The Skin
Chapter 685

Morphology of the Skin
Julie M. Dhossche and Yvonne E. Chiu
EPIDERMIS

The mature epidermis is a stratified epithelial tissue composed predominantly of keratinocytes (Fig. 685.1). The epidermis protects the
organism from the external environment through physical, chemical,
and immunologic barrier functions and prevents water loss. Epidermal
differentiation results in the formation of a functional barrier to the
external world. The epidermis comprises four histologically recognizable layers, described here from deepest to most superficial. The first or
basal layer consists of columnar cells that rest on the dermal-­epidermal
junction. Basal keratinocytes are connected to the dermal-­epidermal
junction by hemidesmosomes. Basal keratinocytes are attached to
themselves and to the cells in the spinous layer by desmosomal, tight,
gap, and adherens junctions. The role of the basal keratinocyte is to
serve as a continuing supply of keratinocytes for the normally differentiating epidermis and as a reservoir of cells to repair epidermal damage.
The second layer is the spinous layer, composed of three to four layers
of spinous cells. Their role is to synthesize keratin, which makes up the
keratin intermediate filament network. The third layer is the granular
layer, which consists of two to three layers of granular cells. Granular
cells contain keratohyalin and lamellar granules, containing the protein
and lipid components that make up the cornified layer. The fourth layer,
or cornified layer, is composed of multiple layers of dead, highly compacted cells. The dead cells are composed mainly of disulfide-­bonded
keratins cross-­linked by filaggrins. The intercellular spaces are composed of hydrophobic lipids, predominantly ceramides, cholesterol,
and fatty acids, serving as an effective barrier against water and salt loss
as well as permeation of water-­soluble substances. As the cornified layer

PART

XXIX
is replenished, the oldest or most superficial layer is shed in a highly
regulated process. The normal process of epidermal differentiation,
from basal cell to shedding of the cornified layer, takes 28 days.
The epidermis also contains three other cell types. The melanocytes
are pigment-­forming cells, which are responsible for skin color and protection from ultraviolet radiation. Epidermal melanocytes are derived
from the neural crest and migrate to the skin during embryonic life.
They reside in the interfollicular epidermis and in the hair follicles.
Melanocytes produce intracellular organelles (melanosomes) containing melanin, which they transfer via dendrites to the keratinocytes to
protect the keratinocyte nucleus from ultraviolet damage. Merkel cells
are type I slow-­adapting mechanosensory receptors for touch that differentiate within the epidermis from epidermal progenitor cells. Langerhans cells are dendritic cells of the mononuclear phagocyte system and
are uniquely characterized by a specific organelle, the Birbeck granule,
which resembles a tennis racket on electron microscopy. These cells are
derived from bone marrow and participate in immune reactions in the
skin, playing an active part in antigen presentation and processing.
The junction of the epidermis and dermis is the basement membrane
zone. This complex structure is a result of contributions from both
epidermal and mesenchymal cells. The dermal-­epidermal junction
extends from the basal cell plasma membrane to the uppermost region
of the dermis. Ultrastructurally, the basement membrane appears as a
trilaminar structure, consisting of a lamina lucida immediately adjacent to the basal cell plasma membrane, a central lamina densa, and the
subbasal lamina on the dermal side of the lamina densa. Several structures within this zone act to anchor the epidermis to the dermis. The
plasma membrane of basal cells contains electron-­dense plates known
as hemidesmosomes; tonofilaments course within basal cells to insert at
these sites. The hemidesmosomes are composed of 180-­and 230-­kDa
bullous pemphigoid antigens (BP180 [BPAG2, type XVII collagen]
and BP230 [BPAG1], respectively), α6β4 and α3β1 integrins, and plectin. Anchoring filaments originate in the plasma membrane, primarily
near the hemidesmosomes, and insert into the lamina densa. Anchoring fibrils, composed predominantly of type VII collagen, extend from
the lamina densa into the uppermost dermis, where they loop through
collagen fibrils before reinserting into the lamina densa.
Apocrine
unit
Straight duct

Meissner nerve
ending

Epidermis

Coiled gland

papillary
Eccrine
sweat unit

Dermis

Spiraled duct
reticular
Sebaceous gland
Arrector pili muscle
Hair shaft
Pacini nerve ending

Straight duct
Coiled duct
Eccrine gland
Dermal
vasculature

Subcutaneous tissue

Superficial plexus
Deep plexus

Fig. 685.1 Schematic of skin structure. (From James WD, Berger T, Elston D. Andrews’ Diseases of the Skin: Clinical Dermatology, 12th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Fig. 1.1.)

4025
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4026 Part XXIX u The Skin
DERMIS

The dermis provides the skin with most of its mechanical properties
(see Fig. 685.1). The dermis forms a tough, pliable, fibrous supporting
structure between the epidermis and the subcutaneous fat. The predominant dermal cell is a spindle-­shaped fibroblast that is responsible
for the synthesis of collagen, elastic fibers, and mucopolysaccharides.
Phagocytic histiocytes, mast cells, and motile leukocytes are also present. Within the dermis are blood vessels, lymphatics, neural structures,
eccrine and apocrine sweat glands, hair follicles, sebaceous glands, and
smooth muscle. Morphologically, the dermis can be divided into two
layers: the superficial papillary layer that interdigitates with the rete
ridges of the epidermis and the deeper reticular layer that lies beneath
the papillary dermis. The papillary layer is less dense and more cellular,
whereas the reticular layer appears more compact because of the coarse
network of interlaced collagen and elastic fibers.
The extracellular matrix of the dermis consists of collagen and elastic fibers embedded in an amorphous ground substance. Collagen
provides strength and stability to the dermis, and elastic fibers allow
for elasticity. The gelatinous ground substance serves as a supporting
medium for the fibrillar and cellular components and as a storage place
for a substantial portion of body water.

SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE

The panniculus, or subcutaneous tissue, consists of fat cells and fibrous
septa that divide it into lobules and anchor it to the underlying fascia
and periosteum (see Fig. 685.1). Blood vessels and nerves are also present in this layer, which serves as a storage depot for lipid, an insulator to
conserve body heat, and a protective cushion against trauma.

APPENDAGEAL STRUCTURES

Appendageal structures are derived from aggregates of epidermal
cells that become specialized during early embryonic development.
Small buds (primary epithelial germs) appear in the third fetal month
and give rise to hair follicles, sebaceous and apocrine glands, and the
attachment bulges for the arrector pili muscles. Eccrine sweat glands
are derived from separate epidermal downgrowths that arise in the second fetal month and are completely formed by the fifth month. Formation of nails is initiated in the third intrauterine month.

Hair Follicles

The pilosebaceous unit includes the hair follicle, sebaceous gland, arrector
pili muscle, and, in areas such as the axillae, an apocrine gland. Hair follicles are distributed throughout the skin, except in the palms, soles, lips,
and glans penis. Individual follicles extend from the surface of the epidermis to the deep dermis (see Fig. 685.1). The hair follicle is divided into four
segments: the infundibulum, which extends from the skin surface to the
opening of the sebaceous duct; the isthmus, extending from the sebaceous
duct opening to the bulge; the lower follicle between the bulge and the hair
bulb; and the hair bulb. The bulge is at the insertion of the arrector pili
muscle and is a focus of epidermal stem cells. The bulb is where the matrix
cells and the dermal papilla are involved in formation and maintenance of
the hair. The growing hair consists of the hair shaft, made of dead keratinocytes, and its supporting inner and outer root sheaths.
Human hair growth is cyclic, with alternate periods of growth (anagen), transition (catagen), and rest (telogen). The length of the anagen
phase varies from months to years, whereas catagen and telogen last
approximately 3 weeks and 3 months, respectively. At birth, all hairs are
in the anagen phase. Subsequent generative activity lacks synchrony,
so an overall random pattern of growth and shedding prevails. At any
time, approximately 85% of hairs are in the anagen phase. Scalp hair
usually grows about 1 cm per month.
The types of hair are lanugo, vellus, and terminal hairs. Lanugo hair
is thin and short; this hair is shed in utero and is replaced by vellus
hair by 36-­40 weeks of gestation. Vellus hair is short, soft, frequently
unpigmented, and distributed over the body. Terminal hair is long and
coarse and is found on the scalp, beard, eyebrows, eyelashes, and axillary and pubic areas. During puberty, androgenic hormone stimulation causes pubic, axillary, and beard hair to change from vellus hair
to terminal hair.

Sebaceous Glands

Sebaceous glands occur in all areas except the palms, soles, and dorsal
feet and are most numerous on the head, upper chest, and back (see
Fig. 685.1). Their ducts open into the hair follicles except on the eyelids,
lips, nipples, prepuce, and labia minora, where they emerge directly
onto the skin surface. These holocrine glands are saccular structures
that are often branched and lobulated and consist of a proliferative
basal layer of small flat cells peripheral to the central mass of lipidized
cells. The latter cells disintegrate as they move toward the duct and
form the lipid secretion known as sebum, which consists of triglycerides, wax esters, squalene, and cholesterol esters. The purpose of sebum
production likely relates to hydrophobic skin barrier function. Sebaceous glands depend on hormonal stimulation and are activated by
androgens at puberty. Fetal sebaceous glands are stimulated by maternal androgens, and their lipid secretion, together with desquamated
stratum corneum cells, constitutes the vernix caseosa.

Apocrine Glands

The apocrine glands are located in the axillae, areolae, perianal and
genital areas, and periumbilical region (see Fig. 685.1). These large,
coiled, tubular structures continuously secrete an odorless milky fluid
that is discharged in response to adrenergic stimuli, usually because
of emotional stress. Bacterial biotransformation of apocrine sweat
components (fatty acids, thioalcohols, and steroids) accounts for the
unpleasant odor associated with perspiration. Apocrine glands remain
dormant until puberty, when they enlarge and secretion begins in
response to androgenic activity. The secretory coil of the gland consists
of a single layer of cells enclosed by a layer of contractile myoepithelial
cells. The duct is lined with a double layer of cuboidal cells and opens
into the pilosebaceous complex.

Eccrine Sweat Glands

Eccrine sweat glands are distributed over the entire body surface and
are most abundant on the palms and soles (see Fig. 685.1). Those on
the hairy skin respond to thermal stimuli and serve to regulate body
temperature by delivering water to the skin surface for evaporation;
in contrast, sweat glands on the palms and soles respond mainly to
psychophysiologic stimuli.
Each eccrine gland consists of a secretory coil located in the reticular dermis or subcutaneous fat and a secretory duct that opens onto the
skin surface. Sweat pores can be identified on the epidermal ridges of the
palm and fingers with a magnifying lens but are not readily visualized
elsewhere. Two types of cells constitute the single-­layered secretory coil:
small dark cells and large clear cells. These rest on a layer of contractile
myoepithelial cells and a basement membrane. The glands are supplied
by sympathetic nerve fibers, but the pharmacologic mediator of sweating
is acetylcholine rather than epinephrine. Sweat from these glands consists of water; sodium; potassium; calcium; chloride; phosphorus; lactate;
and small quantities of iron, glucose, and protein. The composition varies with the rate of sweating but is always hypotonic in normal children.

Nails

Nails are specialized protective epidermal structures that form convex, translucent, tight-­fitting plates on the distal dorsal surfaces of the
fingers and toes. The nail plate, which is derived from a metabolically
active matrix of multiplying cells situated beneath the posterior nail
fold, is composed of anucleate keratinocytes. Nail growth is relatively
slow; complete fingernail regrowth takes 6 months, and complete toenail regrowth requires 12-­18 months. The nail plate is bounded by the
lateral and posterior nail folds; a thin eponychium (the cuticle) protrudes from the posterior fold over a crescent-­shaped white area called
the lunula. The eponychium serves as a sealant barrier to protect the
germinal matrix of the nail plate. The hyponychium refers to the volar
surface epithelium of the distal digit and seals the nail bed distally. The
pink color beneath the nail reflects the underlying vascular bed. Nail
health relies on several factors, including nutrition, hydration, local
infection/irritation, and systemic disease.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 686 u Dermatologic Evaluation of the Patient

Chapter 686

Dermatologic Evaluation
of the Patient
Julie M. Dhossche and Yvonne E. Chiu
HISTORY AND PHYSICAL EXAMINATION

A history and careful physical examination are often necessary for
accurate assessment of skin disorders. A good skin exam is essential
in dermatologic evaluation and should be performed under adequate
illumination. In addition to the skin covering the entire body surface,
mucous membranes (conjunctiva, oropharynx, nasal mucosa, and anogenital mucosa), hair, and nails should be examined when appropriate.
The color, turgor, texture, temperature, and moisture of the skin and
the growth, texture, caliber, and luster of the hair and nails should be
noted. Erythema or other color changes may be challenging to appreciate in children with darker skin tones, and other features of the disorder should be relied upon to make the diagnosis. Skin lesions should
be palpated, inspected, and classified on the basis of morphology, size,
color, texture, firmness, configuration, location, and distribution. One
must also decide whether the changes are those of the primary lesion
itself or whether the clinical pattern has been altered by a secondary
factor such as infection, trauma, or therapy.
Primary lesions are classified as macules, papules, patches, plaques,
nodules, tumors, vesicles, bullae, pustules, wheals, and cysts. A macule represents an alteration in skin color but cannot be felt. When
the lesion is >1 cm, the term patch is used. Papules are palpable solid
lesions <1 cm. Plaques are palpable lesions >1 cm in size and have a flat
surface. Nodules are palpable lesions >1 cm with a rounded surface.
The word tumor may be used for a large nodule that is suspected to
be neoplastic in origin. Vesicles are raised, fluid-­filled lesions <1 cm in
diameter; when larger, they are called bullae. Pustules are fluid-­filled
lesions containing purulent material. Wheals are flat-­topped, palpable
lesions of variable size, duration, and configuration that represent dermal collections of edema fluid. Cysts are circumscribed, thick-­walled
lesions; they are covered by a normal epidermis and contain fluid or
semisolid material.
Primary lesions may change into secondary lesions, or secondary
lesions may develop over time where no primary lesion existed. Primary lesions are usually more helpful for diagnostic purposes than secondary lesions. Secondary lesions include scales, purpura, petechiae,
ulcers, erosions, excoriations, fissures, crusts, and scars. Scales consist
of compressed layers of stratum corneum cells that are retained on the
skin surface. Purpuras are the result of bleeding into the skin and have
a red-­purple color; they may be flat or palpable. Petechiae are small
(<2-­3 mm) purpura. Erosions involve focal loss of the epidermis, and
they heal without scarring. Ulcers extend into the dermis and tend to
heal with scarring. Ulcerated lesions inflicted by scratching are often
linear or angular in configuration and are called excoriations. Fissures
are caused by splitting or cracking. Crusts consist of matted, retained
accumulations of blood, serum, pus, and epithelial debris on the surface of a weeping lesion. Scars are end-­stage lesions that can be thin,
depressed, and atrophic; raised and hypertrophic; or flat and pliable.
Lichenification is a thickening of skin with accentuation of normal
skin lines that is caused by chronic irritation (rubbing, scratching) or
inflammation.
If the diagnosis is not clear after a thorough examination, one or
more diagnostic procedures may be indicated.

BIOPSY OF SKIN

Biopsy of skin is occasionally required for diagnosis. The two most
commonly used approaches are the shave biopsy and the punch biopsy.
A shave biopsy is primarily used for superficial, raised lesions, whereas

4027

a punch biopsy is used when it is indicated to sample the dermis and
subcutaneous tissue, as with most inflammatory dermatoses. Both are
simple, relatively painless procedures and usually provide adequate tissue for examination if the appropriate lesion is sampled. The selection
of a fresh, well-­developed primary lesion is extremely important to
obtain an accurate diagnosis. In cases of a punch biopsy, the site of the
biopsy should have relatively low risk for damage to underlying dermal
structures. After cleansing of the site, the skin is anesthetized by intradermal injection of 1–2% lidocaine, with or without epinephrine, with
a 27-­or 30-­gauge needle. For a shave biopsy, a double-­edged razor or
scalpel is used to remove a thin disk of tissue down to the upper dermis.
Hemostasis can be obtained with 20% aluminum chloride solution,
and the biopsy site is then covered with petroleum jelly and a bandage.
In the case of a punch biopsy, after anesthetizing the skin, a punch tool,
usually 3 or 4 mm in diameter, is pressed firmly against the skin and
rotated until it sinks to the proper depth. All three layers (epidermis,
dermis, and subcutis) should be contained in the plug. The plug should
be lifted gently with forceps or extracted with a needle and separated
from the underlying tissue with iris scissors. Bleeding abates with firm
pressure and with suturing. The biopsy specimen should be placed in
10% formaldehyde solution (Formalin) for appropriate processing.

WOOD LAMP

A Wood lamp emits ultraviolet light mainly at a wavelength of 365
nm. A skin examination under a Wood lamp, which is performed in a
darkened room, is useful in accentuating changes in pigmentation and
detecting fluorescence in certain infectious disorders. Discrete areas of
altered pigment can often be visualized more clearly by using a Wood
lamp, particularly if the pigmentary change is epidermal. Hyperpigmented lesions appear darker, and hypopigmented lesions (e.g., those
seen in tuberous sclerosis) lighter than the surrounding skin. Blue-­
green fluorescence is detectable at the base of each infected hair shaft
in ectothrix infections, such as tinea capitis caused by Microsporum
species. Scales and crusts may appear pale yellow, but this color is not
evidence of a fungal infection. Dermatophyte lesions of the skin (tinea
corporis) do not fluoresce; macules of tinea versicolor have a golden
fluorescence under a Wood lamp. Erythrasma, an intertriginous infection caused by Corynebacterium minutissimum, may fluoresce pink-­
orange, whereas Pseudomonas aeruginosa is yellow-­
green under a
Wood lamp.

POTASSIUM HYDROXIDE PREPARATION

Potassium hydroxide (KOH) preparation is a rapid and reliable method
for detecting fungal elements of both yeasts and dermatophytes. Scaly
lesions should be scraped at the active border for optimal recovery of
mycelia and spores. Vesicles should be unroofed, and the blister roof
should be clipped and placed on a slide for examination. In tinea capitis, infected hairs must be plucked from the follicle; scales from the
scalp do not usually contain mycelia. A few drops of 20% KOH are
added to the specimen. Dimethyl sulfoxide is usually in solution with
the KOH, negating the need to heat the specimen. If using KOH without dimethyl sulfoxide, the specimen is gently heated over an alcohol
lamp or on a hot plate until the KOH begins to bubble. Alternatively,
sufficient time (10-­20 minutes) can be allowed for dissolution of the
keratin at room temperature. The preparation is examined under low-­
intensity light microscopy for fungal elements.

TZANCK SMEAR

Tzanck smear had been useful in the diagnosis of infections caused
by herpes simplex virus or varicella-­zoster virus and for the detection
of acantholytic cells in pemphigus. An intact, fresh vesicle is ruptured
and drained of fluid. The roof and base of the blister are then carefully
scraped with a No. 15 scalpel blade, with care taken to avoid drawing a significant amount of blood; the material is smeared on a clear
glass slide and air dried. Staining with Giemsa stain is preferable, but
Wright stain is acceptable. Balloon cells and multinucleated giant cells
are diagnostic of herpes virus infection; acantholytic epidermal cells—
large round epidermal cells with hypertrophic nuclei—are characteristic of pemphigus.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4028 Part XXIX u The Skin
Table 686.1  Immunofluorescence Findings in Immune-­Mediated Cutaneous Diseases
INVOLVED
SKIN

DISEASE

UNINVOLVED SKIN

DIRECT IF
FINDINGS

INDIRECT IF
FINDINGS

CIRCULATING
ANTIBODIES

Dermatitis herpetiformis

Negative

Positive

Granular IgA ± C in
papillary dermis

None

IgA antiendomysial
and transglutaminase
antibodies

Bullous pemphigoid

Positive

Positive

Linear IgG and C
band in BMZ,
occasionally IgM,
IgA, IgE

IgG to BMZ

IgG anti-­BP180 and
anti-­BP230

Pemphigus (all variants)

Positive

Positive

IgG in intercellular
spaces of
epidermis between
keratinocytes

IgG to intercellular
spaces of
epidermis
between
keratinocytes

IgG antidesmoglein
1 and 3 (pemphigus
vulgaris and foliaceus).
IgA antidesmocollin 1
(IgA pemphigus)

Linear IgA bullous
dermatosis (chronic
bullous dermatosis of
childhood)

Positive

Positive

Linear IgA at BMZ,
occasionally C

Low titer, rare IgA,
anti-­BP180

None

Discoid lupus
erythematosus

Positive

Negative

Linear IgG, IgM, IgA,
and C3 at BMZ
(lupus band)

None

Usually ANA-­negative

Systemic lupus
erythematosus

Positive

Variable; 30–50%
of sun-­exposed
skin; 10–30% of
photoprotected skin

Linear IgG, IgM, IgA,
and C3 at BMZ
(lupus band)

None

ANA
Anti-­Ro (SSA), anti-­La
(SSB)
Anti-­RNP
Anti-­dsDNA
Anti-­Sm

IgA vasculitis (Henoch-­
Schönlein purpura)

Positive

Positive

IgA around vessel
walls

None

None

ANA, Antinuclear antibody; BMZ, basement membrane zone at the dermal-­epidermal junction; BP, bullous pemphigoid; C, complement; dsDNA, double-­stranded deoxyribonucleic
acid; IF, immunofluorescence; Ig, immunoglobulin; Sm, Smith; SSA/SSB, Sjögren syndrome A/B; RNP, ribonucleoprotein.

Direct fluorescent assay and polymerase chain reaction tests have
largely replaced Tzanck smears in the diagnosis of herpes simplex and
varicella-­zoster infections. Both of these are rapid, sensitive, and specific, with the polymerase chain reaction even more so. When obtaining specimens for these tests, the vesicles should be ruptured before
sample collection with the swab.

IMMUNOFLUORESCENCE STUDIES

Immunofluorescence studies of skin can be used to detect tissue-­fixed
antibodies to skin components and complement; characteristic staining patterns are specific for certain skin disorders (Table 686.1). Direct
immunofluorescence detects autoantibodies bound to cutaneous antigens in the skin, and indirect immunofluorescence detects circulating
autoantibodies present in the serum.
Skin biopsy specimens for direct immunofluorescence should be
obtained from involved sites except in those diseases for which perilesional skin or uninvolved skin is required. A punch biopsy sample
is obtained, and the tissue is placed in a special transport medium or
immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen for transport or storage. Thin
cryostat sections of the specimen are incubated with fluorescein-­
conjugated antibodies to the specific antigens.
Serum of patients can be examined by indirect immunofluorescence techniques using sections of normal human skin, guinea pig
lip, or monkey esophagus as substrate. The substrate is incubated with
fresh or thawed frozen serum and then with fluorescein-­conjugated
antihuman globulin. If the serum contains antibody to epithelial
components, its specific staining pattern can be seen on fluorescence
microscopy. By serial dilution, the titer of circulating antibody can
be estimated.

686.1 Cutaneous Manifestations of Systemic
Diseases
Julie M. Dhossche and Yvonne E. Chiu
Selected diseases have signature skin findings, often as the presenting
signs of illness, which can facilitate the assessment of patients with
complex medical states (Table 686.2).

CONNECTIVE TISSUE DISEASES
Lupus Erythematosus

Lupus erythematosus (LE; see Chapter 199) is an idiopathic autoimmune inflammatory disease that may be multisystemic (i.e., systemic
LE or SLE) or confined to the skin. Distinct cutaneous lupus subtypes
seen in children include acute cutaneous LE, subacute cutaneous LE,
chronic cutaneous LE (including discoid LE, discussed under “Discoid
Lupus Erythematosus”), and neonatal LE (discussed under “Neonatal
Lupus Erythematosus”).

Systemic Lupus Erythematosus

SLE is a chronic inflammatory multisystem disease with approximately
15–20% of cases diagnosed in childhood. It is diagnosed when 4 of
11 well-­defined clinical and 6 immunologic criteria are present (see
Chapter 199), where both one clinical and one immunologic criterion
each must be met. Four of the clinical criteria are skin findings. Criterion 1 is acute cutaneous lupus, which may involve the classic malar or
“butterfly” rash (Fig. 686.1), bullous lupus lesions, psoriasiform and/
or annular polycyclic lupus lesions that resolve without scarring, and
photosensitive erythematous macular or papular eruption (Fig. 686.2).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 686 u Dermatologic Evaluation of the Patient

4029

Table 686.2  Characteristics of Cutaneous Signs of Systemic Diseases
AGE OF
ONSET

DISEASE

SKIN LESIONS

DISTRIBUTION

DIAGNOSTIC
EVALUATION(S)
AND FINDINGS

ASSOCIATED
SYMPTOMS/
SIGNS

DIFFERENTIAL
DIAGNOSIS

Systemic lupus
erythematosus

Any

Erythematous
Photodistribution;
patches and
“malar” face
plaques; palpable
purpura; livedo
reticularis; Raynaud
phenomenon;
urticaria

ANA panel
Anti-­dsDNA
Leukopenia/
lymphopenia
Thrombocytopenia
Complement
levels
Urinalysis

Arthritis
Nephritis
Cerebritis
Serositis

Seborrheic
dermatitis
Atopic dermatitis
Juvenile
dermatomyositis

Discoid lupus
erythematosus

Any

Annular, scaly
plaques; atrophy;
dyspigmentation

Photodistribution

ANA

Scarring

Subacute
cutaneous lupus
Polymorphous light
eruption
Juvenile
dermatomyositis

Neonatal lupus
erythematosus

Newborn

Annular,
erythematous,
scaly plaques

Head/neck

ANA
Heart block
Anti-­Ro (SSA), anti-­ Thrombocytopenia
La (SSB)

Tinea capitis
Atopic dermatitis
Seborrheic
dermatitis

Juvenile
dermatomyositis

Any

Erythematous to
violaceous scaly
macules; discrete
papules overlying
joints

Periocular face;
shoulder
girdle; extensor
extremities

ANA
AST
ALT
Aldolase
Creatine kinase
Lactate
dehydrogenase

Fatigue
Proximal muscle
weakness
Calcifications
Vasculopathy

Atopic dermatitis
Allergic contact
dermatitis
Lupus
erythematosus

Morphea

Any

Sclerotic plaques;
resolve with
hyperpigmentation
and atrophy

Variable

Skin biopsy
MRI brain if
head and neck
involvement

Neurologic
(seizures, migraine
headaches,
focal neurologic
deficits,
asymptomatic MRI
abnormalities)
Musculoskeletal
(joint contractures,
limb length
discrepancy,
arthritis,
arthralgias)

Systemic sclerosis

IgA vasculitis
(Henoch-­
Schönlein
purpura)

Childhood
and
adolescence

Purpuric papules
and plaques

Buttocks; lower
extremities

Urinalysis
Blood urea
nitrogen/
creatinine ratio
Skin biopsy

Abdominal pain
Arthritis

Vasculitis
Drug eruption
Infantile
hemorrhagic
edema
Viral exanthem

Kawasaki disease

Infancy,
childhood

Erythematous
maculopapular to
urticarial plaques;
acral and groin
erythema, edema,
desquamation,
digital cyanosis /
gangrene

Diffuse

Leukocytosis
ESR
C-­reactive protein
Thrombocytosis

Strawberry tongue
Conjunctivitis
Lymphadenopathy
Cardiovascular
complications

Viral syndrome
Drug eruption
Staphylococcal/
streptococcal
illness

Inflammatory
bowel disease

Childhood
and
adolescence

Aphthae; erythema
nodosum;
pyoderma
gangrenosum; lip
swelling

Oral and perianal
predominate

Skin biopsy
Fecal calprotectin,
ESR, CRP
Gastroenterology
evaluation

Abdominal pain
Diarrhea
Cramping
Arthritis
Conjunctivitis

Behçet syndrome
Vasculitis
Yersinia colitis

Sweet syndrome

Any

Infiltrated
erythematous,
edematous
plaques

Head and neck
predominate

Skin biopsy
Leukocytosis
ESR

Fever
Flulike illness
Conjunctivitis

Infection
Urticaria
Erythema
multiforme
Urticarial vasculitis
Systemic
autoinflammatory
diseases*
Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4030 Part XXIX u The Skin
Table 686.2  Characteristics of Cutaneous Signs of Systemic Diseases—cont’d

DISEASE

AGE OF
ONSET

SKIN LESIONS

DISTRIBUTION

DIAGNOSTIC
EVALUATION(S)
AND FINDINGS

ASSOCIATED
SYMPTOMS/
SIGNS

DIFFERENTIAL
DIAGNOSIS

Graft-­versus-­host
disease

Any

Acute: erythema,
papules, vesicles,
bullae

Diffuse with
predilection for
head/neck and
palms/soles

Skin biopsy
Liver function tests

Fever
Mucositis
Hepatitis

Drug eruption
Infectious
exanthem

Drug rash with
eosinophilia
and systemic
symptoms
(DRESS
syndrome)

Any

Erythema; urticarial
macules and
plaques

Diffuse

Liver function
Eosinophilia
Atypical
lymphocytosis

Facial edema
Lymphadenopathy
Fever
Hepatitis

Stevens-­Johnson
syndrome
Infectious
exanthem

Serum sickness-­
like reaction
(SSLR)

Any

Edematous, urticarial Diffuse
plaques

None

Fever
Lymphadenopathy
Arthritis, nephritis

Kawasaki disease
Urticaria

Multisystem
inflammatory
syndrome in
children (MIS-C)
(see Table 686.3)
Autoinflammatory
diseases (see
Table 686.4)
*NOMID, Neonatal-­onset multisystem inflammatory disease and other recurrent fever syndromes.
ALT, Alanine aminotransferase; ANA, antinuclear antibodies; AST, aspartate aminotransferase; dsDNA, double-­stranded deoxyribonucleic acid; ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate;
SSA/SSB, Sjögren syndrome A/B.

Fig. 686.1 Malar rash of systemic lupus erythematosus.

Fig. 686.2 Photosensitive rash of systemic lupus erythematosus.

The malar rash must be distinguished from other causes of a “red face,”
most notably seborrheic dermatitis, atopic dermatitis, and rosacea.
Criterion 2 is chronic cutaneous lupus, which includes discoid lupus
lesions, hypertrophic (verrucous) lupus lesions, and lupus panniculitis, among others. Criterion 3 is oral or nasal ulcers in the absence of
other causes such as vasculitis, Behçet disease, infection (herpes simplex virus [HSV]), or inflammatory bowel disease. Criterion 4 is nonscarring alopecia, which may include diffuse thinning or hair fragility
in the absence of other causes such as alopecia areata, drugs, or iron
deficiency. Patients may meet full SLE criteria based on skin findings
alone with one immunologic criterion (such as positive antinuclear
antibodies [ANA] or anti-­dsDNA). Other associated but not diagnostic
cutaneous findings include purpuric lesions, livedo reticularis, Raynaud phenomenon, and urticaria.
On histology, cutaneous LE demonstrates varying degrees of epidermal atrophy, plugging of hair follicles, and a vacuolar alteration at
an inflamed dermal-­epidermal junction. Deposition of immunoglobulins (IgM, IgG) and complement in lesional skin may help confirm the
diagnosis. Immune deposits in nonlesional sun-­exposed skin are found

in the majority of patients with SLE (lupus band test), although clinical
use of this test has been mostly abandoned in favor of serologic testing.
The skin lesions often respond to treatment of the SLE with systemic
agents. Oral hydroxychloroquine is used most commonly, but many
other systemic therapies are effective, including both classic and biologic immunosuppressants. Low-­to mid-­potency topical corticosteroids, topical calcineurin inhibitors, and intralesional corticosteroid
injection may be considered for adjunctive therapy for skin lesions. A
multispecialty approach is recommended, as pediatric patients are at
significantly higher risk for long-­term morbidity than adults.

Neonatal Lupus Erythematosus

Neonatal LE (see Chapter 199.1) manifests at birth or during the first
few weeks of life as annular, erythematous, scaly plaques, typically
on the head, neck, and upper trunk (Fig. 686.3). Telangiectasias are
also common. Ultraviolet light may exacerbate or initiate cutaneous
lesions. Passive transplacental transfer of maternal anti-­Ro/SSA and
anti-­La/SSB antibodies causes the transient skin lesions, though most
infants are born to mothers without a known rheumatologic diagnosis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 686 u Dermatologic Evaluation of the Patient

4031

Table 686.3  Mucocutaneous Findings in Multisystem
Inflammatory Syndrome in Children

Table 686.4  Dermatologic Manifestations of Monogenic
Autoinflammatory Diseases

LOCATION

DESCRIPTORS

Generalized, including:
Perineal
Trunk
Face
Ears
Periorbital area
Extremities

Urticarial
Papular
Maculopapular
Macular
Morbilliform
Desquamative
Edematous
Erythematous
Purpuric
Targetoid
Retiform
Reticular
Scarlatiniform
Petechiae
Livedoid
EM-­like
RIME-­like
Lipschultz ulcer

I. NONSPECIFIC MACULOPAPULAR RASHES WITH RECURRENT
EPISODIC FEVER AND ABDOMINAL PAIN (HEREDITARY
PERIODIC FEVER SYNDROME)
A.	Recurrent fever attacks of short duration (typically ≤7 days)
1.	Familial Mediterranean fever
2.	Hyperimmunoglobulinemia D with periodic fever syndrome/
mevalonate kinase deficiency
B.	Recurrent fever attacks of longer duration (typically >7 days)
1.	Tumor necrosis factor receptor–associated periodic syndrome

Hands and Feet

Edematous
Erythematous
Desquamative
Purpuric
Petechiae

Tongue

Papillitis
Strawberry tongue
De-­epithelialized

Lips

Cracked/fissured
Erythematous

Eyes

Injected
Swollen
Nonpurulent discharge

RIME, Reactive infectious mucocutaneous eruption.
From Neale H, Hawryluk EB. COVID-­19 pediatric dermatology. Dermatol Clin.
39(4):505–519, Table 1, p. 509.

Antibody levels wane by 6 months old, generally resulting in clearance
of the rash. Congenital heart block occurs in 30% of affected infants, but
only 10% of affected infants have both skin and cardiac abnormalities.
Noncardiac extracutaneous manifestations, such as anemia, thrombocytopenia, and cholestatic liver disease, are less common. Neonatal LE
is often misdiagnosed as infantile eczema, seborrheic dermatitis, or
tinea corporis. Skin lesions are typically managed conservatively, given
the transient nature of neonatal LE, and strict sun avoidance and protection are important. If necessary, low-­to mid-­potency topical corticosteroids may be used. Systemic agents should be avoided. Maternal
ANA testing is indicated.

Discoid Lupus Erythematosus

Discoid LE (DLE) is uncommon in early childhood and manifests in
late adolescence. The signature skin findings in DLE are chronic, erythematous, scaly, atrophic plaques (Fig. 686.4) on sun-­exposed skin
that frequently heal with scarring and dyspigmentation. Extracutaneous features may include involvement of the nasal and oral mucosa,
eyes, and nails. The differential diagnosis includes other photodermatoses, such as polymorphous light eruption, juvenile springtime eruption, and juvenile dermatomyositis (JDM). There is a distinct overlap
between SLE and DLE, with common histopathologic features and
photoexacerbation; most patients with DLE have normal laboratory
results and do not progress to systemic disease.
First-­line treatment of DLE consists of low-­to mid-­potency topical corticosteroids. Other topical options include calcineurin inhibitors and retinoids. Intralesional corticosteroid injection is also effective
for severe localized lesions. Oral hydroxychloroquine is used first-­line
for severe skin disease or as a second-­line agent when lesions are not

II. NEUTROPHILIC URTICARIA (CAPS)
A.	Recurrent fever attacks of short duration (typically <24 hours)
1.	CAPS/familial cold autoinflammatory syndrome
2.	CAPS/Muckle-­Wells syndrome
B.	Continuous low-­grade fever
1.	CAPS/neonatal-­onset multisystem inflammatory disease/
CINCA
2.	IL-­18–mediated AID and IL-­1–mediated AID: NLRC4-­related
macrophage activation syndrome
III. PUSTULAR SKIN RASHES AND EPISODIC FEVERS
A.	IL-­1–mediated pyogenic disorders with sterile osteomyelitis
1.	Deficiency of IL-­1 receptor antagonist
2.	Majeed syndrome
B.	Partially IL-­1–mediated pyogenic disorders
1.	Pyogenic sterile arthritis, pyoderma gangrenosum, and acne
syndrome
2.	Haploinsufficiency of A20 (monogenic form of Behçet disease)
C.	Pyogenic disorders caused by non–IL-­1 cytokine dysregulation
1.	Deficiency of IL-­36 receptor antagonist
2.	CARD14-­mediated psoriasis (monogenic form of psoriasis)
3.	Early-­onset inflammatory bowel disease
IV. VASCULOPATHY AND PANNICULITIS/LIPOATROPHY
SYNDROMES
A.	Chronic atypical neutrophilic dermatitis with lipodystrophy and
elevated temperature syndrome or proteasome-­associated
autoinflammatory syndrome
V. VASCULOPATHY AND/OR VASCULITIS WITH LIVEDO
RETICULARIS SYNDROMES
A.	Without significant CNS disease
1.	STING-­associated vasculopathy with onset in infancy
B.	With severe CNS disease
1.	Aicardi-­Goutières syndrome
2.	Deficiency of adenosine deaminase 2
3.	Spondyloenchondrodysplasia with immune dysregulation
VI. AUTOINFLAMMATORY DISORDERS WITH GRANULOMATOUS
SKIN DISEASES
A.	Without significant immunodeficiency
1.	Blau syndrome (pediatric granulomatous arthritis, pediatric
granulomatous arthritis)
B.	With variable features of immunodeficiency and significant CNS
disease
2.	PLCγ2-­associated antibody deficiency and immune
dysregulation: cold-­induced urticaria and/or granulomatous
rash
VII. OTHER INFLAMMATORY SYNDROMES
A.	LACC1-­mediated monogenic Still disease
AID, Autoinflammatory disorder; CAPS, cryopyrin-­associated periodic syndromes;
CINCA, chronic infantile neurologic cutaneous and articular syndrome; CNS, central
nervous system; STING, stimulator of interferon genes.
From Shwin KW, Lee CCR, Goldbach-­Mansky. Dermatologic manifestations of
monogenic autoinflammatory diseases. Dermatol Clin. 2017;35:21–38, Box 1, p. 24–25.

controlled with topical or local agents. Strict ultraviolet light avoidance
is important.

Juvenile Dermatomyositis

Characteristic skin findings are often the presenting sign of JDM
(see Chapter 200). An ill-­defined, erythematous to violaceous, scaly,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4032 Part XXIX u The Skin

Fig. 686.3 Annular plaque in neonatal lupus erythematosus.

lichen planus, medication reactions, and infectious exanthems.
Pathology of lesional skin demonstrates epidermal atrophy and vacuolar degeneration at the dermal-­epidermal junction, often similar
to LE. JDM is distinct from adult dermatomyositis in both presentation and prognosis. Pediatric patients have more difficulty with
gastrointestinal (GI) vasculopathy and cutaneous calcifications, and
JDM is not a paraneoplastic phenomenon as in adults. A rare clinical
variant known as amyopathic dermatomyositis occurs when only
skin, and not muscle, is involved.
Skin lesions benefit from systemic immunosuppressive therapy, as
discussed in detail in Chapter 200. Adjunctive treatment options for
skin disease include topical corticosteroids and calcineurin inhibitors.
The cutaneous calcinosis of JDM is difficult to manage, with a variety
of agents showing limited benefit, and no treatment consensus exists.
Strict photoprotection and sunlight avoidance are vital to prevent cutaneous exacerbations.

Systemic Sclerosis

Systemic sclerosis is characterized by diffuse skin hardening and thickening, along with systemic features. It frequently manifests as acral
(sclerodactyly, ulceration, nail fold telangiectasia, or Raynaud phenomenon) and facial changes (pinched nose, furrowed perioral skin,
or “scleroderma facies”) (see Chapter 201). Overlap syndromes such as
mixed connective tissue disease may include some physical and laboratory features of scleroderma.

Morphea

Fig. 686.4 Erythematous scaly plaque of discoid lupus erythematosus.

Morphea, also called localized scleroderma (see Chapter 201), is another
autoimmune connective tissue disease characterized by skin hardening
and thickening. The lesions of morphea are generally more localized,
and it is a distinct disorder from systemic sclerosis. There are five subtypes of morphea, including circumscribed (plaque), linear, generalized, pansclerotic, and mixed. Though morphea is not characterized
by the degree of systemic involvement that systemic sclerosis has, it
can have extracutaneous manifestations. Neurologic findings such as
seizures, migraine headaches, focal neurologic deficits, and asymptomatic MRI abnormalities are seen in some patients, predominately those
with linear morphea of the head and neck. Musculoskeletal complications can include joint contractures, limb length and girth discrepancies, arthritis, and arthralgias, and these are most common in children
with linear morphea of a limb.

VASCULITIDES

Fig. 686.5 Gottron papules in juvenile dermatomyositis.
minimally pruritic eruption occurs in photodistributed areas such
as the face, upper trunk, and extensor extremities. Circumscribed
periocular involvement of this heliotrope rash involving the eyelids
may take the appearance of “raccoon eyes,” particularly in young
children. Distinctive erythematous, scaly papules overlying the
knuckles and other joints (Gottron papules) are helpful in suggesting the diagnosis in the absence of associated muscle weakness
(Fig. 686.5). Other cutaneous features include nail fold and gingival
margin telangiectasia, palmar hyperkeratosis (“mechanic’s hands”),
ulceration resulting from vasculopathy or underlying calcinosis,
lipodystrophy, and a poikilodermatous (dyspigmentation and telangiectasia) eruption over the shoulder girdle (“shawl sign”). Cutaneous features may precede the systemic illness, which is primarily
characterized by muscle weakness and pain. The differential diagnosis includes atopic dermatitis, other connective tissue diseases,

The vasculitides (see Chapter 210) encompass a broad group of disorders having considerable overlap with connective tissue diseases.
Immune-­mediated inflammation of blood vessels of varying size may
be caused by an underlying inflammatory state, infection, medication,
or malignancy. Common clinical features include palpable nonthrombocytopenic purpuric skin lesions, arthritis, fever, myalgia, fatigue,
and weight loss as well as an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate.
Extracutaneous organs that may be involved include the joints, lungs,
kidneys, and central nervous system.

Henoch-­Schönlein Purpura (Immunoglobulin A
Vasculitis)

Henoch-­Schönlein purpura (see Chapter 210.1) is a vasculitis that
manifests in school-­
age children as palpable purpuric lesions in
gravity-­
dependent areas, predominantly the buttocks and lower
extremities (Fig. 686.6). Infantile hemorrhagic edema (IHE; also
called acute hemorrhagic edema of infancy) shares some clinical features with Henoch-­
Schönlein purpura but appears in infants and
toddlers. IHE is characterized by the sudden onset of circumscribed
edema with purpuric papules and plaques on the trunk and extremities but, unlike Henoch-­Schönlein purpura, commonly affects the face
and lacks other organ involvement. Henoch-­Schönlein purpura must
also be differentiated from infectious causes of purpuric skin lesions,
such as meningococcemia, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, and purpuric viral exanthems such as those caused by enteroviruses, as well as
from juvenile rheumatoid arthritis and other vasculitides. Diagnosis is

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 686 u Dermatologic Evaluation of the Patient

Fig. 686.6 Purpura of the lower leg in IgA vasculitis (Henoch-­
Schönlein purpura).

confirmed by histologic confirmation of a small vessel vasculitis with
the immunofluorescence finding of IgA in blood vessel walls. Skin
lesions are generally managed conservatively and self-­resolve in 3–4
weeks. Systemic treatment is discussed in detail in Chapter 210.1.

Kawasaki Disease

Kawasaki disease (see Chapter 208) is a common vasculitis usually
seen in children younger than age 5 years. The skin eruption of Kawasaki disease is polymorphic, manifesting variously as maculopapular
or morbilliform eruptions, urticaria, targetoid lesions, or psoriasiform
lesions on the trunk and extremities. Early involvement with erythema
and peeling in the perineum/inguinal region may be an initial clue to
the diagnosis. Acral edema and desquamation are also prominent features but typically occur later. Classic mucocutaneous features include
erythematous cracked lips, nonpurulent conjunctivitis with sparing of
the limbus, and lingual plaques (“white strawberry tongue”) that shed
to produce denuded, erythematous patches with prominent papilla
(“strawberry tongue”). Extracutaneous features include high fever,
cervical lymphadenopathy, arthritis, and occasionally cardiac or GI
disease. First-­line treatment is with aspirin and intravenous immunoglobulin, as discussed in Chapter 208. Multisystem inflammatory
syndrome in children (MIS-­C) (Chapter 311) may resemble Kawasaki
disease; cutaneous manifestations are noted in Table 686.3.

Behçet Disease

Behçet disease (see Chapter 202) is a multisystem disease that includes
oral and genital ulceration and ocular disease (uveitis, relapsing iridocyclitis) in older children and adults. Recurrent aphthous stomatitis is
present in almost all patients and is commonly the presenting symptom. Genital ulcerations may resemble aphthae; can occur on the penis,
scrotum, or vulva; and may be particularly painful in females. Perianal
ulceration is more common in children than in adults. Additional skin
findings may include folliculitis, purpuric lesions, erythema nodosum,
and pustule formation after venipuncture or skin trauma (pathergy).
Differential diagnosis of oral lesions includes recurrent aphthous stomatitis, herpes simplex, and rare oculocutaneous syndromes (e.g.,
MAGIC [mouth and genital ulcers with inflamed cartilage] syndrome).
Skin biopsy demonstrates nongranulomatous vasculitis in all vessel
sizes. Oral lesions may respond to swish and spit/swallow preparations variably, including corticosteroids, antihistamines, antibiotics,
and analgesics. Skin lesions are managed with topical corticosteroids,
topical anesthetics such as sucralfate, and systemic agents as outlined
in Chapter 202.

GASTROINTESTINAL DISEASES
Inflammatory Bowel Disease

Inflammatory bowel disease includes ulcerative colitis (see Chapter
382.1) and Crohn disease (see Chapter 382.2). Skin lesions of inflammatory bowel disease are classified as specific or reactive. Specific cutaneous manifestations have the same histologic features and pathologic

4033

Fig. 686.7 Clinical picture of idiopathic Sweet syndrome. (From Prat
L, Bouaziz JD, Wallach D, et al. Neutrophilic dermatoses as systemic
diseases. Clin Dermatol. 2014;32:376–388, Fig. 1.)

mechanism as the underlying inflammatory bowel disease lesions and
include aphthous ulcers, granulomatous cheilitis, perianal fistulas and
fissures, and metastatic Crohn disease (discussed later). Reactive cutaneous manifestations occur secondary to immune-­mediated antigen
cross reactivity between gut and skin components; examples include
erythema nodosum and pyoderma gangrenosum.
Up to 30% of patients with ulcerative colitis present with cutaneous
manifestations. Aphthous ulcers are common and may worsen with
gastrointestinal exacerbations. Erythema nodosum, occurring in up to
10% of patients, manifests as warm, erythematous nodules, often on
the distal lower extremities. Pyoderma gangrenosum is a focal, ulcerative process that has distinctive, inflamed, undermined borders and a
purulent, boggy center. Thrombophlebitis also occurs at an increased
rate in patients with ulcerative colitis.
Crohn disease classically manifests as perianal fissures and skin tags,
abscesses, sinuses, and fistulas; these may be presenting signs. Enlargement of the lips and a cobblestone appearance of oral mucosa may also
be present, known as orofacial granulomatosis or cheilitis granulomatosa. As in ulcerative colitis, aphthae, erythema nodosum, and pyoderma gangrenosum occur with increased frequency and may improve
with treatment of the underlying disease. Noncaseating granulomatous
inflammation is seen on routine histopathology, and when found in skin
not contiguous with the intestinal tract, is labeled metastatic Crohn
disease. Metastatic lesions may appear as solitary or multiple localized
plaques or nodules and may be located on perianal, perioral, or other
cutaneous surfaces, including scars and ileostomy sites. In most cases
of inflammatory bowel disease–associated skin disease, treatment of
the underlying condition improves the cutaneous sequelae.
Rarely, these associated skin findings may be seen without the classic GI manifestations, warranting continued GI surveillance for subsequent disease development. Isolated cutaneous involvement is treated
similarly with systemic steroid-­sparing and biologic agents with or
without topical or intralesional corticosteroids. Azathioprine, a common treatment, causes increased risk for nonmelanoma skin cancers.

CUTANEOUS MANIFESTATIONS OF MALIGNANCY

Skin disease associated with malignancy has a wide variety of presentations, including both metastatic lesions and nonmalignant paraneoplastic conditions. Cutaneous metastases manifest as firm nodules and
occur at any cutaneous site. Paraneoplastic reaction patterns are often
distinctive and can aid in the diagnosis of the underlying malignancy.
Some genetic syndromes have an increased malignancy risk that may
be suggested initially by cutaneous signs. Other cutaneous findings
that may signal an underlying malignancy include pruritus, ichthyosis,
acanthosis nigricans, urticaria, pemphigus, and erythroderma.

Sweet Syndrome

Also known as acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis, Sweet syndrome
(see Chapter 213) occurs in several forms, including classical (usually
idiopathic or infection-­
related, Fig. 686.7), malignancy-­associated,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4034 Part XXIX u The Skin
immunodeficiency-­
related, autoinflammatory (recurrent fever) syndromes, and drug-­induced. Pathogenesis for all four forms remains
unclear; however, new data are emerging implicating a potential interleukin (IL)-­
1–mediated pathway. Malignancy-­
associated Sweet syndrome is most commonly associated with hematologic malignancies,
especially acute myelogenous leukemia. It manifests abruptly before,
during, or after the malignancy course and is characterized by tender,
erythematous, edematous plaques or nodules that may be pustular or
targetoid, often accompanied by fever, anemia, and leukocytosis. Oral
ulcers are more common in malignancy-­associated Sweet syndrome
than in other forms of the disease, and extracutaneous manifestations
involving various organ systems may also occur. Diagnosis is confirmed
by the presence of a dense neutrophilic infiltrate without evidence of
vasculitis. The differential diagnosis includes other neutrophilic dermatoses such as pyoderma gangrenosum as well as cellulitis, erythema multiforme, Behçet disease, and erythema nodosum. First-­line treatment for
both malignancy-­associated and nonmalignancy-­associated Sweet syndrome is oral glucocorticoids (prednisone 1-­2 mg/kg/day for 2-­4 weeks)
in combination with high-­potency topical or intralesional corticosteroids. Systemic steroid-­sparing agents include colchicine and dapsone.
Cutaneous manifestations of other autoinflammatory diseases are
noted in Table 686.4.

Langerhans Cell Histiocytosis

Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH, see Chapter 556.1) is a neoplastic
disorder characterized by proliferation of myeloid dendritic cells. Once
thought to be Langerhans cells, which are skin-­resident dendritic cells,
the cells of LCH are now understood to represent a distinct cell type.
LCH can be a single-­system or multisystem disease, with the neoplastic
infiltrate in organs such as the skin, bone, central nervous system, lung,
hematopoietic system, liver, and spleen. When present on the skin,
the lesions of LCH can be crusted erosions, scaly papules, or purpura.
There is a predilection for the scalp, palms, soles, and intertriginous
areas such as axillae and groin. Prognosis and treatment are variable
depending on the organ systems involved.

Necrolytic Migratory Erythema (Glucagonoma
Syndrome)

Necrolytic migratory erythema is a distinctive migratory erythema
that often signals an underlying neoplasm, usually an α-­cell pancreatic tumor. Polycyclic, weeping, erythematous patches and plaques on
the face, extremities, and groin occur in association with glossitis and
cheilitis. The lesions are painful or pruritic, enlarge and coalesce over
time, and may develop central clearing with vesicles, crusts, and scales
peripherally. Skin biopsy reveals superficial necrolysis with perivascular
infiltrate. Elevated glucagon levels, hyperglycemia, and hypoaminoacidemia confirm the diagnosis, and tumor resection leads to resolution of
the rash. Other treatments for necrolytic migratory erythema include
somatostatin analogs (octreotide) and nutritional support; however,
these measures do not affect the underlying tumor burden.

ERYTHROMELALGIA

This disorder may be primary (caused by pathogenic genetic variants
in SCN9A) or secondary (myeloproliferative disorders, paraneoplastic,
autoimmune) and is characterized by the triad of recurrent extremity
pain, warmth, and redness. Warmth, exercise, sitting, or wearing shoes
or gloves may initiate the episode. Cooling and elevation may relieve
symptoms (see Chapter 211.5).

CUTANEOUS REACTIONS IN THE SETTING OF
IMMUNOSUPPRESSION

Medication reactions, infectious etiologies, and graft-­
versus-­
host
disease (GVHD) are included in the differential diagnosis in skin
eruptions in immunosuppressed patients; cutaneous and histologic
similarities can be confounding.

Medication Reactions

The majority of medication reactions are mild morbilliform or exanthematous eruptions of little clinical consequence. Identifying the

Fig. 686.8 Lichenoid eruption in chronic graft-­versus-­host disease.
suspect medication may be difficult owing to the many medications
used in immunosuppressed patients. Features that may help identify
suspect medications include rash onset relative to exposure, character
of distribution and spread, associated symptoms, and laboratory data.
Medication eruptions usually begin on the trunk 7-­10 days after exposure; they spread peripherally and are associated with pruritus and, less
commonly, with fever, arthralgia, and lymphadenopathy. Eosinophilia
may support a diagnosis of drug eruption but may be absent in the setting of bone marrow suppression. Penicillins, sulfa drugs, cephalosporins, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), anticonvulsants,
and aminoglycosides are common offenders. Medication eruptions
may resolve despite continued use of the offending agent, or they may
progress to more severe involvement. A careful drug history, elimination of all nonessential, suspect medications or change to medications
of dissimilar class, and treatment of pruritus with emollients, topical
steroids, antihistamines, and antipruritics are indicated. Skin biopsies
are rarely useful in distinguishing medication eruptions from viral
exanthems, although GVHD, if sufficiently advanced, may have signature histopathologic findings.

Graft-­Versus-­Host Disease

GVHD (see Chapter 179) may have florid cutaneous expression
in addition to characteristic extracutaneous features such as fever,
mucositis, diarrhea, and hepatitis. It may be either acute or chronic.
Acute GVHD occurs in 20–70% of hematopoietic stem cell transplants, depending on histocompatibility differences. It may be mistaken for a medication reaction or infectious exanthem because of
the nonspecific erythematous maculopapular (morbilliform) eruption that often starts focally and then generalizes. Features that suggest acute GVHD include timing of eruption (typically 1-­3 weeks
after transplantation, at the time of hematopoietic reconstitution);
initial involvement of the head and neck including the ears; and subsequent spread to the trunk, extremities, palms, and soles. In severe
cases of acute GVHD, blistering, necrolysis, and erythroderma
occur. Chronic GVHD occurs in approximately 65% of long-­term
transplant survivors, who may or may not have experienced prior
acute GVHD. Cutaneous manifestations of chronic GVHD are distinctive, with sclerotic, poikilodermic scaly plaques and lichen planus–like papules predominating on the trunk and distal extremities
(Fig. 686.8). Sclerotic areas are prone to contracture and chronic
wound development. Involvement of the hair, nails, and oral mucosa
is also common in chronic GVHD. First-­line treatment for GVHD
includes systemic glucocorticoids and other immunosuppressants
supplemented by mid-­to high-­potency topical corticosteroids. In
mild disease, topical corticosteroids or topical calcineurin inhibitors
alone may be effective. Second-­line treatment approaches include
phototherapy (narrow-­band UVB or UVA1) and extracorporeal photopheresis. All patients with GVHD benefit from sunlight protection,
emollient use, and topical or oral antipruritics.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 686 u Dermatologic Evaluation of the Patient

686.2 Multisystem Medication Reactions
Julie M. Dhossche and Yvonne E. Chiu
See also Chapter 193.
Most cutaneous reactions that result from the use of systemic medications are confined to the skin and resolve without sequelae after discontinuation of the offending agent (Table 686.5). More severe drug
eruptions may be life-­
threatening, making rapid recognition vital
(Table 686.6 and see Chapter 695). Genetics and, particularly, ethnicity
appear to play a major role in determination of the occurrence of multisystem medication reactions, particularly to anticonvulsants.

4035

DRUG RASH WITH EOSINOPHILIA AND SYSTEMIC
SYMPTOMS

Drug rash with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS syndrome) is also called drug hypersensitivity syndrome or anticonvulsant hypersensitivity syndrome. It is classically seen 2-­6 weeks after
initial exposure to an anticonvulsant (carbamazepine, phenobarbital, phenytoin, lamotrigine) or other drugs (allopurinol, minocycline, sulfonamides [dapsone, sulfasalazine], other antibiotics)
and often manifests as the triad of fever, rash, and hepatitis (Fig.
686.9). The skin rash is initially located on the head, upper trunk,
and arms. A diffuse exanthem of pruritic, morbilliform papules

Table 686.5  Drug Eruptions in Pediatric Patients
ERUPTION

KEY DRUGS

LESIONAL PATTERN

MUCOSAL CHANGES

Urticaria

Penicillins, cephalosporins, sulfonamides, minocycline,
aspirin/NSAIDs, antiepileptics, monoclonal antibodies,
radiocontrast media

Pruritic erythematous wheals
(Fig. 686.12)

None

Angioedema

Aspirin/NSAIDs, ACE inhibitors

Swelling of subcutaneous and
deep dermal tissues

May be present

Serum sickness–like
reaction

Cephalosporins, penicillins, minocycline, sulfonamides,
macrolides, rifampin, ciprofloxacin, griseofulvin,
itraconazole, bupropion, fluoxetine, rituximab, H1N1
vaccine

Urticarial or erythema
multiforme–like (see Fig.
686.11)

None

Exanthematous

Penicillins, sulfonamides, cephalosporins, antiepileptics

Erythematous macules and/or
papules

None

Drug hypersensitivity
syndrome

Sulfonamides, phenytoin, phenobarbital, carbamazepine,
lamotrigine, amoxicillin, allopurinol, sulfonamides,
dapsone, minocycline, aspirin, vancomycin, azithromycin,
abacavir, nevirapine, Chinese medicine

Edema (especially periorbital);
erythematous macules and/or
papules; sometimes vesicles
or bullae (see Fig. 686.10)

May be present

Lichenoid

Captopril, enalapril, labetalol, nifedipine, propranolol,
gold salts, hydrochlorothiazide, furosemide,
spironolactone, hydroxychloroquine, ketoconazole,
penicillamine, griseofulvin, tetracycline, carbamazepine,
phenytoin, NSAIDs, hydroxyurea, imatinib, dapsone,
sulfasalazine, allopurinol, iodides and radiocontrast
media, IFN-­γ, omeprazole, TNF inhibitors, sildenafil,
leflunomide, human growth hormone

Discrete flat-­topped, reddish-­
purple papules and plaques

May be present

Fixed drug

Sulfonamides, ibuprofen, acetaminophen, salicylates,
tetracyclines, pseudoephedrine, loratadine, teicoplanin,
metronidazole, macrolides, barbiturates, lamotrigine,
potassium iodide, quinine, phenolphthalein, foods and
food flavorings (especially tartrazine)

Solitary to few erythematous,
hyperpigmented plaques (see
Fig. 686.13)

Unusual

Pustular (AGEP)

β-­Lactam antibiotics, cephalosporins, macrolides,
clindamycin, terbinafine, paroxetine,
hydroxychloroquine, contrast agents

Generalized small pustules and
papules (see Fig. 686.14)

None

Acneiform

Corticosteroids, androgens, lithium, iodides, phenytoin,
isoniazid, methotrexate

Follicular-­based inflammatory
papules and pustules
predominate

None

Pseudoporphyria

NSAIDs, COX-­2 inhibitors, tetracyclines, furosemide

Photodistributed blistering and
skin fragility

None

Vasculitis

Penicillins, NSAIDs, sulfonamides, cephalosporins

Purpuric papules, especially on
the lower extremities; urticaria,
hemorrhagic bullae, digital
necrosis, pustules, ulcers

Rarely

Stevens-­Johnson/
toxic epidermal
necrolysis

Sulfonamides, antiepileptics (especially phenytoin,
carbamazepine, and lamotrigine), NSAIDs,
acetaminophen, allopurinol, dapsone, barbiturates

Target lesions, bullae, epidermal
necrosis with detachment (see
Figs. 695.3 and 695.4)

Present

Drug-­induced lupus

Minocycline, procainamide, hydralazine, isoniazid,
penicillamine

Urticarial, vasculitic,
erythematous

Rare

ACE, Angiotensin converting enzyme; AGEP, acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis; COX-­2, cyclooxygenase-­2; IFN, interferon; NSAID, Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug;
TNF, tumor necrosis factor.
Adapted from Paller AS, Mancini AJ, eds. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 6th ed. St Louis: Elsevier; 2022: p. 541.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4036 Part XXIX u The Skin
Table 686.6  Main Clinical and Histologic Characteristics of Severe Cutaneous Adverse Reactions
DRUG TO SCAR
INTERVAL

GENERAL
SYMPTOMS

SKIN FEATURES

LABORATORY VALUES

MAIN ORGANS
INVOLVED

HISTOLOGIC FEATURES

SJS and TEN

4-­28 days

Fever ≥38°C,
Influenza-­ like
syndrome,
respiratory tract
symptoms

Blisters, large skin detachment,
confluent erythema, atypical
target lesions, purpura,
Nikolsky sign; skin detachment
Stevens-­Johnson syndrome
<10%, toxic epidermal
necrolysis ≥30%, SJS-­TEN
10–30%; two or more mucous
membranes involved

Lymphopenia,
transitory
neutropenia,
mild cytolysis,
renal impairment

Full-­thickness epidermal
necrosis, focal adnexal
necrosis, necrotic
keratinocytes, mild
mononuclear cell dermal
infiltrate, negative direct
immunofluorescence
test

DRESS syndrome

2-­6 wk

Fever ≥38°C,
Influenza-­ like
syndrome

Maculopapular rash
Erythroderma, facial or extremity
edema, pustules, focal
monopolar mucous membrane
involvement

Eosinophilia >700
cells/μL
Atypical
lymphocytes,
elevated
transaminase
concentration,
impaired
renal function,
herpesvirus
reactivation
(HHV-­6, HHV-­
7, EBV, CMV),
parvovirus B19
reactivation

Lichenoid infiltrate or
Eczematous pattern
(spongiosis, edema),
focal necrotic
keratinocytes,
mononuclear infiltrate,
focal eosinophil and
neutrophil infiltrates,
mild vasculitis

AGEP

1-­11 days

Fever ≥38°C

Intertriginous erythema, edema,
widespread nonfollicular sterile
pustules, postpustular pinpoint
desquamation, Nikolsky sign,
rare oral mucous membrane
involvement

Hyperleukocytosis,
neutrophils ≥7,000
cells/μL, mild
eosinophilia

Subcorneal or
intraepidermal
spongiform or
nonspongiform
pustules with or without
papillary edema, focal
necrotic keratinocytes,
neutrophilic, sometimes
with eosinophils, mild
vasculitis

*General symptoms can precede or occur at the same time as skin manifestations.
AGEP, Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis; CMV, cytomegalovirus; DRESS, drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; HHV, human
herpesvirus; SCAR, severe cutaneous adverse reaction; SJS, Stevens-­Johnson syndrome; TEN, toxic epidermal necrolysis.
From Duong TA, Valeyrie-­Allanore L, Wolkenstein P, et al. Severe cutaneous adverse reactions to drug. Lancet. 2017;390: 1996–2011. Table 1.

Drug
(3+ weeks)
Skin rashes
Fever
Clinical

Lymphadenopathy

manifestations

Hepatitis
Nephritis
IgG, B cells

HHV-6

EBV

3

4

CMV

Herpesvirus
reactivations
Onset

1

2

5

6

(Week)

Fig. 686.9 Clinical symptoms and laboratory findings of drug-­induced

hypersensitivity syndrome/drug rash with eosinophilia and systemic
symptoms. CMV, Cytomegalovirus; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; HHV, human herpesvirus. (From Kano Y, Ishida T, Hirahara K, Shiohara T. Visceral
involvements and long-­term sequelae in drug-­induced hypersensitivity
syndrome. Med Clin N Am. 2010;94:743–759, Fig. 1, p. 745).

are most common, though any morphology may be present (Fig.
686.10). Exfoliation early in the course, as seen in toxic epidermal necrolysis, is uncommon. If mucous membrane involvement
occurs, it is usually mild. Prominent periocular or facial edema,
cervical lymphadenopathy, pharyngitis, and malaise accompany
this dramatic cutaneous eruption. Eosinophilia (≥500/μL) and
atypical lymphocytosis are common but not always present. Hepatitis
ranging from mild elevation of liver transaminase values to frank
hepatic failure may also be accompanied by interstitial nephritis,
pneumonitis, myocarditis, shock, and encephalitis; mortality rate
from these complications approaches 10%. Late-­onset thyroiditis
and hypothyroidism may occur months later as a result of antimicrosomal antibodies directed against thyroid peroxidases involved
in drug metabolism.
DRESS syndrome is caused by a T-­cell response specific to the
drug. Reactivation of herpesviruses, especially human herpesvirus
6, also contributes to DRESS syndrome via an unknown pathogenic mechanism. Genetic predisposition with particular HLA
allele types has also been implicated with specific ethnic groups
and drugs, such as HLA-­A*3101 with carbamazepine. The differential diagnosis includes Stevens-­Johnson syndrome, viral exanthem,
macrophage activation, hemophagocytic syndromes, and GVHD
in the appropriate clinical setting. DRESS syndrome is often distinguished from other medication reactions by its later onset after
drug exposure and more persistent course.
Withdrawal of the medication is the primary therapeutic intervention. Lymphocyte transformation tests and patch testing may be

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 686 u Dermatologic Evaluation of the Patient

4037

Fig. 686.11 Serum sickness–like reaction is composed of urticarial
plaques with an erythematous border and violaceous centers.

Fig. 686.10 A 9-­yr-­old with cerebral palsy and seizures treated with
carbamazepine. Seventeen days after start of therapy he demonstrated
fever, rash (exanthematous), lymphadenopathy, and nephritis, all part
of a drug-­
induced hypersensitivity syndrome. (From Schachner LA,
Hansen RC, eds. Pediatric Dermatology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Mosby;
2003: p. 1269.)

helpful for identifying the offending drug when multiple suspect
agents are present, but drug discontinuation should not be delayed
while awaiting results. Symptomatic treatment of pruritus and pain
can be accomplished with emollients and mid-­to high-­potency topical corticosteroids (twice daily for 1-­2 weeks). Systemic corticosteroid therapy is necessary in the setting of rapidly evolving or severe
hepatic or renal involvement. Counseling about increased risk with
similar medications and in family members is important. DRESS
syndrome can have a relapsing course, both in the skin and other
organ systems, well after the medication has been withdrawn and initial improvement achieved, necessitating close follow-­up for several
months.

circumscribed, erythematous
Fig. 686.12 Urticaria. Transient well-­

wheals occurred in this girl as a reaction to administration of cefixime.
Note the edematous center and halo of erythema. Circling a lesion
and noting whether it is clear 24 hours later facilitates diagnosis. (From
Paller AS, Mancini AJ, eds. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 5th
ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Fig. 20-­2, p. 469.)

SERUM SICKNESS–LIKE REACTION

Serum sickness–like reaction (SSLR) manifests as annular, urticarial, sharply marginated, coalescing plaques, often with a lavender
hue to the center (Fig. 686.11). In addition, acral erythema/edema,
arthritis/arthralgia, lymphadenopathy, and fever are often present.
Unlike with true serum sickness (see Chapter 191), laboratory evidence of circulating immune complexes and multisystem involvement of vasculitis are typically absent. The differential diagnosis
includes Kawasaki disease, connective tissue diseases, acute annular
urticaria, and DRESS syndrome. SSLR is most commonly seen 10-­
14 days after exposure to various drugs (especially cephalosporins,
penicillins, minocycline, and other antibiotics), as well as after certain infections and vaccinations. The cause of drug-­related SSLR is
unknown, but a toxic metabolite is suspected. In contrast to DRESS
syndrome, SSLR typically occurs after repeated drug exposures.

Fig. 686.13 Multiple fixed-­drug eruption.

Medication withdrawal and symptomatic treatment with oral
antihistamines and analgesics are recommended. Systemic glucocorticoids are indicated for severe joint involvement or extensive
rashes.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4038 Part XXIX u The Skin

Chapter 687

Principles of
Dermatologic Therapy
Stephen R. Humphrey

Fig. 686.14 Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis is char-

acterized by the acute onset of fever and generalized erythema with
numerous small, discrete, sterile, nonfollicular pustules. Pustules may
appear in a few days after the drug therapy is started. Pustules resolve
in <15 days, followed by desquamation. (From Habif TP, ed. Clinical
Dermatology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2004: p. 490.)

FIXED-­DRUG ERUPTION

Fixed-­drug eruption (FDE) occurs minutes to hours after exposure
to a drug and is characterized by mild pruritus or burning of a well-­
circumscribed, dusty red, brown, gray or, if severe, violaceous patch
appearing on the extremities, trunk, lips, or genitals (Fig. 686.13).
There is usually one lesion that, on reexposure to the drug, appears
in the same (fixed) location as the previous episode, often appearing more rapidly. On occasion, there may be two or more lesions.
Stopping the offending agent is required; the FDE will then resolve
within 10-­14 days, often with residual hyperpigmentation. Offending medications include sulfonamides, tetracyclines, NSAIDs, and
acetaminophen.

ACUTE GENERALIZED EXANTHEMATOUS
PUSTULOSIS

Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis is often drug-­related
(most commonly aminopenicillins, macrolides, sulfonamides),
occurring within hours to days after drug exposure. It is characterized by many nonfollicular sterile pustules with underlying
edema and erythema, typically beginning on the face and intertriginous regions (Fig. 686.14). Neutrophilia and fever are common,
whereas eosinophilia is less common than in DRESS syndrome. The
rash may burn or itch; mucous membrane involvement is rare and
often mild. Internal organ involvement is not common and often
is asymptomatic. A pustular smear is always indicated to rule out
infection in the setting of leukocytosis, fever, and a pustular rash.
Differential diagnosis includes generalized pustular psoriasis, bullous impetigo, IgA pemphigus, and subcorneal pustular dermatosis.
Therapy consists of stopping the causative drug and offering symptomatic relief with moist dressings, emollients, and mid-­potency
topical corticosteroids (applied twice daily for 1-­2 weeks).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Competent skin care requires an appreciation of primary versus secondary lesions, a specific diagnosis, and knowledge of the natural
course of the disease. If the diagnosis is uncertain, it is better to err on
the side of less aggressive rather than more aggressive treatment.
In the use of topical medication, consideration of vehicle is as important as the specific therapeutic agent. Acute weeping lesions respond
best to wet compresses, followed by lotions or creams. For dry, thickened, scaly skin, or for treatment of a contact allergic reaction possibly
the consequence of a component of a topical medication, an ointment
base is preferable, as it helps to occlude and moisten the affected area.
Gels and solutions are most useful for the scalp and other hairy areas
because of their faster absorption. The site of involvement is of considerable importance because the most desirable vehicle may not be cosmetically or functionally appropriate, such as an ointment on the face
or hands. A patient’s preference should also play a part in the choice of
vehicle because compliance is poor if a medication is not acceptable
to a patient. Ointments tend to sting less and are the least irritating.
Cosmetically acceptable foam delivery systems have been developed,
and the number of products and formulations available is increasing.
Most lotions are mixtures of water and oil that can be poured. After
the water evaporates, the small amount of remaining oil covers the
skin. Some shake lotions are a suspension of water and insoluble powder; as the water evaporates, cooling the skin, a thin film of powder
covers the skin. Creams are emulsions of oil and water that are viscous
and do not pour (more oil than in lotions). Ointments have oils and a
small amount of water or no water at all; they feel greasy, lubricate dry
skin, trap water, and aid in occlusion. Ointments without water usually require no preservatives because microorganisms require water to
survive. Because of this, ointments often have the lowest number and
concentration of ingredients, decreasing the risk of sensitizing the skin.
Therapy should be kept as simple as possible, and specific written
instructions about the frequency and duration of application should be
provided. Physicians should become familiar with one or two preparations in each category and should learn to use them appropriately.
Prescribing nonspecific proprietary medications that may contain sensitizing agents should be avoided. Certain preparations, such as topical
antihistamines and sensitizing anesthetics, are never indicated.

WET DRESSINGS

Wet dressings cool and dry the skin by evaporation and cleanse it by
removing crusts and exudate, which would cause further irritation if
permitted to remain. The dressings decrease pruritus, burning, and
stinging sensations and are indicated for acutely inflamed moist or oozing dermatitis. Although various astringent and antiseptic substances
may be added to the solution, cool or tepid tap water compresses are
just as effective. Dressings of multiple layers of Kerlix, gauze, or soft
cotton material may be saturated with water and remoistened as often
as necessary. Compresses should be applied for 10-­20 minutes at least
every 4 hours and should usually be continued for 24-­48 hours.
Alternatively, cotton pajamas can be soaked in water and then wrung as
dry as possible. These are placed on the child and covered with dry pajamas, preferably sleeper pajamas with feet. The child should sleep in these
overnight. This type of dressing can be used nightly for up to 1 week.
Wet dressings or wet wraps in conjunction with topical steroids
may also be used in more severe cases of dermatitis (e.g., atopic dermatitis). In this method, a thin layer of the topical steroid is applied
to the affected areas, which are then covered with warm, wet wraps

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4038 Part XXIX u The Skin

Chapter 687

Principles of
Dermatologic Therapy
Stephen R. Humphrey

Fig. 686.14 Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis is char-

acterized by the acute onset of fever and generalized erythema with
numerous small, discrete, sterile, nonfollicular pustules. Pustules may
appear in a few days after the drug therapy is started. Pustules resolve
in <15 days, followed by desquamation. (From Habif TP, ed. Clinical
Dermatology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2004: p. 490.)

FIXED-­DRUG ERUPTION

Fixed-­drug eruption (FDE) occurs minutes to hours after exposure
to a drug and is characterized by mild pruritus or burning of a well-­
circumscribed, dusty red, brown, gray or, if severe, violaceous patch
appearing on the extremities, trunk, lips, or genitals (Fig. 686.13).
There is usually one lesion that, on reexposure to the drug, appears
in the same (fixed) location as the previous episode, often appearing more rapidly. On occasion, there may be two or more lesions.
Stopping the offending agent is required; the FDE will then resolve
within 10-­14 days, often with residual hyperpigmentation. Offending medications include sulfonamides, tetracyclines, NSAIDs, and
acetaminophen.

ACUTE GENERALIZED EXANTHEMATOUS
PUSTULOSIS

Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis is often drug-­related
(most commonly aminopenicillins, macrolides, sulfonamides),
occurring within hours to days after drug exposure. It is characterized by many nonfollicular sterile pustules with underlying
edema and erythema, typically beginning on the face and intertriginous regions (Fig. 686.14). Neutrophilia and fever are common,
whereas eosinophilia is less common than in DRESS syndrome. The
rash may burn or itch; mucous membrane involvement is rare and
often mild. Internal organ involvement is not common and often
is asymptomatic. A pustular smear is always indicated to rule out
infection in the setting of leukocytosis, fever, and a pustular rash.
Differential diagnosis includes generalized pustular psoriasis, bullous impetigo, IgA pemphigus, and subcorneal pustular dermatosis.
Therapy consists of stopping the causative drug and offering symptomatic relief with moist dressings, emollients, and mid-­potency
topical corticosteroids (applied twice daily for 1-­2 weeks).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Competent skin care requires an appreciation of primary versus secondary lesions, a specific diagnosis, and knowledge of the natural
course of the disease. If the diagnosis is uncertain, it is better to err on
the side of less aggressive rather than more aggressive treatment.
In the use of topical medication, consideration of vehicle is as important as the specific therapeutic agent. Acute weeping lesions respond
best to wet compresses, followed by lotions or creams. For dry, thickened, scaly skin, or for treatment of a contact allergic reaction possibly
the consequence of a component of a topical medication, an ointment
base is preferable, as it helps to occlude and moisten the affected area.
Gels and solutions are most useful for the scalp and other hairy areas
because of their faster absorption. The site of involvement is of considerable importance because the most desirable vehicle may not be cosmetically or functionally appropriate, such as an ointment on the face
or hands. A patient’s preference should also play a part in the choice of
vehicle because compliance is poor if a medication is not acceptable
to a patient. Ointments tend to sting less and are the least irritating.
Cosmetically acceptable foam delivery systems have been developed,
and the number of products and formulations available is increasing.
Most lotions are mixtures of water and oil that can be poured. After
the water evaporates, the small amount of remaining oil covers the
skin. Some shake lotions are a suspension of water and insoluble powder; as the water evaporates, cooling the skin, a thin film of powder
covers the skin. Creams are emulsions of oil and water that are viscous
and do not pour (more oil than in lotions). Ointments have oils and a
small amount of water or no water at all; they feel greasy, lubricate dry
skin, trap water, and aid in occlusion. Ointments without water usually require no preservatives because microorganisms require water to
survive. Because of this, ointments often have the lowest number and
concentration of ingredients, decreasing the risk of sensitizing the skin.
Therapy should be kept as simple as possible, and specific written
instructions about the frequency and duration of application should be
provided. Physicians should become familiar with one or two preparations in each category and should learn to use them appropriately.
Prescribing nonspecific proprietary medications that may contain sensitizing agents should be avoided. Certain preparations, such as topical
antihistamines and sensitizing anesthetics, are never indicated.

WET DRESSINGS

Wet dressings cool and dry the skin by evaporation and cleanse it by
removing crusts and exudate, which would cause further irritation if
permitted to remain. The dressings decrease pruritus, burning, and
stinging sensations and are indicated for acutely inflamed moist or oozing dermatitis. Although various astringent and antiseptic substances
may be added to the solution, cool or tepid tap water compresses are
just as effective. Dressings of multiple layers of Kerlix, gauze, or soft
cotton material may be saturated with water and remoistened as often
as necessary. Compresses should be applied for 10-­20 minutes at least
every 4 hours and should usually be continued for 24-­48 hours.
Alternatively, cotton pajamas can be soaked in water and then wrung as
dry as possible. These are placed on the child and covered with dry pajamas, preferably sleeper pajamas with feet. The child should sleep in these
overnight. This type of dressing can be used nightly for up to 1 week.
Wet dressings or wet wraps in conjunction with topical steroids
may also be used in more severe cases of dermatitis (e.g., atopic dermatitis). In this method, a thin layer of the topical steroid is applied
to the affected areas, which are then covered with warm, wet wraps

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 687 u Principles of Dermatologic Therapy
for approximately 30 minutes to 1 hour 2-­3 times daily. This method
is especially effective in children with extensive and severe dermatitis.

BATH OILS, COLLOIDS, AND SOAPS

Bath oil has little benefit in the treatment of children. It offers little moisturizing effect but increases the risk of injury during a bath. Bath oil may
lubricate the surface of the bathtub, causing an adult or child to fall when
stepping into the tub. Tar bath solutions can be prescribed and may be
helpful for psoriasis and atopic dermatitis. Colloids such as starch powder
and colloidal oatmeal are soothing and antipruritic for some patients when
added to the bathwater. Oilated colloidal oatmeal contains mineral oil and
lanolin derivatives for lubrication if the skin is dry. These can also lubricate
the bathtub surface. Ordinary bath soaps may be irritating and drying if
patients have dry skin or dermatitis. Synthetic soaps are much less irritating. Fragrance-­free soaps and cleansers are often better tolerated and less
likely to irritate skin. Additionally, solid soaps tend to be less irritating, as
they do not have as many preservatives as liquid soap might. When skin is
acutely inflamed, avoidance of soap is advised.

LUBRICANTS

Lubricants, such as lotions, creams, and ointments, can be used as moisturizers for dry skin and as vehicles for topical agents such as corticosteroids
and keratolytics. In general, ointments are the most effective emollients.
Numerous commercial preparations are available. Some patients do not
tolerate ointments, and some may be sensitized to a component of the
lubricant; some preservatives in creams are also sensitizers. These preparations can be applied several times a day if necessary and tolerated. Maximal effect is achieved when they are applied to dry skin 2 or 3 times daily.
Lotions containing menthol and camphor in an emollient vehicle can help
control pruritus and dryness, but the use of moisturizers in addition to
these products is best to decrease skin dryness.

SHAMPOOS

Special shampoos containing sulfur, salicylic acid, zinc, and selenium
sulfide are useful for conditions in which there is scaling of the scalp,
such as seborrheic dermatitis or psoriasis. Tar-­containing shampoos
are useful in these conditions. Most shampoos also contain surfactants
and detergents. They should be used as frequently as necessary to control scaling. Patients should be instructed to leave the lathered shampoo in contact with the scalp for 5-­10 minutes before thorough rinsing.

POWDERS

Powders are hygroscopic and serve as absorptive agents in areas of
excessive moisture. When dry, powders decrease friction between two
surfaces. They are most useful in the intertriginous areas and between
the toes, where maceration and abrasion may result from friction on
movement. Coarse powders may cake; therefore they should be of fine
particle size and inert, unless medication has been incorporated in the
formulation. The use of cornstarch-­based powders in inflamed or broken skin may serve as a good growth environment for microorganisms
and should be avoided.

4039

Table 687.1  Potency of Topical Glucocorticosteroids
CLASS 1—SUPER-POTENT
Betamethasone dipropionate, 0.05% gel, ointment
Clobetasol propionate cream, ointment, 0.05%
Halobetasol propionate cream, ointment, 0.05%
CLASS 2—POTENT
Betamethasone dipropionate cream 0.05%
Desoximetasone cream, ointment, gel 0.05% and 0.25%
Fluocinonide cream, ointment, gel, 0.05%
CLASS 3—UPPER MID-­STRENGTH
Betamethasone dipropionate cream, 0.05%
Betamethasone valerate ointment, 0.1%
Fluticasone propionate ointment, 0.005%
Mometasone furoate ointment, 0.1%
Triamcinolone acetonide cream, 0.5%
CLASS 4—MID-­STRENGTH
Desoximetasone cream, 0.05%
Fluocinolone acetonide ointment, 0.025%
Triamcinolone acetonide ointment, 0.1%
CLASS 5—LOWER MID-­STRENGTH
Betamethasone valerate cream/lotion, 0.1%
Fluocinolone acetonide cream, 0.025%
Fluticasone propionate cream, 0.05%
Triamcinolone acetonide cream/lotion, 0.1%
CLASS 6—MILD STRENGTH
Desonide cream, 0.05%
CLASS 7—LEAST POTENT
Topicals with hydrocortisone, dexamethasone, flumethasone,
methylprednisolone, and prednisolone
From Weston WL, Lane AT, Morelli JG. Color Textbook of Pediatric Dermatology, 4th
ed. St. Louis: Mosby; 2007: p. 418.

be used in treating small infants or on large surface areas or denuded
skin; percutaneous absorption may result in salicylism. The α-­hydroxy
acids, particularly lactic acid and glycolic acid, are available in commercial preparations or can be incorporated in an ointment vehicle in
concentrations up to 12%. Some creams contain both urea and lactic
acid. The α-­hydroxy acid preparations are useful for the treatment of
keratinizing disorders and may be applied once or twice daily. Some
patients complain of burning with the use of these agents; in such cases,
the frequency of application should be decreased.

TAR COMPOUNDS

Pastes contain fine powder in ointment vehicles and are not often prescribed in current dermatologic therapy; in certain situations, however,
they can be used effectively to protect vulnerable or damaged skin. A stiff
zinc oxide paste is bland and inert and can be applied to the diaper area
to prevent further irritation caused by diaper dermatitis. Zinc oxide paste
should be applied in a thick layer, completely obscuring the skin, and is
removed more easily with mineral oil than with soap and water.

Tars are obtained from bituminous coal, shale, petrolatum (coal tars), and
wood. They are antipruritic and astringent and appear to promote normal
keratinization. They may be useful for chronic eczema and psoriasis, and
their efficacy may be increased if the affected area is exposed to UV light
after the tar has been removed. Tars should not be used for acute inflammatory lesions. Tars are often messy and unacceptable because they may stain
and they have an odor. They may be incorporated into shampoos, bath oils,
lotions, and ointments. A useful preparation for pediatric patients is liquor
carbonis detergens (LCD) 2–5% in a cream or ointment vehicle. Tar gel
and tar in light body oil are relatively pleasant cosmetic preparations that
cause minimal staining of skin and fabrics. Tars can also be incorporated
into a vehicle with a topical corticosteroid. The frequency of application
varies from 1-­3 times daily, according to tolerance. Many children refuse
to use tar preparations because of their odor and staining characteristics.

KERATOLYTIC AGENTS

ANTIFUNGAL AGENTS

PASTES

Urea-­containing agents are hydrophilic; they hydrate the stratum corneum and make the skin more pliable. In addition, because urea dissolves hydrogen bonds and epidermal keratin, it is effective in treating
scaling disorders. Concentrations of 10–40% are available in several
commercial lotions and creams, which can be applied once or twice
daily as tolerated. Salicylic acid is an effective keratolytic agent and can
be incorporated into various vehicles in concentrations up to 6% to
be applied 2 or 3 times daily. Salicylic acid preparations should not

Antifungal agents are available as powders, lotions, creams, ointments,
and solutions for the treatment of dermatophyte and yeast infections.
Nystatin, naftifine, and amphotericin B are specific for Candida albicans
and are ineffective in other fungal disorders. Tolnaftate is effective against
dermatophytes but not against yeast. The spectrum for ciclopirox olamine
includes the dermatophytes, Malassezia furfur, and C. albicans. The azoles
clotrimazole, econazole, ketoconazole, miconazole, oxiconazole, and sulconazole have a similar broad spectrum. Butenafine has a similar broad

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4040 Part XXIX u The Skin
spectrum and also has antiinflammatory properties. Terbinafine has
greater activity against dermatophytes but poorer activity against yeasts
than the azoles. The topical antifungal agents should be applied 1-­2 times
a day for most fungal infections. All have low sensitizing potential; additives such as preservatives and stabilizers in the vehicles may cause allergic
contact dermatitis. Ointments containing 6% benzoic acid and 3% salicylic
acid are potent keratolytic agents that have also been used for the treatment
of dermatophyte infections. Irritant reactions are common.

TOPICAL ANTIBIOTICS

Topical antibiotics have been used for many years to treat local cutaneous infections, although their efficacy, with the exception of mupirocin,
fusidic acid, and retapamulin, has been questioned. Ointments are the preferred vehicles (except in the treatment of acne vulgaris; see Chapter 710),
and combinations with other topical agents such as corticosteroids are,
in general, inadvisable. Whenever possible, the etiologic agent should be
identified and treated specifically. Antibiotics in wide use as systemic preparations should be avoided because of the risk of bacterial resistance. The
sensitizing potential of certain topical antibiotics, such as neomycin and
nitrofurazone, should be kept in mind and avoided when possible. Mupirocin, fusidic acid, and retapamulin are the most effective topical agents
currently available and are as effective as oral erythromycin in treatment of
mild to moderate impetigo. Polysporin and bacitracin are not as effective.

TOPICAL CORTICOSTEROIDS

Topical corticosteroids are potent antiinflammatory agents and effective
antipruritic agents. Successful therapeutic results are achieved in a wide
variety of skin conditions. Corticosteroids can be divided into seven different categories on the basis of strength (Table 687.1), but for practical
purposes, four categories can be used: low, moderate, high, and super.
Low-­potency preparations include hydrocortisone, desonide, and hydrocortisone butyrate. Medium-­potency compounds include betamethasone,
flurandrenolide, fluocinolone, mometasone furoate, and triamcinolone.
High-­
potency topical steroids include fluocinonide and halcinonide.
Betamethasone dipropionate, halobetasol, and clobetasol propionate are
superpotent preparations and should be prescribed with care. Some of
these compounds are formulated in several strengths according to clinical
efficacy and degree of vasoconstriction. Physicians using topical steroids
should become familiar with preparations within each class.
All corticosteroids can be obtained in various vehicles, including
creams, ointments, solutions, gels, and aerosols. Some are available in a
foam vehicle. Absorption is enhanced by an ointment or gel vehicle, but
the vehicle should be selected on the basis of the type of disorder and the
site of involvement. Frequency of application should be determined by the
potency of the preparation, the location on the body, and the severity of the
eruption. Applying a thin film 2 times daily usually suffices. Adverse local
effects include cutaneous atrophy, striae, telangiectasia, acneiform eruptions, purpura, hypopigmentation, and increased hair growth. Systemic
adverse effects of high-­potency and superpotent topical steroids occur
with long-­term use and include poor growth, cataracts, and suppression
of adrenal function.
The relative skin thickness should be considered in regard to the selection of class of steroid (see Table 687.1). Thin skin such as the eyelids,
face, groin, and genitalia will absorb a substantial amount of medication
compared to the thickest skin on the palms and soles. One adult fingertip’s
worth of medication is enough to cover an area the size of an adult palm
and is approximately half a gram of medication. Knowing the area being
treated and which medication class to prescribe can decrease the potential
for side effects.
In selected circumstances, corticosteroids may be administered by
intralesional injection (acne cysts, keloids, psoriatic plaques, alopecia
areata, persistent insect bite reactions). Only experienced physicians
should use this method of administration.

TOPICAL NONSTEROIDAL ANTIINFLAMMATORY
AGENTS

Calcineurin-­
inhibiting antiinflammatory agents that inhibit T-­
cell
activation may be used instead of topical steroids for the treatment of
atopic dermatitis and other inflammatory conditions. These agents are
pimecrolimus and tacrolimus. They do not have the adverse local effects

seen with topical steroids. Stinging with application is the most common
complaint and may be lessened by mixing the medication with an ointment such as petrolatum jelly for the initial applications. These agents
are only as strong as medium-­potency topical steroids. In 2006, the FDA
issued a boxed warning for topical calcineurin inhibitors because data
from animal experiments and case reports suggested potential for an
increased risk of lymphoma with systemic use. No clear link between
topical calcineurin inhibitor use and lymphoma risk has been established
despite multiple epidemiologic and clinical studies. Crisaborole, a novel
PDE4 inhibitor, is now approved for mild to moderate atopic dermatitis,
and is another option for nonsteroidal treatments.

SUNSCREENS

Sunscreens are of two general types: (1) those, such as zinc oxide and
titanium dioxide, that absorb all wavelengths of the UV and visible
spectrums and (2) a heterogeneous group of chemicals that selectively
absorb energy of various wavelengths within the UV spectrum. In addition to the spectrum of light that is blocked, other factors to be considered include cosmetic acceptance, sensitizing potential, retention on skin
while swimming or sweating, required frequency of application, and
cost. Sunscreen ingredients include para-­aminobenzoic acid (PABA)
with ethanol, PABA esters, cinnamates, and benzophenone. These block
transmission of the majority of solar UVB and some UVA wavelengths.
Avobenzone and ecamsule are more effective in blocking UVA. Antioxidants may also be found in some sunscreens. Lip protectants that absorb
in the UVB range are also available. Some chemical sunscreens (oxybenzone, octocrylene, and octinoxate) have been implicated in harming
coral reefs and are banned in certain areas of the world.
Sunscreens are designated by sun protection factor (SPF). The SPF is
defined as the amount of time to develop a mild sunburn with the sunscreen compared with the amount of time without the sunscreen. A minimum SPF factor of 30 should be recommended most often. The higher
the SPF, the better the protection is against UVB rays. Sunscreens do not
include any measurement of the efficacy in blocking UVA. The efficacy of
these agents depends on careful attention to instructions for use. Chemical
sunscreens should be applied at least 30 minutes before sun exposure to
permit penetration into the epidermis, again on arrival at the destination,
and every subsequent hour when exposed to direct sunlight. Most patients
with photosensitivity eruptions require protection by agents that absorb
both UVB and UVA wavelengths (see Chapter 697).
Although sunscreens do confer photoprotection and may decrease
the development of nevi, protection is incomplete against all harmful UV light. Midday (10 am to 4 pm) sun avoidance is the primary
method of photoprotection. Clothing, hats, and staying in the shade
offer additional sun protection.

LASER THERAPY

The vascular-­specific pulsed dye laser therapy is used mainly for the
treatment of capillary malformations (port-­wine stains). Spider telangiectasia, small facial pyogenic granulomas, superficial and ulcerated
hemangioma, and warts may also be treated. Vascular-­specific pulsed
dye lasers produce light that is readily absorbed by oxyhemoglobin,
producing selective photothermolysis of vascular lesions.

Ultraviolet Phototherapy

Phototherapy can be a useful treatment for many cutaneous inflammatory disorders, including atopic dermatitis, psoriasis, pityriasis
lichenoides, vitiligo, and a few others. Some benefits of phototherapy include the fact that it is well tolerated, may treat a large area of
the body, and may enable a patient to avoid systemic immunosuppressive agents. There are two traditional modalities of treatment:
psoralen (a photosensitizer) + UVA (PUVA) or narrow-­band UVB
phototherapy (NBUVB). NBUVB phototherapy is most often used,
typically dosed between 1 and 3 times per week, depending on the
condition. There is an increased risk of skin cancers with long-­term
use of PUVA, but there does not seem to be an increased risk for
NBUVB. Risks include burns, though this is quite rare if performed
properly.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 688 u Dermatologic Diseases of the Neonate

Chapter 688

Dermatologic Diseases of
the Neonate
Sarah B. Younger and Kari L. Martin
Minor evanescent lesions of newborn infants, particularly when florid,
may cause undue concern. Most of these entities are relatively common, benign, and transient and do not require therapy.

SEBACEOUS HYPERPLASIA

Minute, profuse, yellow-­white papules are frequently found on the
forehead, nose, upper lip, and cheeks of a term infant; they represent
hyperplastic sebaceous glands (Fig. 688.1). These tiny papules diminish gradually in size and disappear entirely within the first few weeks of
life; no treatment is required.

MILIA

Milia are superficial epidermal inclusion cysts that contain laminated
keratinized material. The lesion is a firm cyst, 1-­2 mm in diameter, and
pearly, opalescent white. Milia may occur at any age, but in neonates are
most frequently scattered over the face and gingivae and on the midline of the palate, where they are called Epstein pearls. Milia exfoliate
spontaneously in most infants and may be ignored; those that appear
in scars or sites of trauma in older children may be gently unroofed and
the contents extracted with a fine-­gauge needle.

SUCKING BLISTERS

Solitary or scattered superficial bullae present at birth on the upper
limbs of infants are presumably induced by vigorous sucking on the
affected part in utero. Common sites are the radial aspect of the forearm, thumb, and index finger. These bullae resolve rapidly without
sequelae. They may occur in conjunction with sucking pads (calluses),
which are found on the lips and are a result of combined intracellular
edema and hyperkeratosis. No treatment is required.

CUTIS MARMORATA

When a newborn infant is exposed to low environmental temperatures,
an evanescent, lacy, reticulated red and/or blue cutaneous vascular pattern appears over most of the body surface. This vascular change represents an accentuated physiologic vasomotor response that disappears
with increasing age, although it is sometimes discernible even in older
children. No treatment is needed.
Cutis marmorata telangiectatica congenita presents in a similar fashion but is a vascular anomaly in which the lesions are more

4041

intense, may be segmental, and are persistent despite warming of the
infant. They may be associated with loss of dermal tissue, epidermal
atrophy, and ulceration (Fig. 688.2). The lower extremities are usually
affected, with limb atrophy noted on the affected side. Gradual fading of the livid erythema occurs over 3-­5 years, but limb asymmetry
is permanent. Extracutaneous findings such as ocular and neurologic
abnormalities may be associated in 20–80% of cases. There is no specific treatment.

HARLEQUIN COLOR CHANGE

A dramatic vascular event, harlequin color change occurs transiently
in up to 10% of newborns, most commonly on days 2-­52 of life. It
probably reflects an imbalance in the autonomic vascular regulatory mechanism. When the infant is placed on one side, the body is
bisected longitudinally into a pale upper half and a deep red dependent half. The color change lasts only for a few minutes and occasionally affects only a portion of the trunk or face. Changing the
infant’s position may reverse the pattern. Muscular activity causes
generalized flushing and obliterates the color differential. Repeated
episodes may occur but do not indicate permanent autonomic imbalance. There is generally no need for treatment. This disorder should
be readily distinguishable from harlequin syndrome, which is associated with paroxysmal hemifacial flushing and sweating with or without a Horner syndrome. Symptoms are induced by heat, stress, or
exercise. Some cases are secondary to trauma, cervical cord syrinx,
or neuroblastoma. Although rarely congenital, most cases occur in
older children.

NEVUS SIMPLEX (SALMON PATCH)

Nevus simplex is a small, pale pink, ill-­defined, vascular macule
that occurs most commonly on the glabella, eyelids, upper lip, and
nuchal area of 40–60% of normal newborn infants. These lesions persist for several months and may become more visible during crying
or changes in environmental temperature. Most lesions on the face
eventually fade and disappear completely, although lesions occupying
the entire central forehead often do not. Those on the posterior neck
and occipital areas usually persist. Treatment is not usually indicated,
though pulsed dye laser treatment can be helpful in lightening lesions
that are persistent and cosmetically bothersome. Lesions located in
the midline lumbosacral area and associated with other changes such
as a sinus or pit, patch of hair, or asymmetric gluteal cleft warrant
imaging with ultrasound to evaluate the underlying spinal cord for
spinal dysraphism.
Nevus simplex should not be confused with a port-­wine stain (capillary malformation), which is a permanent lesion and may be associated
with Sturge-­Weber syndrome. Nevus simplex is usually symmetric,
with lesions on both eyelids or on both sides of the midline. Port-­wine
stains are often larger and unilateral, and they usually end along the
midline (see Chapter 691).

Fig. 688.2 Newborn girl with reticulate erythema/livedo on legs, right
Fig. 688.1 Sebaceous hyperplasia. Minute white-­yellow papules on
the nose of a newborn.

arm, and cheeks. (From Pleimes M, Gottler S, Weibel L. Characteristic
congenital reticular erythema: cutis marmorata telangiectatica congenital. J Pediatr. 2013;163:604, Fig. 1.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4042 Part XXIX u The Skin
CONGENITAL DERMAL MELANOCYTOSIS (SLATE
GRAY NEVUS)

Congenital dermal melanocytosis, which appears as blue or slate-­gray
macular lesions, has variably defined margins. It occurs most commonly in the sacral area but may be found over the posterior thighs,
legs, back, and shoulders (Fig. 688.3). The spots may be solitary or
numerous and often involve large areas. The peculiar hue of these macules is a result of the dermal location of melanin-­containing melanocytes (mid-­dermal melanocytosis) that are presumably arrested in their
migration from neural crest to epidermis. They usually fade during the
first few years of life as a result of darkening of the overlying skin; no
therapy is required. If lesions persist, they may be treated with lasers,
if desired. Malignant degeneration does not occur. The characteristic appearance and congenital onset distinguish these spots from the
bruises of child abuse. Rarely dermal melanocytosis is associated with
Hurler or Hunter syndrome, GM1 gangliosidosis, Niemann-­Pick disease, mucolipidosis, and mannosidosis. These lesions have previously
been referred to as “Mongolian spots.” This term should be avoided, as
it derives from racist terminology.

ERYTHEMA TOXICUM

A benign, self-­limited, evanescent eruption, erythema toxicum occurs
in approximately 50% of full-­term infants; preterm infants are affected
less commonly. The lesions are firm, yellow-­white, 1-­to 2-­mm papules or pustules with a surrounding erythematous flare (Fig. 688.4).
At times, splotchy erythema is the only manifestation. Lesions may be
sparse or numerous and either clustered in several sites or widely dispersed over much of the body surface. The palms and soles are usually
spared. Peak incidence occurs on the second day of life, but new lesions
may erupt during the first few days as the rash waxes and wanes. Onset
may occasionally be delayed for a few days to weeks in premature
infants. Eosinophils can be demonstrated in Wright-­stained smears of
the intralesional contents. Cultures are sterile.
The cause of erythema toxicum is unknown. The lesions can mimic
pyoderma, candidiasis, herpes simplex, transient neonatal pustular
melanosis, and miliaria but can be differentiated by the characteristic infiltrate of eosinophils and the absence of organisms on a stained

smear. The course is brief (3-­7 days), and lesions generally resolve
without pigmentation. No therapy is required. Incontinentia pigmenti
and eosinophilic pustular folliculitis also have eosinophilic infiltration but can be distinguished by their distribution, histologic type, and
chronicity.

TRANSIENT NEONATAL PUSTULAR MELANOSIS

Pustular melanosis is a transient, benign, self-­limited dermatosis of
unknown etiology that is characterized by three types of lesions: (1)
evanescent superficial pustules, (2) ruptured pustules with a collarette
of fine scale, at times with a central hyperpigmented macule, and (3)
hyperpigmented macules (Fig. 688.5). Lesions are present at birth, and
one or all types of lesions may be found in a profuse or sparse distribution. Pustules represent the early phase of the disorder, and macules, the late phase. The pustular phase rarely lasts more than 2-­3 days;
hyperpigmented macules may persist for as long as 3 months. Sites of
predilection are the anterior neck, forehead, and lower back, although
the scalp, trunk, limbs, palms, and soles may be affected.
The active phase shows an intracorneal or subcorneal pustule filled
with polymorphonuclear leukocytes, debris, and an occasional eosinophil. The macules are characterized only by increased melanization of
epidermal cells. Cultures and smears can be used to distinguish these
pustules from those of pyoderma and erythema toxicum, because the
lesions of pustular melanosis do not contain bacteria or dense aggregates of eosinophils. No therapy is required.

INFANTILE ACROPUSTULOSIS

Onset of infantile acropustulosis generally occurs at 2-­10 months of age;
lesions are occasionally noted at birth (Fig. 688.6). The cause is unknown.
The lesions are initially discrete erythematous papules that become vesiculopustular within 24 hours and subsequently crust over before healing.

Fig. 688.4 Erythema toxicum on the trunk of a newborn infant.

Fig. 688.5 Transient neonatal pustular melanosis. Multiple papules
Fig. 688.3 Extensive dermal melanocytosis on the back of a newborn.
(Courtesy Fitzsimons Army Medical Center teaching file.)

present at birth on the arm of an infant. (From Weston WL, Lane AT,
Morelli JG, eds. Color Textbook of Pediatric Dermatology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2002:331.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 689 u Cutaneous Defects

4043

Chapter 689

Cutaneous Defects
Kari L. Martin
SKIN DIMPLES

Fig. 688.6 Acropustulosis of infancy. Multiple tense erythematous

papules and pustules on the palm of this 4-­mo-­old girl. (From Kliegman
RM, Lye PS, Bordini BJ, Toth H, Basel D, eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­
Based Diagnosis. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017: Fig. 47.3, p. 854.)

They are intensely pruritic. Preferred sites are the palms of the hands
and the soles and sides of the feet, where the lesions may be extensive. A
less dense eruption may be found on the dorsum of the hands and feet,
ankles, and wrists. Pustules occasionally occur elsewhere on the body.
Each episode lasts 7-­14 days, during which time pustules continue to
appear in crops. After a 2-­to 4-­week remission, a new outbreak follows.
This cyclic pattern continues for approximately 2 years; permanent resolution is often preceded by longer intervals of remission between periods
of activity. Infants with acropustulosis are otherwise well.
Wright-­stained smears of intralesional contents show abundant neutrophils or, occasionally, a predominance of eosinophils. Histologically,
well-­circumscribed, subcorneal, neutrophilic pustules, with or without
eosinophils, are noted.
The differential diagnosis in neonates includes transient neonatal
pustular melanosis, erythema toxicum, milia, cutaneous candidiasis,
and staphylococcal pustulosis. In older infants and toddlers, additional diagnostic considerations include scabies, dyshidrotic eczema,
pustular psoriasis, subcorneal pustular dermatosis, and hand-­foot-­
and-­mouth disease. A therapeutic trial of a scabicide is warranted in
equivocal cases.
Therapy is directed at minimizing discomfort for infants. Topical
mid-­to high-­potency corticosteroids and/or oral antihistamines may
decrease the severity of the pruritus and an infant’s irritability. Dapsone
(1-­2 mg/kg/day by mouth, divided in one to two doses) is effective but
has potentially serious side effects, notably, hemolytic anemia and methemoglobinemia; its use should be limited to particularly severe cases.

EOSINOPHILIC PUSTULAR FOLLICULITIS

Eosinophilic pustular folliculitis is defined as recurrent crops of pruritic, coalescing, follicular papulopustules on the face, trunk, and
extremities. Fifty percent of patients have peripheral eosinophilia, with
eosinophil counts exceeding 5%, and approximately 30% have leukocytosis (>10,000 leukocytes/mm3).
Infants account for <10% of all cases of eosinophilic pustular folliculitis. The clinical and histologic appearances of this disorder in infants
closely resemble those in immunocompetent adults, with minor exceptions. In infants, the lesions are most prominent on the scalp, although
they also occur on the trunk and extremities and occasionally are found
on the palms and soles. The classic annular and polycyclic appearance
with centrifugal enlargement is not seen in infants. The differential
diagnosis includes erythema toxicum neonatorum, infantile acropustulosis, localized pustular psoriasis, pustular folliculitis, and transient
neonatal pustular melanosis. High-­potency topical corticosteroids are
the most effective treatment (see Table 687.1).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Cutaneous depressions over bony prominences and in the sacral area,
at times associated with pits and creases, may occur both in normal
children and in association with dysmorphic syndromes. Skin dimples
may develop in utero because of interposition of tissue between a sharp
bony point and the uterine wall, which leads to decreased subcutaneous tissue formation.
Dimples may also be present overlying an area of bone hypoplasia.
Bilateral acromial skin dimples are usually an isolated finding, but they
are also seen in association with deletion of the long arm of chromosome
18. Dimples tend to occur over the patella in congenital rubella, over the
lateral aspects of the knees and elbows in prune-­belly syndrome, on the
pretibial surface in campomelic syndrome, and in the shape of an H on
the chin in Freeman-­Sheldon (“whistling face”) syndrome.
Sacral dimples are common and usually are isolated findings. They
may be seen in multiple syndromes or in association with spina bifida
occulta and diastematomyelia. Association with a mass or other cutaneous stigma (hair, aplasia cutis, lipoma, hemangioma) should increase
concern for underlying spinal dysraphism (see Chapter 631). Simple
sacral dimples do not predict underlying spinal cord malformations,
and spinal ultrasounds should not be performed in these cases because
most of the abnormal findings reported in them are of no clinical significance. In infants younger than 3 months who warrant imaging,
ultrasound is an initial, cost-­effective, noninvasive method. If there is
serious concern of an underlying defect, MRI is indicated. MRI of the
spine is the imaging modality of choice for patients older than 3 months if
there is a strong suspicion of a spinal dysraphism.

REDUNDANT SKIN

Loose folds of skin must be differentiated from a congenital defect of
elastic tissue or collagen such as cutis laxa, Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome, or
pseudoxanthoma elasticum. Redundant skin over the posterior part of
the neck is common in Turner, Noonan, Down, and Klippel-­Feil syndromes and monosomy 1p36; more generalized folds of skin occur in
infants with trisomy 18 and short-­limbed skeletal dysplasia.

AMNIOTIC CONSTRICTION BANDS

Partial or complete constriction bands that produce defects in extremities and digits are found in 1 in 10,000-­45,000 otherwise normal infants.
Constrictive tissue bands are caused by primary amniotic rupture, with
subsequent entanglement of fetal parts, particularly limbs, in shriveled
fibrotic amniotic strands. This event is probably sporadic, with negligible
risk of recurrence. Formation of constrictive tissue bands is associated
with maternal history of abdominal trauma, amniocentesis, and hereditary defects of collagen such as Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome and osteogenesis
imperfecta. Treatment traditionally involves multiple surgical elongating
procedures such as Z-­and W-­plasties. A surgical alternative uses lipoinjection and multiple internal incisions on the deep surface of the band.
Adhesive bands involve the craniofacial area and are associated with
severe defects such as encephalocele and facial clefts. Adhesive bands
result from broad fusion between disrupted fetal tissue and an intact
amniotic membrane. The craniofacial defects appear not to be caused
by constrictive amniotic bands, but to result from a vascular disruption
sequence with or without cephaloamniotic adhesion (see Chapter 100).
The limb–body wall complex involves vascular disruption early in
development, affecting several embryonic structures; it includes at least
two of the following three characteristics: exencephaly or encephalocele with facial clefts, thoracoschisis and/or abdominoschisis, and limb
defects.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4044 Part XXIX u The Skin
PREAURICULAR SINUSES AND PITS

Pits and sinus tracts anterior to the pinna may be a result of imperfect
fusion of the tubercles of the first and second branchial arches. These
anomalies may be unilateral or bilateral, may be familial, and at times
are associated with other anomalies of the ears and face. Preauricular
pits are present in branchiootorenal dysplasia 1 syndrome (EYA-­1
gene), an autosomal dominant disorder that consists of external ear
malformations, branchial fistulas, hearing loss, and renal anomalies.
When the tracts become chronically infected, retention cysts may form
and drain intermittently; such lesions may require excision.

ACCESSORY TRAGI

An accessory tragus typically appears as a single pedunculated, flesh-­
colored papule in the preauricular region anterior to the tragus. Less
commonly, accessory tragi are multiple or bilateral and may be located
in the preauricular area, on the cheek along the line of the mandible
(Fig. 689.1), or on the lateral aspect of the neck anterior to the sternocleidomastoid muscle. In contrast to the rest of the pinna, which
develops from the second branchial arch, the tragus and accessory
tragi derive from the first branchial arch. Accessory tragi may occur
as isolated defects or in chromosomal first branchial arch syndromes
that include anomalies of the ears and face, such as cleft lip, cleft palate,
and mandibular hypoplasia. An accessory tragus is consistently found
in oculoauriculovertebral syndrome (Goldenhar syndrome). Other
associated syndromes include mandibulofacial dysostosis (Treacher
Collins syndrome), Townes-­Brocks, VACTERL, and Wolf-­Hirschhorn
syndrome. Surgical excision is appropriate if cosmetically desired.
Studies are controversial on whether patients with accessory tragi
and preauricular pits have a higher prevalence of hearing loss and urinary tract anomalies. Renal ultrasound should be performed when found
with at least one of the following: other malformations or dysmorphic
features; family history of deafness, auricular, and/or renal malformation; or a maternal history of gestational diabetes.

BRANCHIAL CLEFT AND THYROGLOSSAL CYSTS
AND SINUSES

Cysts and sinuses in the neck may be formed along the course of the
first, second, third, or fourth branchial clefts as a result of improper
closure during embryonic life. Second branchial cleft cysts are the most
common. The lesions may be unilateral or bilateral (2–3%) and may
open onto the cutaneous surface or drain into the pharynx. Secondary
infection is an indication for systemic antibiotic therapy. These anomalies may be inherited as autosomal dominant traits.
Thyroglossal cysts and fistulas are similar defects located in or near
the midline of the neck; they may extend to the base of the tongue. A
pathognomonic sign is vertical motion of the mass with swallowing
and tongue protrusion. In nearly 50% of affected children, the cyst or
fistula manifests as an infected midline upper neck mass. Cysts in the
tongue base may be differentiated from an undescended lingual thyroid by radionuclide scanning. Unlike branchial cysts, a thyroglossal duct cyst often appears after an upper respiratory infection (see
Chapter 601).

PILONIDAL SINUS AND ABSCESS

The etiology of pilonidal disease remains unknown; three hypotheses
explaining its origin have been proposed. The first states that trauma,
such as can occur with prolonged sitting, impacts hair into the subcutaneous tissue, which serves as a nidus for infection. The second suggests
that in some patients, hair follicles exist in the subcutaneous tissues,
perhaps the result of some embryologic abnormality, and that they
serve as a focal point for infection, especially with secretion of hair oils.
The third speculates that motion of the buttocks disturbs a particularly
deep midline crease and works bacteria and hair beneath the skin. This
theory arises from the apparent improved short-­term and long-­term
results of operations that close the wound off the midline, obliterating
the deep natal cleft.
Pilonidal disease usually manifests in adolescents or young adults
with significant hair over the midline sacral and coccygeal areas. It can
occur as an acute abscess with a tender, warm, flocculent, erythematous swelling or as draining sinus tracts. This disease does not resolve
with nonoperative treatment. An acute abscess should be drained and
packed open, using appropriate anesthesia. Oral broad-­spectrum antibiotics covering the usual isolates (Staphylococcus aureus and Bacteroides species) are prescribed, and the patient’s family withdraws the
packing over the course of a week. When the packing has been totally
removed, the area can be kept clean by a bath or shower. The wound
usually heals completely in 6 weeks. Once the wound is healed, most
pediatric surgeons feel that elective excision should be scheduled to
avoid recurrence. There are some reports, however, that this is only
necessary if the disease recurs. Usually, patients who present with sinus
tracts are managed with a single elective excision.
Most surgeons carefully identify the extent of each sinus tract and
excise all skin and subcutaneous tissue involved to the fascia covering
the sacrum and coccyx. Some close the wound in the midline; others leave it open and packed for healing by secondary intention. This
method has been modified by the application of a vacuum-­assisted
(VAC sponge) dressing. This is a system that applies continuous suction
to a porous dressing. It is usually changed every 3 days and can be done
at home with the assistance of a nurse. Some marsupialize the wound
by suturing the skin edges down to the exposed fascia covering the
sacrum and coccyx. There appears to be improved success with excision and closure in such a way that the suture line is not in the midline.
Currently there appears to be enthusiasm for the less radical methods
that Bascom has introduced, treating simple sinus tracts with small
local procedures and limiting excision to only diseased tissues, while
still keeping the incision off the midline. Recurrence or wound-­healing
problems are relatively common, occurring in 9–27% of cases. The
variety of treatments and procedures currently being described indicates that all are associated with significant complications and delays in
return to normal activity. Still, it is rare for problems to persist beyond
1-­2 years. Recalcitrant cases are treated by a large, full-­thickness gluteal
flap or skin grafting.

SUPERNUMERARY NIPPLES

Solitary or multiple accessory nipples may occur in a unilateral or
bilateral distribution along a line from the anterior axillary fold to the
inguinal area. Accessory nipples may or may not have areolae and may
be mistaken for congenital nevi. They may be excised for cosmetic
reasons, but otherwise, treatment is not necessary. Renal or urinary
tract anomalies, malignancies—especially genitourinary cancers—and
hematologic abnormalities may rarely occur in children with this finding (see Chapter 588).

APLASIA CUTIS CONGENITA (CONGENITAL
ABSENCE OF SKIN)

Fig. 689.1 Accessory tragus on cheek along jaw line.

Developmental absence of skin is usually noted on the scalp as multiple
or solitary (70%), noninflammatory, well-­demarcated, oval or circular 1-­
to 2-­cm ulcers (Table 689.1). The appearance of lesions varies, depending on when they occurred during intrauterine development. Those that
form early in gestation may heal before delivery and appear as atrophic,
fibrotic scars with associated alopecia, whereas more recent defects may

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 689 u Cutaneous Defects

4045

Table 689.1  Freiden’s Classification of Aplasia
Cutis Congenita
GROUP

DEFINITION

INHERITANCE

1

Isolated scalp involvement; may be
associated with single defects

AD

2

Scalp ACC with limb reduction defects
(Adams-­Oliver syndrome); may be
associated with encephalocele

AD

3

Scalp ACC with epidermal nevus

Sporadic

4

ACC overlying occult spinal dysraphism,
spina bifida, or meningoencephalocele

Sporadic

5

ACC with placental infarcts and/or fetus
Sporadic
papyraceus (disappearing twin syndrome)

6

ACC with epidermolysis bullosa; Bart
phenotype*

AD or AR

7

ACC localized to extremities without
blistering; usually affecting pretibial
areas and dorsum of hands and feet

AD or AR

8

ACC caused by teratogens (e.g.,
Sporadic
varicella, herpes, methimazole, valproic
acid, misoprostol)

9

ACC associated with malformation
Variable
syndromes (e.g., trisomy 13, deletion
4p−, deletion Xp22.1, ectodermal
dysplasia, Johanson-­Blizzard syndrome,
Adams-­Oliver syndrome)

Fig. 689.2 Solitary scalp vertex lesion of aplasia cutis congenita with
hair collar sign.

*Bart phenotype ACC with epidermolysis bullosa and dystrophic nails.
ACC, Aplasia cutis congenital; AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive.
Modified from Frieden IJ. Aplasia cutis congenita: a clinical review and proposal for
classification. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1986;14:646–660.

manifest as ulcerations. Most occur at the vertex of the scalp just lateral
to the midline, but similar defects may also occur on the face, trunk,
and limbs, where they are often symmetric and usually associated with
an intrauterine fetal demise of a twin (fetus papyraceus). The depth
and size of the ulcer vary. Only the epidermis and upper dermis may
be involved, resulting in minimal scarring or hair loss, or less often, the
defect may extend to the deep dermis; to the subcutaneous tissue; and,
rarely, to the periosteum, skull, and dura. Lesions may be surrounded by
a ring of hair known as the hair collar sign (Fig. 689.2). The hair collar
sign may also be associated with an encephalocele, meningocele, heterotopic glial tissue, or a meningothelial hamartoma.
Diagnosis is made on physical findings indicative of in utero disruption of skin development. Lesions are sometimes mistakenly attributed
to scalp electrodes or obstetric trauma. Most are sporadic, but autosomal dominant and recessive cases also occur; some are caused by
pathogenic variants in BMS1.
Although most individuals with aplasia cutis congenita have no
other abnormalities, these lesions may be associated with isolated
physical anomalies or with malformation syndromes, including
Opitz, Adams-­
Oliver, oculocerebrocutaneous, Johanson-­
Blizzard,
and 4p(−), X-­p22 microdeletion syndromes; trisomy 13-­15; and chromosome 16-­18 defects (see Table 689.1). Aplasia cutis congenita may
also be found in association with an overt or underlying embryologic
malformation, such as congenital pulmonary malformations, meningomyelocele, gastroschisis, omphalocele, or spinal dysraphism. Aplasia cutis congenita in association with the vanishing twin syndrome
(fetus papyraceus) is apparently caused by ischemic or thrombotic
events in the placenta and fetus such as the hypovolemia that occurs
with acute transfusion from a surviving to a dying twin. Blistering or
skin fragility and/or absence or deformity of nails in association with
aplasia cutis congenita is a well-­recognized manifestation of epidermolysis bullosa.

Fig. 689.3 An elastic protruding hairless nodule measuring up to 1.5
cm in diameter, with a ring of dark, coarse, long hairs surrounding the
nodule forming a “hair collar.” (From Chien MM, Chen KL, Chiu HC.
The “hair collar” sign. J Pediatr. 2016;168:246.)

Major complications are rare and more often associated with large,
stellate lesions of the midline parietal scalp. Hemorrhage, secondary
local infection, and meningitis have been reported. If the defect is
small, recovery is uneventful, with gradual epithelialization and formation of a hairless atrophic scar over a period of several weeks. Small
bony defects usually close spontaneously in the first year of life. Large
or numerous scalp defects may require repair, but care must be taken,
as abnormal underlying venous structures have complicated surgical
repair. Truncal and limb defects, despite being large, usually epithelialize and form atrophic scars, which can later be revised.
Although the hair collar sign is often associated with aplasia cutis, it
may also be seen with encephaloceles, meningoceles, heterotopic glial
elements, or hamartoma. Brain MRI is often indicated to evaluate for
these lesions in patients with the hair collar sign without aplasia cutis
(Fig. 689.3).

FOCAL FACIAL DERMAL DYSPLASIAS

The focal facial dermal dysplasias (FFDDs) are a rare group of conditions sharing bitemporal or preauricular lesions resembling scars or
aplasia cutis congenita. FFDD1 (Brauer syndrome) is inherited in an
autosomal dominant fashion and typically has mild associated facial
features. FFDD2 (Brauer-­Setleis syndrome) and FFDD3 (Setleis syndrome) are associated with thin, puckered periorbital skin, distichiasis

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4046 Part XXIX u The Skin
and/or absent eyelashes, upslanting palpebral fissures, flat nasal bridge,
large lips, and redundant facial skin. FFDD2 is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion, whereas FFDD3 is autosomal recessive and
caused by pathogenic variants in TWIST2; autosomally dominant cases
of FFDD3 have been reported and are caused by chromosome duplication/triplication of the 1p36.22p36.21 region. FFDD4 has no other
related skin findings; it is inherited both in autosomal dominant and
recessive manners and is caused by pathogenic variants in CYP26C1.

of the lacrimal ducts are occasional manifestations. Oral leukokeratosis
may give rise to squamous cell carcinoma. Other mucous membranes,
including conjunctival, urethral, and genital, may be involved. Infection,
malignancy, pulmonary fibrosis, and bone marrow failure are common,
and death before age 40 years is typical. No effective treatment exists.
Allogenic hemopoietic stem cell transplantation is curative treatment
when bone marrow failure occurs.

FOCAL DERMAL HYPOPLASIA (GOLTZ-­GORLIN
SYNDROME)

Cutis verticis gyrata, an unusual alteration of the scalp that is more
common in males, may be present from birth or may develop during
adolescence. The scalp is characterized by convoluted elevated folds,
1-­2 cm in thickness, usually in the fronto-­occipital axis. Unlike the lax
skin of other disorders, the convolutions cannot generally be flattened
by traction. Primary cutis gyrata may be associated with intellectual
disability, retinitis pigmentosa, sensorineural deafness, and thyroid
aplasia. Secondary cutis gyrata may be the result of chronic inflammatory diseases, tumors, nevi, and acromegaly.

A rare congenital mesoectodermal and ectodermal disorder, focal
dermal hypoplasia is characterized by dysplasia of connective tissue
in the skin and skeleton. This disorder is an X-­linked dominant disorder caused by pathogenic variants in the PORCN gene. It manifests
as numerous soft tan papillomas. Other cutaneous findings include
linear atrophic lesions, reticulated hypopigmentation and hyperpigmentation, telangiectasias, congenital absence of skin, angiofibromas
presenting as verrucous excrescences, and papillomas of the lips,
tongue, circumoral region, vulva, anus, and the inguinal, axillary, and
periumbilical areas. Partial alopecia, sweating disorders, and dystrophic nails are additional, less common ectodermal anomalies. The
most frequent skeletal defects are syndactyly, clinodactyly, polydactyly, and scoliosis. Osteopathia striata are fine parallel vertical stripes
noted on radiographs in the metaphyses of long bones of patients
with this disorder; these are highly characteristic of focal dermal
hypoplasia but are not pathognomonic. Many ocular abnormalities,
the most common of which are colobomas, strabismus, nystagmus,
and microphthalmia, are also characteristic. Small stature, enamel
hypoplasia, soft tissue anomalies, and peculiar dermatoglyphic patterns are also common. Cognitive impairment occurs occasionally.
There is no specific treatment.

DYSKERATOSIS CONGENITA (ZINSSER-­ENGMAN-­
COLE SYNDROME)

Dyskeratosis congenita (DKC), a rare familial syndrome, consists classically of the triad of reticulated hyperpigmentation of the skin (Fig. 689.4),
dystrophic nails, and mucous membrane leukoplakia in association with
immunologic and hematologic abnormalities. Patients with DKC also
show signs of premature aging and increased occurrence of cancer, especially squamous cell carcinoma. DKC may be X-­linked recessive (DKC-­
1 gene), autosomal dominant (hTERC and TINF2 genes), or autosomal
recessive (NOLA3 gene). Onset occurs in childhood, most commonly
as nail dystrophy. The nails become atrophic and ridged longitudinally
with progression to pterygia and complete nail loss. Skin changes usually appear after onset of nail changes and consist of reticulated gray-­
brown pigmentation, atrophy, and telangiectasia, especially on the neck,
face, and chest. Hyperhidrosis and hyperkeratosis of the palms and soles,
sparse scalp hair, and easy blistering of the hands and feet are also characteristic. Blepharitis, ectropion, and excessive tearing because of atresia

Fig. 689.4 Reticulated dyspigmentation on neck of patient with dyskeratosis congenita.

CUTIS VERTICIS GYRATA

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 690

Ectodermal Dysplasias
Kari L. Martin
Ectodermal dysplasia (ED) is a heterogeneous group of disorders
characterized by a constellation of findings involving defects of two or
more of the following: teeth, skin, and appendageal structures, including hair, nails, and eccrine and sebaceous glands. Although more than
150 EDs have been described, the majority are rare, with an estimated
incidence of 3.5 in 10,000 individuals.
Individuals presenting with a constellation of abnormalities involving the teeth, skin, and nails should raise suspicion for a diagnosis of
ED. Table 690.1 provides a general list of abnormalities that may be
seen in patients with EDs. Further specifying the specific type of ED
can be challenging because there are a large number of subtypes and
most are extremely rare (Table 690.2). Exome sequencing may enhance
the identification of these rare subtypes.

Table 690.1  Clinical Abnormalities in Ectodermal
Dysplasia
Teeth

Small primary teeth, anodontia or hypodontia of
secondary teeth, conical or peg teeth, premature loss
of teeth, delayed eruption of teeth, defective enamel,
small widely spaced teeth, elongated pulp chamber
in teeth

Skin

Atopic dermatitis, xerosis, photosensitivity,
palmoplantar keratoderma, facial telangiectasias

Hair

Abnormal quantity, structure and quality: thin, brittle,
slow-­growing, kinky or wooly, fragile, dry, and
lusterless hair. Often involves scalp, eyebrows and
eyelashes.

Nails

Brittle, dystrophic, absent, ridging, pitting

Sweat

Hypohidrosis, hyperhidrosis of palms and soles

Other

Recurrent sinus infection, nasal congestion, hoarse
voice, wheezing

Normal phenotype is also possible for any of these categories.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 690 u Ectodermal Dysplasias 4047
Table 690.2  Classification for Ectodermal Dysplasias*
DISORDER†

INHERITANCE

GENE

PROTEIN

FUNCTION

EDA/NF-­κB PATHWAY
Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia

XLR

EDA1

Ectodysplasin (EDA)

Membrane ligand

Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia

AD

EDAR

EDA receptor (EDAR)

Receptor of EDA

EDARADD

EDAR-­associated death
domain

Adaptor molecule

EDAR

EDAR

Receptor of EDA

EDARADD

EDAR-­associated death
domain

Adaptor molecule

TRAF6

TNF receptor–associated
factor 6

Activates IKK

Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia

AR

Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia
with immune deficiency (males)
± osteopetrosis (males) ±
lymphedema

XLR

NEMO/IKBKG

NF-­kB essential modulator

NF-­kB activation

Incontinentia pigmenti (females)

XLD

NEMO/IKKγ

NF-­κB essential modulator

NF-­κB activation

Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia
with immune deficiency

AR

IkBα

IkBα

NF-­kB activation

P63 PATHWAY
Ectrodactyly-­ectodermal dysplasia-­
clefting syndrome

AD

p63

p63

Transcription factor

Rapp-­Hodgkin syndrome

AD

p63

p63

Transcription factor

Ankyloblepharon-­ectodermal
dysplasia-­clefting syndrome (AEC)

AD

p63

p63

Transcription factor

Acrodermatoungual-­lacrimal-­tooth
(ADULT)

AD

p63

p63

Transcription factor

Limb-­mammary syndrome

AD

p63

p63

Transcription factor

Curly hair, ankyloblepharon,
and nail dystrophy (CHAND)
syndrome

AR

RIPK4

RIPK4

Serine/threonine
protein kinase

Popliteal pterygium syndromes
(spectrum)
Popliteal pterygium
Bartsocas-­Papas
(Cocoon syndrome)

AR, AD

IRF6

IRF6

Transcription factor

AR
AR

RIPK4
CHUK

RIPK4
CHUK

Kinase
Kinase

Ectodermal dysplasia

AD

KDF1

KDF1

Keratinocyte
differentiation factor

Trichodentoosseous syndrome (TDO)

AD

DLX3

DLX3

Transcription factor

Clefting-­ectodermal dysplasia

AR

PVRL1

Nectin 1

Interacts with cadherins,
especially at adherens
junctions

Ectodermal dysplasia-­syndactyly
syndrome

AR

PVRL4

Nectin 4

Interacts with cadherins,
especially at adherens
junctions

Hypotrichosis with juvenile macular
dystrophy ± ectrodactyly/other
ectodermal defects

AR

CDH3

Cadherin 3/P-­cadherin

Adhesion molecule for
cell-­cell binding

WNT PATHWAY
Witkop syndrome

AD

MSX1

MSX1

Transcription factor

Focal dermal hypoplasia

X-­linked dominant

PORCN

PORCN

Regulates Wnt signaling

Oculodentodigital dysplasia (ODDD)

AD

WNT10A

Wnt10A

Wnt pathway

Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia

AR, AD

WNT10A

Wnt10A

β-­catenin-­mediated
signaling

Schöpf-­Schulz-­Passarge syndrome

AR

WNT10A

Wnt10A

β-­catenin-­mediated
signaling

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4048 Part XXIX u The Skin
Table 690.2  Classification for Ectodermal Dysplasias*—cont’d
DISORDER†

INHERITANCE

GENE

PROTEIN

FUNCTION

Ectodermal dysplasia

AR

KREMEN1

KREMEN1

Receptor involved in
Wnt regulation

STRUCTURAL ELEMENT
Clouston syndrome

AD

GJB6

Connexin 30

Intercellular junctions

Ectodermal dysplasia

AR

GRHL2

Grainyhead-­like 2

Transcription factor

Oculodentodigital dysplasia (ODDD)

AR

GJA1

Connexin 43

Intercellular junctions

Ellis van Creveld syndrome

AR

EVC, EVC2

EVC, EVC2

Ciliopathy

Ectodermal dysplasia 4, hair/nail type
(ECTD4)

AR

KRT85

KRT85

Keratin

Keratitis-­ichthyosis-­deafness
syndrome, autosomal dominant
(KID)

AR

GJB2

Connexin 26

Intercellular junctions

Ectodermal dysplasia: skin fragility
syndrome

AR

PKP1

Plakophilin 1

Desmosomal plaque/
stability

Naegeli-­ Franceschetti-­Jadassohn
syndrome

AD

KRT14

KRT14

Keratin

Pachyonychia congenita

AD

KRT 6a, 6b, 6c, 16, 17

KRT 6a, 6b, 6c, 16, 17

Keratin

*Many forms of ectodermal dysplasia remain unclassified.
†Some more recently described forms of ectodermal dysplasia are not yet named.
AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; IKK, inhibitor of kappa light polypeptide gene enhancer in B-­cell kinase; TNF, tumor necrosis factor; XLD, X-­linked dominant;
XLR, X-­linked recessive.
From Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Table 7.1, p. 165.

HYPOHIDROTIC ECTODERMAL DYSPLASIA

The syndrome known as hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (HED)
manifests as a triad of defects: partial or complete absence of sweat
glands, anomalous dentition, and hypotrichosis. There are many recognized types of HED; HED-­1 (X-­linked recessive) is most common,
with a frequency of 1 per 17,000 live births.
In HED, affected patients are unable to sweat and may experience episodes of high fever in warm environments, which may be
mistakenly considered to be fevers of unknown origin. This error
is particularly common in infancy when the facial changes are not
easily appreciated. Diagnosis at this time may be made using the
starch-­iodine test or palmar or scalp biopsy. Scalp biopsy is the most
sensitive and is 100% specific. It shows a complete lack of eccrine
structures. Infants and older children must be protected from high
temperatures given their inability to sweat. Cooling devices and
clothing can be helpful to increase participation in activities and
sports. Aside from patients with WNT10A pathogenic variants—
who do not have facial dysmorphism—the typical facies are characterized by frontal bossing; malar hypoplasia; a flattened nasal
bridge; recessed columella; thick, everted lips; wrinkled, hyperpigmented periorbital skin; and prominent, low-­set ears (Fig. 690.1).
The skin over the entire body is dry, finely wrinkled, and hypopigmented, often with a prominent venous pattern. Extensive peeling
of the skin is a clinical clue to diagnosis in the newborn period. The
paucity of sebaceous glands may account for the dry skin. The scalp
hair is sparse, fine, and lightly pigmented, and eyebrows and lashes
are sparse or absent. Other body hair is also sparse or absent. Sexual
hair growth is normal. Anodontia or hypodontia with widely spaced,
conical teeth is a consistent feature (see Fig. 690.1). Co-­management
with pediatric dentistry familiar with ectodermal dysplasias is critical
for oral health, nutrition, and maintenance of the facial bones. Otolaryngic and ophthalmologic abnormalities secondary to decreased
saliva and tear production are seen. The incidence of atopic diseases
in children with HED is high. Gastroesophageal reflux is common
and may play a role in failure to thrive, which is seen in 20% of

cases. Sexual development is usually normal. Historically, the infant
mortality rate has been 30%. Carrier females of X-­linked HED may
have no or less severe clinical manifestations.
Prenatal therapy of X-­linked HED with a recombinant protein
containing the EDA receptor binding domain has been successful
in three patients.
Hypohidrotic ED with immune deficiencies causes similar findings in sweating and hair and nail development, in association with
a dysgammaglobulinemia. Significant mortality is seen from recurrent infections. A variety of pathogenic variants of the genes encoding the tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα)–related signaling pathway
proteins—key in signal transduction from ectoderm to mesoderm
during development—are the molecular basis for this disorder (see
Table 690.2).
Treatment of children with HED includes protecting them from
exposure to high ambient temperatures. Early dental evaluation is necessary so that prostheses can be provided for cosmetic reasons and for
adequate nutrition. The use of artificial tears prevents damage to the
cornea in patients with defective lacrimation. Alopecia may necessitate
the wearing of a wig to improve appearance.

HIDROTIC ECTODERMAL DYSPLASIA (CLOUSTON
SYNDROME)

The salient features of the autosomal dominant disorder hidrotic ED are
dystrophic, hypoplastic, or absent nails; sparse hair; and hyperkeratosis
of the palms and soles (Table 690.3). Conjunctivitis and blepharitis are
common. The dentition and sweating are always normal. Absence of
eyebrows and eyelashes, clubbing of the fingers, and hyperpigmentation over the knees, elbows, and knuckles have been noted in some
affected individuals. Pathogenic variants in the GJB6 gene encoding
the gap junction protein connexin 30 are responsible for this disorder.
A similar disorder associated with deafness has been described with
pathogenic variants in the GJB2 gene encoding the connexin 26 protein. Pathogenic variants in GJB1 have also been implicated.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 690 u Ectodermal Dysplasias 4049

Fig. 690.1 Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia is characterized by pointed ears, fine hair, periorbital hyperpigmentation, midfacial hypoplasia, and
pegged teeth. (Courtesy the Fitzsimons Army Medical Center teaching file.)

Table 690.3  Common Ectodermal Dysplasias: Inheritance and Characteristic Clinical Findings
TYPE

INHERITANCE(S)

CHARACTERISTIC CLINICAL FINDINGS

Hypohidrotic ED

XLR, AD, AR

Distinctive facies: prominent forehead, thick lips and flattened nasal bridge; collodion-­like
membrane; eczema
Hypotrichosis of scalp and trunk, light/brittle/slow-­growing hair
Hypodontia, conical teeth
Hypohidrosis

Hypohidrotic ED-­
immune deficiency
(EDA-­ID)

XLR, AD

Seborrheic dermatitis–like rash, intertrigo
Hypotrichosis
Hypodontia, pointed teeth
Hypohidrosis/anhidrosis
Recurrent infections
Decreased immunoglobulin levels

Hidrotic ED (Clouston)

AD

Hyperpigmented skin over joints; palmoplantar keratoderma, conjunctivitis, blepharitis
Milky-­white nails in early childhood, nail dystrophy, clubbing
Sparse, wiry, brittle, pale scalp hair to total alopecia
Normal sweating

Witkop tooth and nail
syndrome

AD

Usually normal hair, rarely sparse or fine
Normal sweating
Small primary teeth, hypodontia causing lower lip eversion (“pouting lower lip”)
Thin, slow growing hypoplastic nails (toes > fingers), koilonychia

EEC

AD

Dry skin, aplasia or hypoplasia of skin
Normal sweating
Coarse, lightly pigmented hair; thick eyebrows
Hypodontia (reduced number), taurodontia, premature loss of teeth, dental enamel
abnormalities
Ectrodactyly more common than syndactyly
Nail dystrophy, transverse ridging and pitting
Corneal erosion, lacrimal duct abnormality, blepharitis, GU defects, cleft lip or palate
Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4050 Part XXIX u The Skin
Table 690.3  Common Ectodermal Dysplasias: Inheritance and Characteristic Clinical Findings—cont’d
TYPE

INHERITANCE(S)

CHARACTERISTIC CLINICAL FINDINGS

AEC (Hay-­Wells
syndrome) and RHS

AD

Erosive dermatitis, neonatal erythroderma (e.g., scalp, hands), dyspigmentation of skin
Coarse, wiry, lightly pigmented hair, patchy alopecia
± Hypohidrosis
Hypodontia, conical teeth
Nail absence or dystrophy with thickened nails
Ectrodactyly more common than syndactyly
Lacrimal duct abnormality, hearing loss, cleft lip/palate, ankyloblepharon, reflux

Limb-­mammary

AD

Normal hair
Hypodontia
± Hypohidrosis
Nail dystrophy
Ectrodactyly more common than syndactyly
Bifid uvula, hypoplastic nipples, joint contracture of hand, lacrimal duct atresia, cleft palate

ADULT

AD

Dry skin, photosensitivity, lentigines
Hypodontia, premature loss of teeth
Normal sweating
Pitting and longitudinal ridging of nails
Ectrodactyly and syndactyly
No cleft palate or lip
Hypoplastic nipples, lacrimal duct atresia,

AD, Autosomal dominant; ADULT, acro-­dermato-­ungal-­lacrimal-­tooth; AEC, ankyloblepharon-­ectodermal dysplasia-­clefting; AR, autosomal recessive; ED, ectodermal dysplasia; EEC,
ectrodactyly, ectodermal dysplasia, and cleft lip/palate syndrome; RHS, Rapp-­Hodgkin syndrome; XLR, X-­linked recessive.

Table 690.4  Disorders Associated with Decreased Sweat
Production

Chapter 691

CUTANEOUS LESIONS
Congenital absence of sweat glands without ectodermal dysplasia
Incontinentia pigmenti
Burns

Vascular Anomalies

MULTISYSTEM DISORDERS
Fabry disease
Crisponi syndrome
Chronic graft-­versus-­host disease
Sjögren syndrome
NEUROLOGIC DISORDERS
Spinal cord injury
Guillain-­Barré syndrome
Hereditary sensory autonomic neuropathy type I, II, IV
Complex regional pain syndrome
Multiple sclerosis
Multiple system atrophy
Ross syndrome
Shy-­Drager syndrome
MEDICATIONS
Anticholinergic drugs
Opioids
Botulism toxin
Clonidine
Barbiturate overdose
α2-­Receptor antagonists
OTHER
Idiopathic acquired generalized anhidrosis
Hypothyroidism
Conversion disorder
Heat shock
Sympathectomy

In addition to the EDs, other disorders are associated with absent or
decreased sweat production (Table 690.4).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Kari L. Martin
Nearly all vascular lesions of childhood may be divided into vascular
malformations and vascular tumors (Table 691.1). Vascular malformations are developmental disorders of blood vessel formation. Malformations do not regress, but slowly enlarge. They should be named after
the predominant vessel(s) forming the lesion: arterial, capillary, lymph,
venous, or combinations of these. Vascular tumors exhibit endothelial cell hyperplasia and proliferation. The International Society for the
Study of Vascular Anomalies (ISSVA) continues to update the classification structure for vascular disorders as new disorders are identified and as the biology and genetic causes for established disorders are
found. The complete classification, associated syndromes, and causative pathogenic variants can be found at www.issva.org.

VASCULAR MALFORMATIONS
Capillary Malformation (Port-­Wine Stain)

Capillary malformations (CMs) are present at birth. These vascular
malformations consist of mature dilated dermal capillaries. The lesions
are macular, sharply circumscribed, pink to purple, and tremendously
varied in size (Fig. 691.1). The head and neck region is the most common site of predilection; most lesions are unilateral. The mucous membranes can be involved. As a child matures into adulthood, the CM may
become darker in color and pebbly in consistency; it may occasionally
develop papules that bleed spontaneously. CM may occur in isolation
or in combination with other vessel malformations.
True CM should be distinguished from nevus simplex, which, in
contrast, is a relatively transient lesion often located in the midline (see
Chapter 688). When a CM is lateral and localized to the forehead and
upper eyelid, the diagnosis of Sturge-­Weber syndrome (glaucoma,
leptomeningeal venous angioma, seizures, hemiparesis contralateral
to the facial lesion, intracranial calcification) must be considered
(see Chapter 636.3). Early screening for glaucoma is important to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 691 u Vascular Anomalies
Table 691.1  Contemporary Classification of Vascular
Anomalies (ISSVA 2014 Classification)
VASCULAR TUMORS
Benign
Infantile hemangioma/hemangioma of infancy
Congenital hemangiomas (RICH, NICH, PICH)
Tufted angioma
Spindle cell hemangioma
Epithelioid hemangioma
Pyogenic granuloma
Locally Aggressive or Borderline
Kaposiform hemangioendothelioma
Retiform hemangioendothelioma
Papillary intralymphatic angioendothelioma (Dabska tumor)
Composite hemangioendothelioma
Kaposi sarcoma

4051

Table 691.2  Port-­Wine Stain–Associated Syndromes
• Sturge-­Weber syndrome
• Klippel-­Trenaunay syndrome
• Parkes-­Weber syndrome
• Phakomatosis pigmentovascularis
• Macrocephaly–capillary malformation (M-­CM) syndrome
• Capillary malformation–arteriovenous malformation (CM-­AVM)
syndrome
• Diffuse capillary malformation with overgrowth (DCMO)
• Bannayan-­Riley-­Ruvalcaba syndrome
• Von Hippel-­Lindau disease
• Rubinstein-­Taybi syndrome
• Wyburn-­Mason syndrome
• Roberts syndrome
• Coat disease
Modified from Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 6th ed.
Elsevier: Philadelphia; 2022: Box 12.4, p. 347.

Malignant
Angiosarcoma
Epithelioid hemangioendothelioma
VASCULAR MALFORMATIONS
Simple
Capillary (CM) (e.g., port-­wine stain, telangiectasia, CMTC, salmon
patch/nevus simplex)
Venous (VM) (includes common, familial, glomuvenous, others)
Lymphatic (LM) (includes macrocystic, microcystic, primary
lymphedema, others)
Arteriovenous (AVM) and arteriovenous fistula (sporadic or
syndromal)
Combined
CM + VM, CM + LM, CM + AVM
LM + VM
CM + LM + VM
CM + LM + AVM, CM + VM + AVM
CM + LM + VM + AVM
Of major named vessels
Affect veins, arteries or lymphatics; usually of large caliber
Associated with other anomalies
Associated with anomalies of bone, soft tissue (usually overgrowth,
rarely undergrowth) or viscera
CMTC, Cutis marmorata telangiectatica congenita; NICH, noninvoluting congenital
hemangioma; PICH, partially involuting congenital hemangioma; RICH, rapidly
involuting congenital hemangioma.
From Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 6th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Box 12.1, p. 327. Created with data from Wassef M,
Blei F, Adams D, et al. Vascular anomalies classification: Recommendations from the
International Society for the Study of Vascular Anomalies. Pediatrics. 2015;136(1):e203–
e214.

Fig. 691.2 Nodular venous malformation on the leg of an adolescent.

prevent additional damage to the eye. CMs also occur as a component
of Klippel-­Trenaunay syndrome and with moderate frequency in
other syndromes, including megalencephaly, capillary malformation,
polymicrogyria (MCAP), Cobb (spinal arteriovenous malformation
[AVM], port-­wine stain), congenital lipomatous, overgrowth, vascular
malformations, epidermal nevi, skeletal anomalies (CLOVES), Proteus,
Beckwith-­Wiedemann, and Bonnet-­Dechaume-­Blanc syndromes, and
others (Table 691.2). In the absence of associated anomalies, morbidity from these lesions may include a poor self-­image, hypertrophy of
underlying structures, and traumatic bleeding.
The most effective treatment for CM is with the pulsed-­dye laser.
This therapy is targeted to hemoglobin within the lesion and minimizes
thermal injury to the surrounding normal tissue. After such treatment,
the texture and pigmentation of the skin are generally improved with
low risks of scarring. Therapy can begin in infancy when the surface
area of involvement is smaller. There may be advantages to treating
within the first year of life. Although this approach is quite effective,
redarkening of the stain may occur over time, making ongoing treatments useful. Camouflaging cosmetics may also be used.

Venous Malformation

Fig. 691.1 Capillary malformation. Pink macule on the cheek of an
infant.

Venous malformations include vein-­only malformations and combination malformations. Malformations consisting of veins only range
from nodules containing a mass of venules (Fig. 691.2) to diffuse large
vein abnormalities that may consist of either a superficial component
resembling varicose veins, deeper venous malformations, or both.
Most venous malformations are sporadic, although inherited forms
exist as well. Inherited forms and up to 40% of sporadic venous malformations are caused by TIE2 pathogenic variants. Treatment is reserved
for painful or symptomatic lesions. Surgical excision is best for small

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4052 Part XXIX u The Skin
or superficial nodular lesions; sclerotherapy or laser ablation is used
for larger, diffuse lesions. Localized intravascular coagulopathy can be
problematic in these lesions because of the chronic slow flow. This leads
to both painful thrombotic episodes and the risk of progression to systemic disseminated intravascular coagulopathy. Pulmonary embolus
has been reported in patients with large venous malformations.

LYMPHATIC MALFORMATIONS
See Chapter 538.

ARTERIOVENOUS MALFORMATION

AVMs are direct connections of artery to vein that bypass the capillary
bed (Fig. 691.3). AVMs of the skin are very rare. Skin changes are often
noted at birth, but they tend to be very subtle, presenting as a red-­pink
patch. Over time the lesions deepen in color and often result in thickening of the skin and surrounding tissue. They are diagnosed from their
obvious arterial palpation. Some AVMs are progressive and can lead to
significant morbidity and even mortality, so early diagnosis and evaluation by an experienced multidisciplinary team are essential.

KLIPPEL-­TRENAUNAY AND PARKES-­WEBER
SYNDROMES

Klippel-­Trenaunay syndrome is a term historically used to describe
complex mixed vascular malformation with overgrowth of bone and
soft tissue (Figs. 691.4 and 691.5). The anomaly is present at birth
and usually involves a lower limb but may involve more than one
limb, as well as portions of the trunk or face. Enlargement of the soft
tissues may be gradual and may involve the entire extremity, a portion of it, or selected digits. The vascular lesion most often is a capillary malformation, generally localized to the hypertrophied area. The
deep venous system may be absent or hypoplastic. Venous blebs and/

or vesicular lymphatic lesions may be present on the malformation’s
surface. Thick-­walled venous varicosities typically become apparent ipsilateral to the vascular malformation after the child begins
to ambulate. If there is an associated AVM, the disorder is called
Parkes-­Weber syndrome.
Somatic pathogenic activating variants in multiple genes have been
associated with vascular malformations and limb overgrowth (Fig.
691.6 and Table 691.3).
These disorders can be confused with Maffucci syndrome or, if
the surface vascular lesion is minimal, with Milroy disease. Pain,
limb swelling, and cellulitis may occur. Thrombophlebitis, dislocations of joints, hematuria secondary to angiomatous involvement of
the urinary tract, rectal bleeding from lesions of the gastrointestinal
tract, pulmonary lesions, and malformations of the lymphatic vessels are infrequent complications. MRI may delineate the extent of
the anomaly, but surgical correction or palliation is often difficult.
Sclerotherapy or endovenous laser ablation may be of benefit when
a venous component is the dominant vessel in the malformation.
The indications for radiologic studies of viscera and bones are best
determined by clinical evaluation. Supportive care includes compression bandages for varicosities; surgical treatment may help carefully selected patients. Leg-­length differences should be treated with
orthotic devices to prevent the development of spinal deformities.
Corrective bone surgery may eventually be needed to treat significant
leg-­length discrepancy.

Angiokeratoma Circumscriptum

Several forms of angiokeratoma have been described. Angiokeratomas are characterized by ectasia of superficial lymphatic vessels and
capillaries with hyperkeratosis of the overlying epidermis. Angiokeratoma circumscriptum is a rare disorder consisting of a solitary
lesion or multiple lesions that manifest as a plaque or plaques of
blue-­red crusted papules or nodules. The limbs are the sites of predilection. If therapy is desired, surgical excision is the treatment
of choice.

Cutis Marmorata Telangiectatica Congenita

Fig. 691.3 Arteriovenous malformation in conjunction with a port-­
wine stain of the scalp of a newborn.

Cutis marmorata telangiectatica congenita, a benign vascular anomaly
apparent at birth, is composed of dilated superficial capillaries and
veins. Involved areas of skin have a reticulated red or purple hue that
resembles physiologic cutis marmorata but is more pronounced and
relatively unvarying (Fig. 691.7). The lesions may be restricted to a
single limb and a portion of the trunk or may be more widespread. The
lesions become more pronounced during changes in environmental
temperature, physical activity, or crying. In some cases, the underlying
subcutaneous tissue is atrophic, and ulceration may occur within the
reticulated bands. Rarely, defective growth of bone and other congenital abnormalities may be present. No specific therapy is indicated. Mild
vascular-­only cases may show gradual improvement. Cutis marmorata
telangiectatica congenita may be associated with CM, Adams-­Oliver
syndrome, patent ductus arteriosus, and a variety of other anomalies.
It must be differentiated from reticulate CM and physiologic cutis
marmorata.

Blue Rubber Bleb Nevus Syndrome

Fig. 691.4 Overgrowth of the right arm and hand in an adolescent
with Klippel-­Trenaunay syndrome.

Blue rubber bleb nevus is a rare syndrome consisting of numerous
venous malformations of the skin, mucous membranes, and gastrointestinal tract caused by somatic pathogenic variants in TEK in some
patients. Typical lesions are blue-­purple and rubbery in consistency;
they vary in size from a few millimeters to a few centimeters in diameter. They are sometimes painful or tender. The compressible nodules
may be present at birth but usually are progressive during childhood.
New lesions may continue to develop throughout life. Large disfiguring
and irregular blue marks may also occur. The lesions, which can rarely
be located in the liver, spleen, and central nervous system in addition
to the skin and gastrointestinal tract, do not involute spontaneously.
Recurrent gastrointestinal hemorrhage caused by lesions in the gastrointestinal tract may lead to severe anemia. Palliation can be achieved by
excision of involved bowel.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 691 u Vascular Anomalies

A

C

B

4053

D

Fig. 691.5 Parkes-­Weber syndrome. A, Three-­dimensional volume-­rendering CT angiography image of the limbs shows overgrowth of the right

limb (arrows) with an arterial blush adjacent to the posterior tibial artery (arrowhead), consistent with a high-­flow vascular malformation. B, Three-­
dimensional volume-­rendering CT angiography image of the limbs shows arterial blush adjacent to the posterior tibial artery (arrowhead). C, Coronal
CT angiography image of the limb shows arterial blush adjacent to the posterior tibial artery (arrowhead). D, Venous phase CT of the limb reveals
varicose veins in the right limb. (From Ufuk F. Limb overgrowth with vascular anomalies. J Pediatr. 2020;240:308–309, Fig, p. 309)
Ligand

Receptor
Plasma
membrane
P
D
K

PIP3
PI3K

PTEN

AKT

PIP2
PIK3CA related
• CLOVES
• Fibroadipose hyperplasia (FH)
• Fibroadipose infiltrating lipomatosis
• MCAP
• Hemihyperplasia multiple lipomatosis
(HHML)
• Macrodactyly
• Muscle hemihypertrophy
• Skin disorders including benign lichenoid
keratosis, epidermal nevi and seborrheic
keratosis
• Hemimegalencephaly

PTEN related
• Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba
syndrome
• Cowden syndrome
• Type II segmental Cowden
syndrome
• Lhermitte-Duclos disease

TSC2
TSC1

mTOR

Other effects

Cell survival
and growth

AKT related
• Proteus syndrome
• Megalencephaly polymicrogyria
polydactyly hydrocephalus (MPPH)
syndrome
• Lipodystrophy syndrome –
Hypoglycemia
• Hemimegalencephaly
• Focal cortical dysplasia
TSC1/2 related
• Tuberous sclerosis complex

mTOR related
• Hemimegalencephaly
• Focal cortical dysplasia

Apoptosis

Fig. 691.6 Simplified PIK3CA-­AKT-­mTOR pathway and associated clinical overgrowth disorders. PIP, Phosphatidylinositol polyphosphate; PTEN,
phosphatase and tensin homolog; PDK, phosphatidylinositol-­dependent kinase. (From Kang HC, Baek ST, Song S, Gleeson JG. Clinical and genetic
aspects of the segmental overgrowth spectrum due to somatic mutations in PIK3CA. J Pediatr. 2015;167[5]:957–962, Fig, p. 959)

PHAKOMATOSIS PIGMENTOVASCULARIS

Phakomatosis pigmentovascularis is a rare disorder characterized
by the association of a capillary malformation and melanocytic
lesions. Typically, the capillary malformation is extensive, and associated pigmentary lesions may include dermal melanocytosis, café-­
au-­lait macules, or a nevus spilus (speckled nevus). Nonpigmented

skin lesions that may occur in this setting include nevus anemicus
and epidermal nevi. Systemic anomalies are seen in rare cases.

NEVUS ANEMICUS

Although present at birth, nevus anemicus may not be detectable until
early childhood. The nevus consists of solitary or numerous sharply

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4054 Part XXIX u The Skin
Table 691.3  Clinical Diagnostic Criteria for PIK3CA-­
Related Overgrowth Spectrum (PROS)
REQUIRED CRITERIA
1.	The presence of somatic PIK3CA pathogenic variant (if the
pathogenic variant cannot be defined, then the disease is
regarded as a presumptive PROS disorder)
2.	Congenital or early childhood onset
3.	Sporadic, without family history and mosaic distribution
4.	Affected patients can have one or more findings from category A
or B
CATEGORY A (MORE THAN 2
FEATURES)*

CATEGORY B (ISOLATED
FEATURES)

1.	Adipose, muscle, nerve, and
skeletal overgrowth
2.	Capillary, venous,
arteriovenous, and/or LMs
3.	Epidermal nevus

1.	Large, isolated LM
2.	Isolated macrodactyly,†
overgrown and splayed feet/
hands, or overgrown limbs
3.	Truncal adipose overgrowth
4.	Hemi- or bilateral dysplastic
megalencephaly or focal
cortical dysplasia type 2
5.	Epidermal nevus
6.	Seborrheic keratosis
7.	Benign lichenoid keratoses

*Typically progressive. Can manifest as scoliosis (kyphosis), limb overgrowth, central
nervous system (hydrocephalus, cerebellar tonsillar ectopia, Chiari, megalencephaly,
mega corpus callosum), regional lipomatous undergrowth with overgrowth,
infiltrating lipomatosis, or Wilms tumor/ovarian cystadenoma.
†Other terms include macrodystrophia lipomatosa, macrodactylia fibrolipomatosis, and
gigantism.
From Kang HC, Baek ST, Song S, Gleeson JG. Clinical and genetic aspects of the
segmental overgrowth spectrum due to somatic mutations in PIK3CA. J Pediatr.
2015;167(5):957–962, Table 1.

Fig. 691.7 Mottled pattern of cutis marmorata telangiectatica congenita on the right hand.

delineated, pale macules or patches that are most often on the trunk
but may also occur on the neck or limbs. These nevi may simulate
plaques of vitiligo, leukoderma, or nevoid pigmentary defects, but they
can be readily distinguished because of their response to firm stroking.
Stroking evokes an erythematous line and flare in normal surrounding skin, but the skin of a nevus anemicus does not redden. They can
also be diagnosed by diascopy, in which pressure of the skin with a
glass slide will obscure the borders of a nevus anemicus. Although the
cutaneous vasculature appears normal histologically, the blood vessels within the nevus do not respond to injection of vasodilators. It has
been postulated that the persistent pallor may represent a sustained
localized adrenergic vasoconstriction.

VASCULAR TUMORS

Vascular tumors include infantile hemangiomas (IHs), tufted angiomas, kaposiform hemangioendotheliomas (KHEs), congenital hemangiomas, and additional more rare entities.

Infantile Hemangioma

IHs are proliferative benign vascular tumors of vascular endothelium
that may be present at birth or, more commonly, may become apparent in the first or second week of life, predictably enlarge, and then
spontaneously involute. IHs are the most common tumor of infancy,
occurring in 5% of newborns. Risk factors include prematurity, low
birthweight, female gender, and White race. IHs should be classified
as superficial, deep, or mixed (Fig. 691.8). The terms strawberry and
cavernous should not be used to describe hemangiomas. The immunohistochemical marker GLUT-­1 is specifically expressed in an IH,
which helps distinguish it histologically from other vascular anomalies. Superficial IHs are bright red, protuberant, compressible, sharply
demarcated lesions that may occur on any area of the body (Fig. 691.9,
see also Fig. 691.8). Although sometimes present at birth, they more
often appear in the first or second month of life and are heralded by
an erythematous or blue mark or an area of pallor, which subsequently
develops a fine telangiectatic pattern before the growth phase (see Fig.
691.9). The presenting sign may occasionally be an ulceration of the
perineum or lip. Favored sites are the face, scalp, back, and anterior
chest; lesions may be solitary or multiple. Patterns of facial involvement include frontotemporal, maxillary, mandibular, and frontonasal
regions. IHs that are more deeply situated are more diffuse and are less
defined than superficial IHs. The lesions are cystic, firm, or compressible, and the overlying skin may appear normal in color or may have a
bluish hue (Fig. 691.10).
Most IHs are mixed, having both superficial and deep components.
IHs undergo a phase of rapid expansion, followed by a stationary period
and finally by spontaneous involution (Fig. 691.11). Regression may
be anticipated when the lesion develops pale gray areas centrally. The
course of a particular lesion is unpredictable, but approximately 60% of
these lesions reach maximal involution by 5 years of age and 90–95%
by 9 years. Spontaneous involution cannot be correlated with size or
site of involvement, but lip lesions seem to persist most often. Complications include impairment of a vital function, ulceration, secondary
infection, and permanent disfigurement. The location of a lesion may
interfere with a vital function (e.g., on an eyelid interfering with vision,
on the urethra with urination, on the airway with respiration). IHs in a
“beard” distribution may be associated with upper airway or subglottic
involvement. Stridor should suggest a tracheobronchial lesion. Large
visceral (hepatic) IHs may be complicated by coexistent hypothyroidism because of type 3 iodothyronine deiodinase; symptoms may be
difficult to detect in this age-­group. Table 691.4 lists other concerning
features.
In the usual patient with an IH who has no serious complications or
extensive growth resulting in tissue destruction and severe disfigurement,
treatment consists of expectant observation. Because almost all lesions
regress spontaneously, therapy is rarely indicated. Parents require repeated
reassurance and support. After spontaneous involution, many patients
are left with small cosmetic defects, such as telangiectasia, hypopigmentation, fibrofatty deposits, and scars if the lesion has ulcerated. Residual
telangiectasias may be treated with pulsed dye laser therapy. Other defects
can be treated or minimized by judicious surgical repair if desired.
In the rare case in which intervention is required, topical timolol
solution (1 drop of 0.5% gel-­forming solution applied twice each day)
is effective, especially in small, superficial, nonulcerating, and nonmucosal IH. Topical timolol treatment is a very safe alternative to observation alone for a superficial IH. Timolol solution may also be used with
caution in the treatment of an ulcerated IH, with or without occlusion.
In a disfiguring, life-­or vision-­threatening, or ulcerated IH that is
not responding to other treatment, oral propranolol is the first-­line
treatment. IHs typically respond with growth arrest and often early
signs of involution within a couple of weeks of treatment initiation.
Dosing varies ranging from 1 to 3 mg/kg/day, though best outcomes
occur at 3 mg/kg/day with no increase in side effects. Some recommend inpatient initiation of propranolol for infants younger than 8
weeks gestational age or those with comorbid conditions. The dose
is initiated at 1 mg/kg/day divided into three doses with heart rate
and blood pressure monitoring at 1 and 2 hours after each dose. If
that dose is tolerated, the dose is increased to 2 mg/kg/day divided

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 691 u Vascular Anomalies

A

4055

C

B

Fig. 691.8 Types of infantile hemangiomas according to anatomic location. A, Bright red, superficial hemangioma. B, Bluish, deep hemangioma.
C, Mixed type. (From Léaute-­Labréze C, Harper JI, Hieger PH. Infantile haemangioma. Lancet. 2017;390:85–94, Fig. 4, p. 88.)

A

Fig. 691.10 Deep infantile hemangioma of the chest.

B

A

B

C
Fig. 691.9 Precursor lesions of infantile hemangioma. Figure shows a

Fig. 691.11 Spontaneous regression of infantile hemangioma. A, He-

into three doses. The outpatient initiation assumes good social
support and access to the hospital. The initial dose and monitoring are similar to the inpatient plan; if the dose is tolerated for 3-­7
days, the dose is increased to 1.5 mg/kg/day. If the latter dose is

tolerated after 3-­7 days, the dose is increased to 2 mg/kg/day. In all
situations, propranolol must be given a minimum of 6 hours after
the last dose. Risks of propranolol treatment include hypoglycemia, bradycardia, hypotension, gastroesophageal reflux disease or

sharply demarcated, so-­called anemic spot on the left shoulder. A, Day
3. B, Day 21. C, Day 90. (From Léaute-­Labréze C, Harper JI, Hieger PH.
Infantile haemangioma. Lancet. 2017;390:85–94, Fig. 3, p. 87.)

mangioma on right lower arm, age 14 wk. B, Residual telangiectasia
at age 23 mo. (From Léaute-­Labréze C, Harper JI, Hieger PH. Infantile
haemangioma. Lancet. 2017;390:85–94, Fig. 5, p. 88.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4056 Part XXIX u The Skin
Table 691.4  Clinical “Red Flags” Associated with
Hemangiomas
CLINICAL FINDING

RECOMMENDED EVALUATION

Facial hemangioma
involving significant
area of face (>5 cm)

Evaluate for PHACES (posterior fossa
abnormalities, hemangioma, and
arterial, cardiac, eye, and sternal
abnormalities):
MRI and MRA of brain, neck, orbit
Cardiac, ophthalmologic evaluation
Evaluate for midline abnormality:
supraumbilical raphe, sternal atresia,
cleft palate, thyroid abnormality

Cutaneous hemangiomas
in beard distribution

Evaluate for airway hemangioma,
especially if manifesting with stridor

Periocular hemangioma

MRI of orbit
Ophthalmologic evaluation

Paraspinal midline
vascular lesion

Ultrasonography or MRI to evaluate for
occult spinal dysraphism

Multifocal infantile
hemangiomas (>5 cm)

Evaluate for parenchymal hemangiomas,
especially hepatic/central nervous
system
Guaiac stool test, liver ultrasound

Large hemangioma,
especially hepatic

Ultrasonography with Doppler flow study

Consider cardiac evaluation and
echocardiography to rule out diastolic
reversal of flow in aorta
MRI to evaluate extent and flow
characteristics

Perineal segmental
hemangioma

2-­mo-­old infant with definite PHACE. (From Garzon MC, Epstein LG,
Heyer GL, et al. PHACE syndrome: consensus-­derived diagnosis and
care recommendations. J Pediatr. 2016;178:24–33, Fig. 1, p. 25.)

MRI
TSH to detect associated hypothyroidism

Thrill and/or bruit
associated with
hemangioma

Fig. 691.12 Large segmental infantile hemangioma of the face in a

MRI of spine, kidneys to detect
LUMBAR/PELVIS/SACRAL syndrome

LUMBAR, Lower body infantile hemangiomas and other skin defects, urogenital
anomalies and ulceration, myelopathy, bony deformities, anorectal malformations
and arterial anomalies, renal anomalies; PELVIS, perineal hemangioma, external
genital malformations, lipomyelomeningocele, vesicorenal anomalies, imperforate
anus, skin tag; SACRAL, spinal dysraphism, anogenital anomalies, cutaneous
anomalies, renal/urologic anomalies, angioma in lumbosacral location.
Modified from Blei F. Vascular anomalies: from bedside to bench and back again. Curr
Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health. 2002;32:67–102.

of these therapies has become less necessary since the introduction of
propranolol.
In patients with large segmental IH of the face, PHACES syndrome should be considered (Fig. 691.12 and Table 691.5). PHACES
stands for posterior fossa brain defects such as Dandy-­Walker malformation or cerebellar hypoplasia, large segmental facial infantile
hemangioma, arterial cerebrovascular abnormalities such as aneurysms and stroke, coarctation of the aorta, and eye abnormalities.
Sternal raphe defects such as pits, scars, or supraumbilical raphe are
infrequently observed. Evaluation of children at risk for PHACES is
important both to detect any underlying abnormalities and before
starting systemic therapy, which may be indicated given the size and
location of the IH typically associated with this syndrome. PHACES
children with cervical and intracranial arterial abnormalities are at
increased risk of cerebrovascular accidents, and specialized care by
an experienced multidisciplinary team is essential.

Multifocal Infantile Hemangioma
worsening of existing disease, hyperkalemia, and bronchospasm/
wheezing. Nonetheless, reports of side effects of propranolol used
for IH treatment are rare. Increased propranolol levels occur with
inhibitors of CYP2D6 (cimetidine, amiodarone, fluoxetine, quinidine, ritonavir) and CPY1A2 (cimetidine, ciprofloxacin, isoniazid,
ritonavir, theophylline); decreased blood levels occur with inducers
of hepatic drug metabolism (rifampin, phenytoin, phenobarbital).
In patients unable to tolerate propranolol, or if the IH has not
responded after a couple of weeks of treatment, systemic oral
corticosteroids may be used. Termination of growth and sometimes regression may be evident after 2-­4 weeks of therapy. When
a response is obtained, the dose should be decreased gradually,
though most patients will require treatment until about 1 year of
age.
Intralesional corticosteroid injection by an experienced physician
can also induce rapid involution of a localized IH but has risks of ulceration, tissue atrophy, and blindness if used near the orbit. Vincristine is
used by some oncologists to treat significant IH. Interferon-­α therapy
may also be effective, but spastic diplegia is seen in 10% of cases. Use

Diffuse neonatal hemangiomatosis (or benign neonatal hemangiomatosis) is a historical term to describe a condition in which
numerous or multifocal vascular lesions are widely distributed (Fig.
691.13). Several distinct diagnoses have been previously lumped
together under this clinical phenotype with mortality cited as high
as 60–80%. Upon further analysis, this group of disorders has been
found to comprise several distinct entities, which are important to
distinguish from one another, given their varying prognoses and
management strategies. Therefore the term multifocal IH is more
accurate and leads to correct treatments and prognosis for these
patients with more than one cutaneous (and/or visceral) IH.
Multifocal IHs may occur in the skin and visceral organs, but
remain GLUT-­1–positive when biopsied, have a relatively good
prognosis with low morbidity, and respond to systemic propranolol
just as solitary cutaneous IH. Patients with more than five cutaneous IH should undergo an abdominal physical exam and possibly
liver ultrasound to detect liver IH, which can grow quite large (Fig.
691.14).
Multifocal lymphangioendotheliomatosis (also known as cutaneovisceral angiomatosis) also presents with many vascular tumors in the
skin and visceral organs but is GLUT-­1–negative and complicated by

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 691 u Vascular Anomalies

4057

Table 691.5  PHACES Diagnostic Criteria: Revised
ORGAN SYSTEMS

MAJOR CRITERIA

MINOR CRITERIA

Arterial anomalies

Anomaly of major cerebral or cervical arteries*
Dysplasia† of the large cerebral arteries
Arterial stenosis or occlusion with or without moyamoya collaterals
Absence or moderate-­severe hypoplasia of the large cerebral and
cervical arteries
Aberrant origin or course of the large cerebral or cervical arteries
except common arch variants such as bovine arch
Persistent carotid-­vertebrobasilar anastomosis (proatlantal
segmental, hypoglossal, otic, and/or trigeminal arteries)

Aneurysm of any of the cerebral arteries

Structural brain

Posterior fossa brain anomalies
Dandy-­Walker complex
Other hypoplasia/dysplasia of the mid and/or hind brain

Midline brain anomalies
Malformation of cortical development

Cardiovascular

Aortic arch anomalies
Coarctation of the aorta
Dysplasia*
Aneurysm
Aberrant origin of the subclavian artery with or without a vascular
ring

Ventricular septal defect
Right aortic arch/double aortic arch
Systemic venous anomalies

Ocular

Posterior segment abnormalities
Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous
Persistent fetal vasculature
Retinal vascular anomalies
Morning glory disc anomaly
Optic nerve hypoplasia
Peripapillary staphyloma

Anterior segment abnormalities
Microphthalmia
Sclerocornea
Coloboma
Cataracts

Ventral/midline

Anomaly of the midline chest and abdomen
• Sternal defect
• Sternal pit
• Sternal cleft
• Supraumbilical raphe

Ectopic thyroid hypopituitarism
Midline sternal papule/hamartoma

DEFINITE PHACE
Hemangioma >5 cm in diameter of the head including scalp PLUS one
major criteria or two minor criteria
POSSIBLE PHACE
Hemangioma >5 cm in diameter of the head
including scalp
PLUS one minor criteria

Hemangioma of the neck, upper trunk, or trunk and proximal upper
extremity
PLUS two major criteria

Hemangioma of the neck, upper trunk, or
trunk and proximal upper extremity
PLUS one major or two minor criteria

No hemangioma
PLUS two major criteria

*Internal carotid artery, middle cerebral artery, anterior cerebral artery, posterior cerebral artery, or vertebrobasilar system.
†Includes kinking, looping, tortuosity, and/or dolichoectasia.

From Garzon MC, Epstein LG, Heyer GL, et al. PHACE syndrome: consensus-­derived diagnosis and care recommendations. J Pediatr. 2016;178:24–33, Table II.

severe thrombocytopenia and gastrointestinal bleeding with high mortality. Accurate diagnosis in patients who present with multifocal vascular tumors is critical so early, appropriate management may be initiated.

Congenital Hemangioma

Congenital hemangiomas are benign vascular tumors that are present typically at birth. They are most often red or blue hued with
telangiectasia and may have a ring of pallor. They do not undergo
further growth after delivery as IHs do. Changes after delivery occur
along a spectrum, and the lesion may stay stable (noninvoluting
congenital hemangiomas [NICH]), partially involute (partially
involuting congenital hemangiomas [PICH]), or decrease rapidly
in size, leaving fibrofatty residual tissue behind (rapidly involuting
congenital hemangiomas [RICH]). They are distinguishable from
IH because of their clinical course and negative GLUT-­1 markers on
histopathology. It is also important to note the difference because
CH do not respond to propranolol.

Kaposiform Hemangioendothelioma

KHE is a rare and potentially life-­threatening vascular tumor. KHE
classically presents as a red to purple firm plaque on the lateral neck,
axilla, trunk, or extremities. Visceral tumors occur as well. Lesions may
occasionally get smaller over time but rarely resolve completely. Tufted
angioma, once thought to be a separate tumor on the same clinical
spectrum as KHE, is considered under the umbrella term of KHE (Fig.
691.15). The main complication of these tumors is the development of
Kasabach-­Merritt phenomenon (KMP), which may be fatal; therefore
early diagnosis and treatment are important. Oral sirolimus may be
helpful to stabilize and sometimes shrink these tumors. Retroperitoneal or intrathoracic lesions in the absence of cutaneous lesions are
uncommon but are often associated with KMP.

Kasabach-­Merritt Phenomenon

KMP is a life-­threatening combination of a rapidly enlarging KHE,
thrombocytopenia, microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, and an acute

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4058 Part XXIX u The Skin
or chronic consumption coagulopathy. The clinical manifestations
are usually evident during early infancy. The vascular lesion is usually
cutaneous and is only rarely located in viscera. The associated thrombocytopenia may lead to precipitous hemorrhage accompanied by
ecchymoses, petechiae, and a rapid increase in the size of the vascular
lesion. Severe anemia from hemorrhage or microangiopathic hemolysis may ensue. Thrombocytopenia is present, but the bone marrow contains increased numbers of normal or immature megakaryocytes. The

thrombocytopenia has been attributed to sequestration or increased
destruction of platelets within the lesion. Hypofibrinogenemia and
decreased levels of consumable clotting factors are relatively common
(see Chapter 533.6).
Treatment includes surgical excision of small lesions, although
this is often difficult because of coagulopathy. Additional pharmacologic treatments include systemic steroids with or without
vincristine as first-­line therapy in most cases. Antiplatelet, antifibrinolytic, and other chemotherapeutic agents have been used
with mixed results. Initial studies of sirolimus therapy have been
promising. The mortality rate overall once patients have KMP is
significant.

Pyogenic Granuloma (Lobular Capillary Hemangioma)

A pyogenic granuloma (PG) is a small, red, glistening, sessile, or
pedunculated papule that often has a discernible epithelial collarette
(Fig. 691.16). The surface may be weeping and crusted or completely
epithelialized. PGs initially grow rapidly, may ulcerate, and bleed easily

Fig. 691.13 Multifocal cutaneous and systemic (liver) infantile hemangiomas. (From Eichenfield LF, Frieden IJ, Esterly NB. Textbook of Neonatal Dermatology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2008:359.)

Fig. 691.15 Nodular tufted angioma on the left thigh.

A

B

C

Fig. 691.14 Multifocal infantile hemangioma. A, Multiple hypoechoic lesions (arrowheads). B, Arteriovenous shunting on ultrasound. C, Multiple

hypervascular masses in the liver on computed tomography (arrowheads). (From Uda K, Okubo Y, Matushima T, et al. Multifocal infantile hemangioma. J Pediatr. 2019;210:238, Fig. 2, p. 238.e1.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 691 u Vascular Anomalies

4059

Fig. 691.18 Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia. Telangiectases
Fig. 691.16 Pyogenic granuloma on the left cheek.

are found on the lips, oral mucosa, nasal mucosa, skin, and conjunctiva. Epistaxis is the most common manifestation of the disease. Blood
transfusions may be required. (From Habif TP. Clinical Dermatology: A
Color Guide to Diagnosis and Therapy, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby;
2004: Fig. 23.22, p. 831.)

blanching; pulsations visible in larger nevi are evidence for the arterial source of the lesion. Spider angiomas are associated with conditions in which there are increased levels of circulating estrogens,
such as cirrhosis and pregnancy, but they also occur in up to 15%
of normal preschool-­age children and 45% of school-­age children.
Sites of predilection in children are the dorsum of the hand, forearm, nose, infraocular region, lips, and ears. Lesions often regress
spontaneously after puberty. If removal is desired, pulsed dye laser
therapy is the mode of choice; resolution is achieved in 90% of cases
with a single treatment.

Maffucci Syndrome
Fig. 691.17 Spider angioma with visible central arteriole component.

when traumatized because they consist of exuberant granulation tissue.
They are relatively common in children, particularly on the face, arms,
and hands. Such a lesion located on a finger or hand may appear as a
subcutaneous nodule. PGs may arise at sites of injury, but a history of
trauma often cannot be elicited.
PGs are benign but a nuisance because they bleed easily with trauma
and may recur if incompletely removed. Numerous satellite papules
have developed after surgical excision of PGs from the back, particularly in the interscapular region. Small lesions may regress after
cauterization with silver nitrate; larger lesions require excision and
electrodesiccation of the base of the granuloma. Small (<5 mm) lesions
may be treated successfully with pulsed dye laser therapy.

Angiokeratoma of Mibelli

Angiokeratoma of Mibelli is characterized by 1-­to 8-­mm red, purple,
or black scaly, verrucous, occasionally crusted papules and nodules
that appear on the dorsum of the fingers and toes and on the knees and
the elbows. Less commonly, palms, soles, and ears may be affected. In
many patients, onset has followed frostbite or chilblains. These nodules
bleed freely after injury and may involute in response to trauma. They
may be effectively eradicated by cryotherapy, electrofulguration, excision, or laser ablation.

Spider Angioma

A vascular spider (nevus araneus) consists of a central feeder artery
with many dilated radiating vessels and a surrounding erythematous flush, varying from a few millimeters to several centimeters
in diameter (Fig. 691.17). Pressure over the central vessel causes

The association of spindle cell hemangiomas with nodular enchondromas in the metaphyseal or diaphyseal cartilaginous portion of long
bones is known as Maffucci syndrome. Maffucci syndrome is caused
by somatic mosaic pathogenic variants in the IDH1 and IDH2 genes.
Vascular lesions are typically soft, compressible, asymptomatic, blue to
purple subcutaneous masses that grow in proportion to a child’s growth
and stabilize by adulthood. Mucous membranes or viscera may also be
involved. Onset occurs during childhood. Bone lesions may produce
limb deformities and pathologic fractures. Malignant transformation
of enchondromas (chondrosarcoma, angiosarcoma) or primary malignancies (ovarian, fibrosarcoma, glioma, pancreatic) may be a complication (see Chapter 550).

Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia (Osler-­Weber-­
Rendu Disease)

Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT), which is inherited
as an autosomal dominant trait, occurs in two types. The gene in
HHT-­1 encodes ENG, a membrane glycoprotein on endothelial
cells that binds transforming growth factor-­β. HHT-­2 is caused
by pathogenic variants in the ACVRL1 gene and is associated with
increased risk for hepatic involvement and pulmonary hypertension. HHT-­juvenile polyposis syndrome is caused by a pathogenic
variant in SMAD4.
Affected children usually experience recurrent epistaxis before
detection of the characteristic skin and mucous membrane lesions.
The mucocutaneous lesions, which usually develop at puberty, are
1-­to 4-­mm, sharply demarcated, red to purple macules, papules, or
spider-­like projections, each composed of a tightly woven mat of
tortuous telangiectatic vessels (Fig. 691.18). The nasal mucosa, lips,
and tongue are usually involved; less commonly, cutaneous lesions
occur on the face, ears, palms, and nail beds. Vascular ectasias may
also arise in the conjunctivae, larynx, pharynx, gastrointestinal
tract, bladder, vagina, bronchi, brain, and liver. Diagnostic criteria include spontaneous recurrent epistaxis, telangiectasias (oral,
nose, fingers), visceral lesions (gastrointestinal telangiectasias,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4060 Part XXIX u The Skin

Fig. 691.19 Chest multislice spiral CT in a pa-

A

B

C

tient showing a large pulmonary arteriovenous
malformation in the posterior segment of right
upper lobe (arrowhead). A, Axial maximum intensity projection image. B, Coronal maximum
intensity projection image. C, Three-­dimensional
volume rendering. (From Giordano P, Lenato GM,
Suppressa P, et al. Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia: arteriovenous malformations in children. J Pediatr. 2013;163:179–186, Fig. 1, p. 182.)

characterized by multiple atypical-­appearing macules or patches that
are present at birth, suggestive of microcutaneous AVMs that look like
capillary malformations (Fig. 691.20). Lesions that are present at birth
will enlarge and darken with increasing age. Some lesions have peripheral pallor (halo effect). In addition, associated high-­flow AVMs may
be present in the brain, spinal cord, or skin. Arteriovenous fistulas have
also been reported. Pulse dye laser treatment may be effective for cutaneous lesions, whereas embolization is indicated for AVMs.

Ataxia-­Telangiectasia

Fig. 691.20 Infant with CM-­AVM syndrome and a typical-­appearing

CM-­AVM stain of the left chest. This lesion demonstrates high flow on
Doppler evaluation, differentiating it from classic CM. In CM-­AVM syndrome, the lesions tend to be multifocal, with more arising over time.
(From Eichenfield LF, Frieden IJ, eds. Neonatal and Infant Dermatology,
3rd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015: Fig. 22.14, p. 363.)

pulmonary or hepatic or cerebral AVMs), and first-­degree relative
with HHT.
Massive hemorrhage is the most serious complication of HHT and
may result in severe anemia. Bleeding may occur from the nose, mouth,
gastrointestinal tract, genitourinary tract, or lungs; epistaxis is often the
only complaint, occurring in 80% of patients. Approximately 15–20%
of patients with AVMs in the lungs present with stroke due to embolic
abscesses (Fig. 691.19). Hepatic encephalopathy in the presence of normal liver function may occur with a hepatic AVM. Persons with HHT
have normal levels of clotting factors and an intact clotting mechanism.
In the absence of serious complications, the life span of a person with
HHT is normal. Local lesions may be ablated temporarily with chemical cautery or electrocoagulation. More drastic surgical measures may
be required for lesions in critical sites, such as the lung or gastrointestinal tract. Bevacizumab, an anti–vascular endothelial growth factor
agent, has been effective in treating affected patients with HHT who
have high cardiac output secondary to hepatic AVMs. The nasal spray
form of bevacizumab may be beneficial therapy for epistaxis.

Capillary Malformation–Arteriovenous Malformation
Syndrome (CM-­AVM)

CM-­AVM is an autosomal dominant disorder caused by pathogenic
variants in RASA1 (CM-­AVM-­1) or EPHB4 (CM-­AVM-­2) and is

See Chapter 637.1.
Ataxia-­telangiectasia is transmitted as an autosomal recessive trait
because of a pathogenic variant in the ATM gene. The characteristic
telangiectasias develop at approximately 3 years of age, first on the bulbar conjunctivae and later on the nasal bridge, malar areas, external
ears, hard palate, upper anterior chest, and antecubital and popliteal
fossae. Additional cutaneous stigmata include café-­au-­lait spots, premature graying of the hair, and sclerodermatous changes. Progressive
cerebellar ataxia, neurologic deterioration, sinopulmonary infections,
and malignancies are also seen.

Angiokeratoma Corporis Diffusum (Fabry Disease)

See Chapter 106.4.
An inborn error of glycolipid metabolism (α-­galactosidase),
angiokeratoma corporis diffusum is an X-­linked recessive disorder that is fully penetrant in males and is of variable penetrance in
carrier females. Angiokeratomas appear before puberty and occur
in profusion over the genitalia, hips, buttocks, and thighs and in
the umbilical and inguinal regions. They consist of 0.1-­to 3.0-­mm,
red to blue-­black papules that may have a hyperkeratotic surface.
Telangiectasias are seen in the mucosa and conjunctiva. On light
microscopy, these angiokeratomas appear as blood-­filled, dilated,
endothelium-­
lined vascular spaces. Granular lipid deposits are
demonstrable in dermal macrophages, fibrocytes, and endothelial
cells.
Additional clinical manifestations include recurrent episodes of
fever and agonizing pain, cyanosis and flushing of the acral limb areas,
paresthesias of the hands and feet, corneal opacities detectable on slit-­
lamp examination, and hypohidrosis. Renal involvement and cardiac
involvement are the usual causes of death. The biochemical defect is a
deficiency of the lysosomal enzyme α-­galactosidase, with accumulation
of ceramide trihexoside in tissues, particularly vascular endothelium,
and excretion in urine (see Chapter 106.4 for therapy). Similar cutaneous lesions have also been described in another lysosomal enzyme
disorder, α-­l-­fucosidase deficiency, and in sialidosis, a storage disease
with neuraminidase deficiency.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 692 u Cutaneous Nevi

4061

Cutaneous Nevi

scalp (Fig. 692.1). Consideration should be given to the presence of risk
factors for development of melanoma and the patient’s parents’ wishes
about removal of the nevus. If doubt remains about the benign nature
of a nevus, excision is a safe and simple outpatient procedure that may
be justified to allay anxiety.

Kari L. Martin

ATYPICAL MELANOCYTIC NEVUS

Chapter 692

Nevus skin lesions are characterized histopathologically by collections
of well-­differentiated cell types normally found in the skin. Vascular
nevi are described in Chapter 691. Melanocytic nevi are subdivided
into two broad categories: those that appear after birth (acquired nevi)
and those that are present at birth (congenital nevi).

ACQUIRED MELANOCYTIC NEVUS

Melanocytic nevi are benign clusters of melanocytic nevus cells that
arise as a result of alteration and proliferation of melanocytes at the
epidermal-­dermal junction.

Epidemiology

The number of acquired melanocytic nevi increases gradually during
childhood and more slowly in early adulthood. The number reaches a
plateau in the third or fourth decade and then slowly decreases thereafter. The mean number of melanocytic nevi in an adult varies depending on genetics, skin color, and sun exposure. The greater the number
of nevi present, the greater the risk for development of melanoma,
though the majority of melanomas arise de novo. Sun exposure during
childhood, particularly intermittent, intense exposure of an individual
with light skin, and a propensity to burn and freckle rather than tan
are important determinants of the number of melanocytic nevi that
develop. Red-­haired children, despite their light skin and propensity
to freckle and sunburn, have fewer nevi than other children. Increased
numbers of nevi are also associated with immunosuppression and
administration of chemotherapy.

Clinical Manifestations

Melanocytic nevi have a well-­defined life history and are classified as
junctional, compound, or dermal in accordance with the location of
the nevus cells in the skin. In childhood, >90% of nevi are junctional;
melanocyte proliferation occurs at the junction of the epidermis and
dermis to form nests of cells. Junctional nevi appear anywhere on the
body in various shades of brown; they are relatively small, discrete, flat,
and variable in shape. Although some nevi, particularly those on the
palms, soles, and genitalia, remain junctional throughout life, most
become compound as melanocytes migrate into the papillary dermis
to form nests at both the epidermal-­dermal junction and within the
dermis. If the junctional melanocytes stop proliferating, nests of melanocytes remain only within the dermis, forming an intradermal nevus.
With maturation, compound and intradermal nevi may become raised,
dome-­shaped, verrucous, or pedunculated. Slightly elevated lesions are
usually compound. Distinctly elevated lesions are usually intradermal.
With age, the dermal melanocytic nests regress and nevi gradually
disappear.

Atypical melanocytic nevi occur both in an autosomal dominant familial melanoma-­prone setting (familial mole–melanoma syndrome, dysplastic nevus syndrome, BK mole syndrome) and as a sporadic event.
Only 2% of all pediatric melanomas occur in individuals with a familial
syndrome; melanoma develops before age 20 years in 10% of individuals with the syndrome. Malignant melanoma has been reported in children with dysplastic nevus syndrome as young as 10 years old. Risk
for development of melanoma is essentially 100% in individuals with
dysplastic nevus syndrome who have two family members who have
had melanomas. The term atypical mole syndrome describes lesions in
those individuals without an autosomal dominant familial history of
melanoma but with more than 50 nevi, some of which are atypical.
The lifetime risk of melanoma associated with dysplastic nevi in this
context is estimated to be 5–10%.
Atypical nevi tend to be large (5-­15 mm) and round to oval. They
have irregular margins and variegated color, and portions of them are
elevated. These nevi are most common on the posterior trunk, suggesting that intermittent, intense sun exposure has a role in their genesis.
They may also occur in sun-­protected areas such as the breasts, buttocks, and scalp. Atypical nevi do not usually develop until puberty,
although scalp lesions may be present earlier. Atypical nevi demonstrate disordered proliferation of atypical intraepidermal melanocytes,
lymphocytic infiltration, fibroplasia, and angiogenesis. It may be helpful to obtain histopathologic documentation of dysplastic change by
biopsy to identify these individuals. It is prudent to excise borderline
atypical nevi in immunocompromised children or in those treated
with irradiation or chemotherapeutic agents. Although chemotherapy
is associated with the development of a greater number of melanocytic
nevi, it has not been directly linked to increased risk for development
of melanoma. The threshold for removal of clinically atypical nevi is
also lower at sites that are difficult to observe, such as the scalp. Children with atypical nevi should undergo a complete skin examination
every 6-­12 months. In these children, photographic mole mapping
serves as a useful adjunct in following nevus change. Parents must be
counseled about the importance of sun protection and avoidance and
should be instructed to look for early signs of melanoma on a regular
basis, approximately every 3-­4 months.

CONGENITAL MELANOCYTIC NEVUS

Congenital melanocytic nevi are present in 2–3% of newborn infants.
These nevi have been categorized by size: giant congenital nevi are
>40 cm in diameter (adult size) or >5% of the body surface; large nevi
are 20-­40 cm, medium nevi are 1.5-­20 cm, and small nevi are <1.5
cm in diameter (Fig. 692.2). Congenital nevi are characterized by the

Prognosis and Treatment

Acquired pigmented nevi are benign, but a very small percentage
undergo malignant transformation. Suspicious changes are indications for excision and histopathologic evaluation. This includes rapid
increase in size; unusual colors such as red, black, varying shades of
brown, gray, and white; bleeding; textures such as scaling, erosion,
ulceration, and induration; and regional lymphadenopathy. Most of
these changes are from irritation, infection, or maturation; darkening
and gradual increase in size and elevation normally occur during adolescence and should not be cause for concern. Two common benign
changes are clonal nevi (fried-­egg moles) and eclipse nevi. A clonal
nevus is light brown with a dark, raised center representing a clonal
change of a subset of nevus cells within the lesion. Eclipse nevi are flat
and light brown with dark brown rims. They are seen primarily in the

Fig. 692.1 Eclipse nevi (rim moles) in the scalp.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4062 Part XXIX u The Skin

A
Fig. 692.3 “Bathing suit” large congenital melanocytic nevus.

B
Fig. 692.2 Congenital melanocytic nevus. Changing appearance
with time of a congenital melanocytic nevus of small-­to-­medium size
on the trunk when the patient was 9 months old (A) and 10 years old
(B). (From Anderson-­Vildosola J, Hernandez-­Martin A. Addressing frequently asked questions and dispelling myths about melanocytic nevi
in children. Dermatol Clin. 2022;40:51–59, Fig. 5)

presence of nevus cells in the lower reticular dermis; between collagen
bundles; surrounding cutaneous appendages, nerves, and vessels in the
lower dermis; and occasionally extending to the subcuticular fat. Large
and giant congenital nevi often harbor NRAS pathogenic variants, and
BRAF pathogenic variants typically seen in regular melanocytic nevi
are most common in small or medium congenital nevi. Identification is
often uncertain, however, because they may have the histologic features
of ordinary junctional, compound, or intradermal nevi. Some nevi that
were not present at birth display histopathologic features of congenital
nevi; these should not be considered congenital, but may be called congenital nevus–like nevi (CNLN). Furthermore, congenital nevi may be
difficult to distinguish clinically from other types of pigmented lesions,
adding to the difficulty that parents may have in identifying nevi that
were present at birth. The clinical differential diagnosis includes dermal
melanocytosis, café-­au-­lait macules, and smooth muscle hamartomas.
Sites of predilection for small congenital nevi are the lower trunk,
upper back, shoulders, chest, and proximal limbs. The lesions may
be flat, elevated, verrucous, or nodular and may be various shades of
brown, blue, or black. Given the difficulty in identifying small congenital nevi with certainty, data regarding their malignant potential
are controversial and likely overstated. The true incidence of melanoma in congenital nevi, especially small and medium-­sized lesions,
is unknown. Removal of all small congenital nevi is not warranted
because the development of melanoma in a small congenital nevus is
an exceedingly rare event before puberty. A number of factors must
be weighed in the decision about whether or not to remove a nevus,
including its location, the ability to monitor it clinically, the potential
for scarring, the presence of other risk factors for melanoma, and the
presence of atypical clinical features.
Giant congenital pigmented nevi (<1 in 20,000 births) occur most
commonly on the posterior trunk (Fig. 692.3) but may also appear on
the head or extremities. These nevi are of special significance because

of their association with leptomeningeal melanocytosis (neurocutaneous melanocytosis) and their predisposition for development of malignant melanoma.
Leptomeningeal involvement occurs most often when the nevus is
located on the head or midline on the trunk, particularly when associated with multiple “satellite” melanocytic nevi (>20 lesions). Nevus cells
within the leptomeninges and brain parenchyma may cause increased
intracranial pressure, hydrocephalus, seizures, intellectual disability,
and motor deficits and may result in melanoma. Malignancy can be
identified by careful cytologic examination of the cerebrospinal fluid
for melanin-­containing cells. MRI demonstrates asymptomatic leptomeningeal melanosis in 30% of individuals with giant congenital nevus
of the type described earlier. The overall incidence of malignant melanoma arising in a giant congenital nevus is 1–2%. The median age at
diagnosis of the melanomas that arise within a giant congenital nevus
is 7 years. The mortality rate approaches 100%. The risk of melanoma is
greater in patients in whom the predicted adult size of the nevus is >40
cm, lesions are on the trunk, and satellite lesions are present. Management of giant congenital nevi remains controversial and should involve
the parents, pediatrician, dermatologist, and plastic surgeon. If the
nevus lies over the head or spine, MRI may allow detection of neural
melanosis, the presence of which makes gross removal of a nevus from
the skin a futile effort. In the absence of neural melanosis, early excision and repair aided by tissue expanders or grafting may reduce the
burden of nevus cells and thus the potential for development of melanoma, but at the cost of many potentially disfiguring operations. Nevus
cells deep within subcutaneous tissues may evade excision. Random
biopsies of the nevus are not helpful, but biopsy of newly expanding
nodules is indicated. Follow-­up every 6 months for 5 years and every
12 months thereafter is recommended. Serial photographs of the nevus
may aid in detecting changes.

MELANOMA

Malignant melanoma is the most common skin cancer in children, and
approximately 1% of all melanomas occur before 20 years of age. An
estimated 400 cases of pediatric melanoma are diagnosed each year.
The incidence of melanoma in the pediatric population increases with
age, from 1-­2 cases per 1 million in children under age 10 to 16.9 cases
in children age 15-­19 years. The incidence of pediatric melanoma has
increased by an average of 2% per year between 1973 and 2009. This
increase was especially notable in females between the ages of 15 and
19. In this age-­group, melanoma accounts for 6% of all childhood cancers. Melanoma develops primarily in White individuals, on the head
and trunk in males, and on the extremities in females. In preadolescent patients, melanoma is more likely to present on the head and neck
than in other locations. Risk factors for the development of melanoma
include the presence of familial atypical mole–melanoma syndrome
or xeroderma pigmentosum; an increased number of acquired melanocytic nevi, or atypical nevi; fair complexion; excessive sun exposure, especially intermittent exposure to intense sunlight; a personal
or family (first-­degree relative) history of a previous melanoma; giant

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 692 u Cutaneous Nevi
congenital nevus; and immunosuppression (Table 692.1). In previously well children, UV radiation is responsible for most melanomas.
Less than 5% of childhood melanomas develop within giant congenital nevi or in individuals with familial atypical mole–melanoma syndrome. Approximately 40–50% of the time, melanoma develops at a
site where there was no apparent nevus. The mortality rate from melanoma is related primarily to tumor thickness and the level of invasion
into the skin. About 75% of pediatric cases are localized and have an
excellent outcome. Ninety percent of pediatric patients diagnosed with
melanoma are expected to be alive in 5 years. In patients with nodal
disease, the outcomes are intermediate, with about 60% expected to
survive long-­term.
There is variability in prognosis depending on the age of diagnosis
in pediatric patients. Children younger than 10 with melanoma often
have poor prognostic features. They are more often non-White, have
head and neck primary tumors, thicker primary lesions, a higher incidence of spitzoid morphology, vascular invasion and nodal metastases,
and more often have syndromes that predispose them to melanoma.
The treatment of melanomas, as in adult patients, is surgical excision
with 1-­cm margins for tumors <1 mm deep, 1-­to 2-­cm margins for
tumors >1 mm and <2 mm deep, and 2-­cm margins for tumors >2 mm
deep. Sentinel lymph node biopsy has become a widespread practice in
pediatric melanoma. It should be considered in lesions >1 mm and in
thin lesions with ulceration, mitotic rate greater than 1 mm2, and young
age. Though pediatric patients are more likely to have nodal metastases
than their adolescent counterparts, this has not been associated with a
decrease in overall survival. Alternatively, in adolescents, nodal disease
is a significant negative prognostic factor. Increased tumor thickness
and ulceration are associated with lymph node positivity. If the sentinel
node is positive, a lymph node dissection can be considered. Patients
with regional lymph node involvement can be offered treatment with
interferon alfa-­2b or ipilimumab (FDA approved for 12 years of age
and older). BRAF and MEK inhibitors are not currently available for
pediatric patients; however, phase 1 and 2 clinical trials are currently
ongoing for adolescent patients.
Given the lack of effective therapy for melanoma, prevention and
early detection are the most effective measures. Emphasis should be
given to avoidance of intense midday sun exposure between 10 am
and 3 pm; wearing of protective clothing such as a hat, long sleeves,
and pants; and use of sunscreen. Adolescents should be counseled not
to use tanning booths. Early detection includes frequent clinical and
photographic examinations of patients at risk (dysplastic nevus syndrome) and prompt response to rapid changes in nevi (size, shape,

4063

color, inflammation, bleeding or crusting, and sensation). The ABCDE
rule (asymmetry, border irregularities, color variability, diameter >6
mm, evolving), which is a useful screening tool for adults, may not be
as effective for children. Unlike adult melanomas, which are usually
pigmented, pediatric melanomas are often amelanotic and can mimic
benign lesions such as warts and pyogenic granulomas. They are also
more likely to have regular borders and to be less than 6 mm in diameter. They often present as papules or papulonodules. To highlight these
differences from adult melanomas, an ABCDE rule for pediatric melanoma has been proposed: Amelanotic, Bleeding, Bumps, uniform
Color, small Diameter, De novo, and in Evolution.

HALO NEVUS

Halo nevi occur primarily in children and young adults, most commonly on the back (Fig. 692.4). Development of the lesion may coincide with puberty or pregnancy. Several pigmented nevi frequently
develop halos simultaneously. Subsequent disappearance of the central
nevus over several months is the usual outcome, and the depigmented
area usually repigments. Excision and histopathologic examination
of the lesion is indicated only when the nature of the central lesion
is in question. An acquired melanocytic nevus occasionally develops
a peripheral zone of depigmentation over a period of days to weeks.
There is a dense inflammatory infiltrate of lymphocytes and histiocytes
in addition to the nevus cells. The pale halo reflects disappearance of
the melanocytes. This phenomenon is associated with congenital nevi,
blue nevi, Spitz nevi, dysplastic nevi, neurofibromas, primary and secondary malignant melanoma, and occasionally with poliosis, Vogt-­
Koyanagi-­Harada syndrome, and pernicious anemia. Patients with
vitiligo have an increased incidence of halo nevi. Individuals with halo
nevi have circulating antibodies against the cytoplasm of melanocytes
and nevus cells.

SPITZ NEVUS (SPINDLE AND EPITHELIOID CELL
NEVUS)

Spitz nevus manifests most commonly in the first 2 decades of life
as a pink to red, smooth, dome-­shaped, firm, hairless papule on the
face, shoulder, or upper limb (Fig. 692.5). Most are <1 cm in diameter,
but they can achieve a size of 3 cm. Rarely, they occur as numerous
grouped lesions. Visually similar lesions include pyogenic granuloma,
hemangioma, nevocellular nevus, juvenile xanthogranuloma, and
basal cell carcinoma, but these entities are histologically distinguishable. Classic-­appearing Spitz nevi can be monitored with regular clinical and dermoscopic examination, and multiple dermoscopy studies

Table 692.1  Summary of Clinical and Histologic Features by Subtypes of Pediatric Melanoma
SPITZOID MELANOMA

MELANOMA ARISING IN CMN

CONVENTIONAL MELANOMA

Clinical

Papule or nodule; frequently
amelanotic, but can be any color
(e.g., pink-­red to blue-­black);
distribution is not limited to sun-­
exposed skin

New, rapidly growing nodule arising
in the deep dermis or subcutaneous
tissues of a CMN; commonly solitary
and ulcerated; by comparison,
proliferative nodules commonly occur
in multiples and are not ulcerated

Children: typically papules or nodules of any
color, but often amelanotic; most do not
follow ABCD criteria; nodular subtype most
common
Adolescents: similar to presentation in adults
with lesions having ABCD criteria

Histologic

Primary differential diagnosis is Spitz
nevus vs atypical Spitz tumor; most
cells have abundant eosinophilic
cytoplasm and characteristic spitzoid
cytomorphology; nuclear atypia is
typically high grade; growth in the
form of expansile nodules or sheets;
ulceration, epidermal consumption,
brisk deep mitotic activity, and poor
maturation are often seen; epidermal
hyperplasia might be seen on the
surface, but Kamino bodies are
relatively uncommon

The primary differential diagnosis is
benign proliferative nodules arising in
congenital nevi; compared with benign
proliferative nodules, melanomas
typically have epithelioid or small,
blue cell, tumor-­like morphology, with
sheets of melanocytes with high-­
grade nuclear atypia; mitotic activity
is high (often >3/mm2); zones of
necrosis or ulceration can be helpful in
establishing a diagnosis

Nodular melanoma: similar to adult nodular
melanoma; no horizontal growth phase
present; superficial spreading melanoma:
similar to superficial spreading melanoma
in adults with a preceding horizontal growth
phase, pagetosis, lentiginous growth,
and junctional confluence with frequent
alteration of the epidermal contour;
precursor nevus is common

CMN, Congenital melanocytic nevi; ABCD, asymmetry, border irregularity, color variegation, diameter >6 mm.
From Merkel EA, Mohan LS, Shi K, et al. Paediatric melanoma: clinical update, genetic basis, and advances in diagnosis. Lancet Child Adoles. 2019;3:646–654, Table 1).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4064 Part XXIX u The Skin

Fig. 692.6 Nevus spilus.

Fig. 692.4 Well-­developed halo nevus.

and the number of darker lesions may be low or high. Nevus spilus is
rare at birth and is commonly acquired in late infancy or early childhood. Dark elements within the nevus are usually present initially and
tend to increase in number gradually over time. The darker macules
represent nevus cells in a junctional or dermal location; the patch has
increased numbers of melanocytes in a lentiginous epidermal pattern. The malignant potential of these nevi is uncertain; nevus spilus is
found more commonly in individuals with melanoma than in matched
control subjects. Like congenital melanocytic nevi, the risk of melanoma developing within a nevus spilus is thought to be proportionate
to the size of the lesion as a whole. The nevi need not be excised unless
atypical features or recent clinical changes are noted.

NEVUS OF OTA AND NEVUS OF ITO
Fig. 692.5 Dome-­shaped red Spitz nevus.
have demonstrated a tendency for these benign lesions to develop a
reticular or homogeneous pattern and/or regress over time. Guidelines
recommend excision be reserved for suspicious lesions (>8-­10 mm,
with excessive growth, asymmetry, or ulceration) in children over 12
years of age and for suspicious lesions in all ages when melanoma cannot be excluded. If a nevus arouses clinical suspicion that it may be a
melanoma, an excisional biopsy of the entire lesion is recommended. If
the margins of excision of a Spitz nevus are positive but the biopsy sample suggested a typical Spitz nevus, reexcision of the site is no longer
routinely recommended. Because Spitz nevi may be difficult to distinguish histopathologically from malignant melanoma, immunohistochemistry and genomic alteration studies can be useful adjunct tools.
Atypical Spitz tumors are Spitz nevi with atypical histologic features
or unknown malignant potential. Management for these tumors is not
clearly defined and may range from clinical monitoring to yearly nodal
ultrasonography to potentially sentinel lymph node biopsy and lymphadenectomy. Improving genetic profiling of these tumors may provide
better prognostic information soon. Prognostic implication of positive
sentinel lymph node biopsy has not been established, and given the
potential morbidity of the procedure, it is often avoided.

ZOSTERIFORM LENTIGINOUS NEVUS (AGMINATED
LENTIGINES)

Zosteriform lentiginous nevus is a unilateral, linear, bandlike collection of numerous 2-­to 10-­mm brown or black macules on the face,
trunk, or limbs. The nevus may be present at birth or may develop during childhood. There are higher numbers of melanocytes in elongated
rete ridges of the epidermis.

NEVUS SPILUS (SPECKLED LENTIGINOUS NEVUS)

Nevus spilus is a flat brown patch within which are darker flat or raised
brown melanocytic elements with a prevalence of 2–3% (Fig. 692.6). It
varies considerably in size and can occur anywhere on the body. The
color of the macular component may vary from light to dark brown,

Nevus of Ota is more common among females and Asian and Black
patients. This nevus consists of a permanent patch composed of partially
confluent blue, black, and brown macules. Enlargement and darkening
may occur with time. Occasionally, some areas of the nevus are raised.
The macular nevi resemble the more common dermal melanocytosis
of the lower back and buttocks in color and occur unilaterally in the
areas supplied by the first and second divisions of the trigeminal nerve.
Nevus of Ota differs from a more common dermal melanocytosis patch
not only by its distribution but also by having a speckled rather than
a uniform appearance. Both are forms of mid-­dermal melanocytosis.
Nevus of Ota also has a greater concentration of elongated, dendritic
dermal melanocytes located in the upper rather than the lower portion
of the dermis. This nevus is sometimes present at birth; in other cases,
it may arise during the first or second decade of life. Patchy involvement of the conjunctiva, hard palate, pharynx, nasal mucosa, buccal
mucosa, or tympanic membrane occurs in some patients. Malignant
change is exceedingly rare. Laser therapy may effectively decrease the
pigmentation but can be unpredictable.
Nevus of Ito is localized to the supraclavicular, scapular, and deltoid
regions. This nevus tends to be more diffuse in its distribution and less
mottled than nevus of Ota. It is also a form of mid-­dermal melanocytosis.
The only available treatments are masking with cosmetics and laser therapy.

BLUE NEVI

The common blue nevus is a solitary, asymptomatic, smooth, dome-­
shaped, blue to blue-­gray papule <10 mm in diameter on the dorsal
aspect of the hands and feet. Rarely, common blue nevi form large
plaques. Blue nevus is nearly always acquired, often during childhood
and more commonly in females. Microscopically, it is characterized by
groups of intensely pigmented, spindle-­shaped melanocytes in the dermis. This nevus is benign.
The cellular blue nevus is typically 1-­3 cm in diameter and occurs
most frequently on the buttocks and in the sacrococcygeal area. In
addition to collections of deeply pigmented dermal dendritic melanocytes, cellular islands composed of large spindle-­shaped cells are noted
in the dermis and may extend into the subcutaneous fat. A histologic
continuum may be seen from blue nevi to cellular blue nevi. A combined nevus is the association of a blue nevus with an overlying melanocytic nevus.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 692 u Cutaneous Nevi
The blue-­gray color that is characteristic of these nevi is an optical effect caused by dermal melanin. Longer wavelengths of visible
light penetrate to the deep dermis and are absorbed there by melanin;
shorter-­wavelength blue light cannot penetrate deeply but instead is
reflected back to the observer.

NEVUS DEPIGMENTOSUS (ACHROMIC NEVUS)

Nevi depigmentosi are usually present at birth; they are localized macular hypopigmented patches or streaks, often with irregular borders
(Fig. 692.7). They can resemble hypomelanosis of Ito clinically, except
that they are more localized and often unilateral. Small lesions may
also resemble the ash leaf macules of tuberous sclerosis. Nevi depigmentosi appear to represent a focal defect in transfer of melanosomes
to keratinocytes.

EPIDERMAL NEVI

Epidermal nevi may be visible at birth or may develop in the first few
months or years of life. They affect both sexes equally and usually occur
sporadically. Epidermal nevi are hamartomatous lesions characterized
by hyperplasia of the epidermis and/or adnexal structures in a focal
area of the skin.
Epidermal nevi are classified into a number of variants, depending
on the morphology and extent of the individual nevus and the predominant epidermal structure (Table 692.2). An epidermal nevus may
appear initially as a discolored, slightly scaly patch that, with maturation, becomes more linear, thickened, verrucous, and hyperpigmented.
Systematized refers to a diffuse or extensive distribution of lesions, and
ichthyosis hystrix indicates that the distribution is extensive and bilateral (Fig. 692.8). Morphologic types include pigmented papillomas,
often in a linear distribution; unilateral hyperkeratotic streaks involving a limb and perhaps a portion of the trunk; velvety hyperpigmented
plaques; and whorled or marbled hyperkeratotic lesions in localized
plaques or over extensive areas of the body along Blaschko lines. An
inflammatory linear verrucous variant is markedly pruritic and tends
to become erythematous, scaling, and crusted. Many have RAS pathogenic variants.

The histologic pattern evolves as an epidermal nevus matures, but
epidermal hyperplasia of some degree is apparent in all stages of development. One or another dermal appendage may predominate in a particular lesion. These nevi must be distinguished from lichen striatus,
lymphangioma circumscriptum, shagreen patch of tuberous sclerosis,
congenital hairy nevi, linear porokeratosis, linear lichen planus, linear psoriasis, the verrucous stage of incontinentia pigmenti, and nevus
sebaceus (Jadassohn). Keratolytic agents such as retinoic acid and salicylic acid may be moderately effective in reducing scaling and controlling pruritus, but definitive treatment requires full-­thickness excision;
recurrence is usual if more superficial removal is attempted. Alternatively, the nevus may be left intact. Epidermal nevi are occasionally
associated with other abnormalities of the skin and soft tissues; eyes;
and nervous, cardiovascular, musculoskeletal, and urogenital systems.
In these instances, the disorder is referred to as epidermal nevus syndrome. This syndrome, however, is not a distinct clinical entity.

Nevus Sebaceus (Jadassohn)

A relatively small, sharply demarcated, oval or linear, elevated, yellow-­
orange plaque that is usually devoid of hair, nevus sebaceus occurs on
the head and neck of infants (Fig. 692.9). Although the lesion is characterized histopathologically by an abundance of sebaceous glands, all elements of the skin are represented. It is frequently flat and inconspicuous
in early childhood. With maturity, usually during adolescence, the lesions
become verrucous and studded with large rubbery nodules. The changing clinical appearance reflects the histologic pattern, which is characterized by a variable degree of hyperkeratosis, hyperplasia of the epidermis,
malformed hair follicles, and often a profusion of sebaceous glands and

Table 692.2  Epidermal Nevi and Their Associated
Genetic Syndromes
LESION
KERATINOCYTIC NEVI
Epidermal nevus

PATHOGENIC
GENE VARIANT
FGFR3
FGFR2
HRAS
KRAS
NRAS
PIK3CA

Epidermolytic ichthyosis

KRT1
KRT10
KRT2

CHILD syndrome

NSDHL

PTEN nevus

PTEN

Proteus syndrome and epidermal nevi

AKT1

PIK3CA-­related overgrowth spectrum/
CLOVES

PIK3CA

Acantholytic dyskeratotic epidermal nevus

ATP2A2
GJB2

Inflammatory linear verrucous epidermal
nevus

Not identified to date

ADNEXAL NEVI
Nevus sebaceous/nevus sebaceous
syndrome

Fig. 692.7 Large nevus depigmentosus of the abdomen.

4065

FGFR2
HRAS
KRAS
NRAS

Porokeratotic adnexal ostial nevus

GJB2 (connexin 26)

Nevus comedonicus/nevus comedonicus
syndrome

NEK9
FGFR2

Becker nevus/Becker nevus syndrome

ACTB (beta-­actin)

CHILD, Congenital hemidysplasia with ichthyosiform erythroderma and limb defects;
CLOVES, congenital lipomatous overgrowth and vascular and skeletal anomalies.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4066 Part XXIX u The Skin

Fig. 692.8 Epidermal nevus (ichthyosis hystrix type).

Fig. 692.9 Orange-­yellow nevus sebaceus of the scalp.
the presence of ectopic apocrine glands. Sebaceous nevi are caused by
somatic mosaic pathogenic variants in HRAS and KRAS. The disruption
of these oncogenes helps explain the 14% incidence of these lesions developing tumors throughout a patient’s lifetime. Most tumors are benign
(trichoblastomas, syringocystadenoma papilliferum, trichilemmomas),
but basal cell carcinoma can occur as well. Lesions may be monitored
or excised if the family is unable to or uncomfortable with monitoring
alone. Sebaceous nevi associated with central nervous system, skeletal,
and ocular defects represent a variant of the epidermal nevus syndrome.

Becker Nevus (Becker Melanosis)

Becker nevus develops predominantly in males, during childhood or
adolescence, initially as a hyperpigmented patch. The lesion commonly
develops hypertrichosis, limited to the area of hyperpigmentation, and
evolves into a unilateral, slightly thickened, irregular, hyperpigmented
plaque. The most common sites are the upper torso and upper arm (Fig.
692.10). The nevus shows an increased number of basal melanocytes
and variable epidermal hyperplasia. Becker melanosis is commonly
associated with a smooth muscle hamartoma, which may appear as
slight perifollicular papular elevations or slight induration. Stroking of
such a lesion may induce smooth muscle contraction and make the
hairs stand up (pseudo-­Darier sign). The nevus is benign, has no risk
for malignant change, and is rarely associated with other anomalies.

NEVUS COMEDONICUS

An uncommon organoid nevus of epithelial origin, nevus comedonicus consists of linear plaques of plugged follicles that simulate comedones; they may be present at birth or may appear during childhood.
The horny plugs represent keratinous debris within dilated, malformed
pilosebaceous follicles. The lesions are most often unilateral and may
develop at any site. Rarely, they are associated with other congenital
malformations, including skeletal defects, cerebral anomalies, and cataracts. Although these lesions are often asymptomatic, some affected
individuals experience recurrent inflammation, resulting in cyst

Fig. 692.10 Becker nevus on the shoulder of an adolescent male.

Fig. 692.11 Large smooth muscle hamartoma of the buttock.
formation, fistulas, and scarring. There is no effective treatment except
full-­thickness excision; palliation of larger lesions may be achieved by
regular applications of a retinoic acid preparation.

CONNECTIVE TISSUE NEVUS

Connective tissue nevus is a hamartoma of collagen, elastin, and/or
glycosaminoglycans of the dermal extracellular matrix. It may occur as
a solitary defect or as a manifestation of an associated disorder. These
nevi may occur at any site but are most common on the back, buttocks,
arms, and thighs. They are skin-­colored, ivory, or yellow plaques, 2-­15
cm in diameter, composed of many tiny papules or grouped nodules that
are frequently difficult to appreciate visually because of the subtle color
changes. The plaques have a rubbery or cobblestone consistency on
palpation. Biopsy findings are variable and include increased amounts
and/or degeneration or fragmentation of dermal collagen, elastic tissue,
or ground substance. Similar lesions occurring with tuberous sclerosis
are called shagreen patches; however, shagreen patches consist only of
excessive amounts of collagen. The association of many small papular
connective tissue nevi with osteopoikilosis is called dermatofibrosis lenticularis disseminata (Buschke-­Ollendorff syndrome).

SMOOTH MUSCLE HAMARTOMA

Smooth muscle hamartoma is a developmental anomaly resulting from
hyperplasia of the smooth muscle (arrector pili) associated with hair
follicles. It is usually evident at birth or shortly thereafter as a flesh-­
colored or lightly pigmented plaque with overlying hypertrichosis
on the trunk or limbs (Fig. 692.11). Transient elevation or a rippling
movement of the lesion, caused by contraction of the muscle bundles,
can sometimes be elicited by stroking of the surface (pseudo-­Darier
sign). Smooth muscle hamartoma can be mistaken for congenital pigmented nevus, but the distinction is important because the former has
no risk for malignant melanoma and need not be removed.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 693 u Hyperpigmented Lesions

Chapter 693

Hyperpigmented Lesions
Joel C. Joyce
DISORDERS OF PIGMENTATION

Pigmentation of the skin requires migration of melanoblasts from the
neural crest to the dermal-­epidermal junction, enzymatic processes to
form pigment, structural components to contain the pigment (melanosomes), and transfer of pigment to the surrounding keratinocytes.
Increased skin color may be generalized or localized and may result
from various defects in any of these requirements. Some of these aberrations are a manifestation of systemic disease, others represent generalized or focal developmental or genetic defects, and still others may be
nonspecific and the result of cutaneous inflammation.

EPHELIDES (FRECKLES)

Ephelides (freckles) are well-­
demarcated macules—light or dark
brown, round, oval, or irregularly shaped—that occur in sun-­exposed
areas such as the face, upper back, arms, and hands. They are usually
less than 3 mm in diameter and are induced by exposure to sun, particularly during the summer, and may fade or disappear during the
winter. They are a result of increased sun-­induced melanogenesis and
melanosome transport from melanocytes to keratinocytes and not
from increased numbers of melanocytes. They are more common in
redheads and fair-­haired individuals and first appear in the preschool
years. Histologically, they are marked by increased melanin pigment in
epidermal basal cells, which have more numerous and larger dendritic
processes than the melanocytes of the surrounding paler skin. The lack
of melanocytic proliferation or elongation of epidermal rete ridges distinguishes them from lentigines. Ephelides have been identified as a
marker for increased risk for ultraviolet (UV)-­induced neoplasia and
hence melanoma independent of melanocytic nevi. Treatment is not
required, but regular and consistent sun protection can slow ephelis
development.

LENTIGINES

Lentigines, often mistaken for ephelides or junctional nevi, are small
(usually <5 mm but occasionally 1-­2 cm), round, dark-­brown macules
that can appear anywhere on the body. They can be solitary or grouped.
Onset can be at an early age, particularly when associated with genetic
syndromes, but can appear at any age. They are more common in
darkly pigmented than in lightly pigmented individuals. They do not
vary in coloration seasonally and remain permanently. Histologically
they have elongated, club-­shaped epidermal rete ridges with increased
numbers of melanocytes and dense epidermal deposits of melanin. No
nests of melanocytes are found. Lentigines are benign and, when few,
may be viewed as a normal occurrence. They are seen most commonly
on the lower lip and sun-­exposed skin but may occur elsewhere, particularly when associated with syndromes, inadvertent or therapeutic
radiation exposure, or patterned (inherited-­tendency).
Eruptive/generalized lentiginosis (lentiginosis profusa) involves
innumerable small pigmented macules that are present at birth or
appear during childhood. There are no associated abnormalities, and
mucous membranes are spared. Carney complex is an autosomal dominant syndrome characterized by multiple lentigines and neoplasms,
including myxomas of the skin, heart (atrial), and breast; psammomatous melanotic schwannomas; epithelioid blue nevi of skin and mucosae; growth hormone–producing pituitary adenomas; and testicular
Sertoli cell tumors. Components of the Carney complex have been
described previously as the NAME (nevi, atrial myxoma, myxoid neurofibroma, ephelides) and LAMB (lentigines, atrial myxoma, mucocutaneous myxoma, blue nevi) syndromes. The complex is inherited in an
autosomal dominant pattern and caused by an inactivating pathogenic
variant of the PRKAR1A gene.

4067

Multiple lentigines syndrome (formerly LEOPARD) is an autosomal dominant entity consisting of a generalized, symmetric distribution of lentigines (Fig. 693.1) in association with electrocardiographic
abnormalities, ocular hypertelorism, pulmonary stenosis, abnormal
genitals (cryptorchidism, hypogonadism, hypospadias), growth retardation, and sensorineural deafness (type 1, PTPN11 gene; type 2, RAF1
gene). Other features include hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy and pectus excavatum or carinatum.
Peutz-­Jeghers syndrome is characterized by melanotic macules on
the lips and mucous membranes and by gastrointestinal (GI) polyposis.
It is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait caused by pathogenic
variants of STK11. Onset is noted in infancy and early childhood when
pigmented macules appear on the lips and buccal mucosa. The macules
are usually a few millimeters in size but may be as large as 1-­2 cm. Macules also occasionally appear on the palate, gums, tongue, and vaginal
mucosa. Cutaneous macules may develop on the nose, hands, and feet;
around the mouth, eyes, and umbilicus; and as longitudinal bands or
diffuse hyperpigmentation of the nails. Pigmented macules often fade
from the lips and skin during puberty and adulthood but generally
do not disappear from mucosal surfaces. Buccal mucosal macules are
the most constant feature of the disorder; in some families, occasional
members may be affected only with the pigmentary changes. Indistinguishable pigmentary changes beginning in adult life, without intestinal involvement, also occur sporadically in individuals.
Polyposis usually involves the jejunum and ileum but may also
occur in the stomach, duodenum, colon, and rectum (see Chapter
393). Episodic abdominal pain, diarrhea, melena, and intussusception are frequent complications. Patients have a significantly increased
risk of GI tract and non–GI tract tumors at a young age. GI cancer
has been reported in 2–3% of patients; the lifetime relative risk for GI
malignancy is 13-­15. The relative risk of non–GI tract malignancies,
including ovarian, cervical, and testicular tumors, is 9. Peutz-­Jeghers
syndrome must be differentiated from other syndromes associated
with multiple lentigines (Laugier-­Hunziker syndrome), from ordinary
freckling, from Gardner syndrome, and from Cronkhite-­Canada syndrome, a disorder characterized by GI polyposis, alopecia, onychodystrophy, and diffuse pigmentation of the palms, volar aspects of the
fingers, and dorsal hands. Treatment of Peutz-­Jeghers melanotic macules is not required, but various lasers have been effective for cosmesis
in some cases.

CAFÉ-­AU-­LAIT MACULES

Café-­au-­lait macules (CALMs) are uniformly hyperpigmented, sharply
demarcated macular lesions, the hues of which vary with the normal
degree of pigmentation of the individual: they are tan or light brown in
White individuals and may be dark brown in Black children (Figs. 693.2
and 693.3). CALMs vary tremendously in size and may be large, covering a significant portion of the trunk or limb. The borders are usually

Fig. 693.1 Multiple lentigines in LEOPARD (lentigines in association

with electrocardiographic abnormalities, ocular hypertelorism, pulmonary stenosis, abnormal genitals [cryptorchidism, hypogonadism, hypospadias], growth retardation, and sensorineural deafness) syndrome.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4068 Part XXIX u The Skin
smooth (ovoid), but some have exceedingly irregular borders. They are
characterized by increased numbers of melanocytes and melanin in the
epidermis but lack the clubbed rete ridges that typify lentigines. One to
three CALMs are common in the general population, and up to 27%
of children have a solitary CALM, depending on ancestry. The spots
may be present at birth or may develop during childhood. The spots
themselves are benign and may fade with age.
Large, often asymmetric café-­au-­lait spots with irregular borders are
characteristic of patients with McCune-­Albright syndrome (GNAS1
gene; see Chapter 600.6). This disorder includes polyostotic fibrous
dysplasia of bone, leading to pathologic fractures; precocious puberty;
and numerous hyperfunctional endocrinopathies. The macular hyperpigmentation has an irregular border and may be present at birth or
may develop late in childhood (see Fig. 693.3). The lesions are often

unilateral and migrate along the lines of Blaschko. Cutaneous pigmentation is typically most extensive on the side showing the most severe
bone involvement.

Neurofibromatosis Type 1 (Von Recklinghausen
Disease)

The CALM is the most familiar cutaneous hallmark of the autosomal
dominant neurocutaneous syndrome known as neurofibromatosis
type 1 (NF1, see Fig. 693.2 and Chapter 636.1). Included in the criteria for this diagnosis is the presence of six or more CALMs (>5 mm
in diameter in prepubertal patients and >15 mm in diameter in postpubertal patients; Table 693.1). Multiple CALMs commonly produce
a freckled appearance of non–sun-­exposed areas such as the axillae
(Crowe sign), the inguinal and inframammary regions, and under the
chin. CALMs can also be seen in segmental NF1, which results from
somatic mosaicism arising from postzygotic pathogenic genetic variants in the NF1 gene such that the clinical manifestations of NF1 are
present only in a localized body segment. Another variant of NF1 is
hereditary spinal neurofibromatosis, which is a rare disorder that generally presents with multiple CALM and multiple symmetric spinal
root neurofibromas, but other stigmata of NF1 are typically absent.
CALM may be seen in Watson syndrome, an NF1 allelic variant (CALM, pulmonic stenosis intellectual disability, short stature),
mosaic NF1, and Legius syndrome (SPRED1). Differentiation of these
disorders is noted in Figure 693.4 and Table 693.2.
CALMs also occur with certain other disorders, including other
types of neurofibromatosis, but in many of these disorders the CALMs
are not the defining diagnostic feature (see Table 693.2).

INCONTINENTIA PIGMENTI (BLOCH-­SULZBERGER
DISEASE)
See Chapter 636.7.

POSTINFLAMMATORY PIGMENTARY CHANGES

Fig. 693.2 Multiple café-­au-­lait macules on a child with neurofibroma-

tosis type 1. (From Eichenfield LF, Frieden IJ, Esterly NB. Textbook of
Neonatal Dermatology. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2001:372.)

Either hyperpigmentation or hypopigmentation can occur as a result
of cutaneous inflammation. Alteration in pigmentation usually follows
a severe inflammatory reaction but may result from mild dermatitis.
Dark-­skinned individuals are more likely than fair-­skinned children
to show these changes. Although altered pigmentation may persist for
weeks to months, patients can be reassured that these lesions are usually temporary. Sun protection and treatment of the underlying dermatitis can shorten duration.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Fig. 693.3 Coast of Maine café-

au-lait macules. Irregularly bordered café au lait macules that
tend not to cross the midline are
characteristic of McCune-­Albright
syndrome. (Modified from Collins MT, Singer FR, Rugster E.
McCune-­
Albright syndrome and
the extraskeletal manifestations of
fibrous dysplasia. Orphanet J Rare
Dis. 2012;7[Suppl. 1]:S4, Fig. 2.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 693 u Hyperpigmented Lesions

4069

Table 693.1  Previous and Recently Updated National Institutes of Health Diagnostic Criteria for Neurofibromatosis Type 1
CARDINAL CLINICAL FEATURES (ANY TWO OR MORE ARE REQUIRED
FOR DIAGNOSIS)
NEW CHANGES
1. Six or more café-­au-­lait macules more than 5 mm in greatest diameter
in prepubertal individuals and more than 15 mm in greatest diameter in
postpubertal individuals

Must be bilateral (both sides of the body)*

2. Freckling in the axillary or inguinal regions

Must be bilateral (both sides of the body)*

3. Two or more neurofibromas of any type or one plexiform neurofibroma

No change

4. Two or more Lisch nodules

Or two or more choroidal abnormalities

5. Optic pathway glioma

No change

6. A distinctive osseous lesion such as sphenoid wing dysplasia

Added anterolateral bowing of tibia (tibial dysplasia) or
pseudarthrosis of a long bone

7. First-­degree relative (e.g., mother, father, sister, brother) with NF1

Changed to a parent with NF1 by the aforementioned criteria
New criteria: A pathogenic NF1 variant

*If only café-­au-­lait macules and freckling are present, the diagnosis is most likely NF1, but exceptionally, the person might have another diagnosis such as Legius syndrome. At least one of
the two pigmentary findings (café-­au-­lait macules or freckling) should be bilateral.
NIH, National Institutes of Health.
From Albaghdadi M, Thibodeau ML, Lara-­Corrales I. Updated approach to patients with multiple café au lait macules. Dermatol Clin. 2022;40:9–23, Table 1.

Only fulfills the NIH NF1 CALMs criteria AND age <2.5 y

NF1 and SPRED1 genetic testing (blood DNA)

SPRED1 positive

NF1 positive

NF1 VUS

Consider VUS
review every 2 years

NF1/SPRED1 negative

Consider
RNAseq

Assess for MNF

Not MNF

Legius syndrome
recommendations

Surveillance and management
recommendations for NF1

Baseline eye exam

MNF

Dermatology follow up every 2 years +
consider tissue diagnosis in teenage years

Dermatology exam q1y for additional NF1
criteria at least until age 6

Fig. 693.4 Approach to the genetic diagnosis of young children who solely meet the CALM NIH criteria. MNF, Mosaic neurofibromatosis; NFI,
neurofibromatosis; RNAseq, RNA sequencing; SPRED1, sprouty-­related EVH1 domain-­containing 1; VUS, variant of unknown significance. (From Albaghdadi M, Thibodeau ML, Lara-­Corrales I. Updated approach to patients with multiple café au lait macules. Dermatol Clin. 2022;40:9–23, Fig. 7.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4070 Part XXIX u The Skin
Table 693.2

Conditions Featuring Café au Lait Macules
ADDITIONAL TESTING TO
CONSIDER

CONDITION

GENE (INHERITANCE)

ASSOCIATED FEATURES*

Ataxia telangiectasia

ATM (AR)

Progeric changes in skin and hair, hypopigmented
macules, progressive neurologic impairment,
cerebellar ataxia, radiosensitivity, malignancy,
immunocompromise, premature aging, and
oculocutaneous telangiectasia

Karyotype*
Serum AFP*

Cardiofaciocutaneous
syndrome

BRAF, MAP2K1/2 (AD)

Follicular hyperkeratosis, sparse, slow-­growing, curly
hair, ulerythema ophryogenes, melanocytic nevi,
infantile hemangiomas, distinctive craniofacial
features, cardiac anomalies, psychomotor delay, failure
to thrive, and skin abnormalities

Gene panel for RASopathies

Constitutional
mismatch repair
deficiency syndrome

MLH1, MSH2, MSH6,
PMS2, EPCAM (AR)

Adenomatous colonic polyps, multiple malignancies
including colonic adenocarcinoma, glioblastoma,
medulloblastoma, lymphoma, and a positive family
history of Lynch syndrome–associated malignancies on
both sides of the family

Gene panel for Lynch
syndrome genes

Multiple café-­au-­lait
spots

N/A (AD)

Six or more CALMs in multiple generations without NF1-­ No genetic testing available
associated features

Familial progressive
hyperpigmentation
and
hypopigmentation
syndrome

KITLG (AR)

Progressive, diffuse, partly blotchy, hyperpigmented
lesions with scattered hypopigmented spots and
lentigines

KITLG gene testing

Fanconi anemia

FANCA and other genes
(AR)

Faint, ill-­defined CALMs “shadow spots,”
hypopigmented macules, skinfold freckle-­like
macules, progressive bone marrow failure, short
stature, hypogonadism, thumb or other radial ray
abnormalities, and skeletal malformations

DNA breakage studies
Gene panel for bone marrow
failure syndromes

Legius syndrome

SPRED1 (AD)

Six or more CALMs, intertriginous freckling, lipomas,
macrocephaly, and learning disabilities

SPRED1 gene testing

Noonan syndrome
with lentigines

PTPN11 (AD)

Small brown lentigines, café noir spots, CALMs,
dysmorphic facial features, obstructive
cardiomyopathy, pulmonary stenosis, growth
abnormalities, and sensorineural hearing loss

PTPN11 gene testing

McCune-­Albright
syndrome

GNAS (sporadic)

Coast of Maine CALMs associated with the lines of
Blaschko, fibrous dysplasia, and endocrinopathies

GNAS gene testing from
affected tissue (not blood)

Neurofibromatosis
type 1

NF1 (AD)

Six or more CALMs, skinfold freckling, neurofibromas,
plexiform neurofibromas, Lisch nodules, optic gliomas,
skeletal dysplasia, macrocephaly, nevus anemicus, and
juvenile xanthogranuloma

NF1 gene testing (DNA) ± RNA
sequencing

Neurofibromatosis
type 2

NF2 (AD)

Schwannomas, cutaneous plaques with hypertrichosis,
light irregularly bordered CALMs, subcutaneous
nodular tumors, peripheral neuropathy, and
ophthalmologic lesions

NF2 gene testing (DNA) ± RNA
sequencing

Noonan syndrome

PTPN11, SOS2, and other
genes (AD)

Skin hyperlaxity, easy bruising, keratosis pilaris, temporal
alopecia, distinctive facial features, developmental
delay, learning difficulties, short stature, congenital
heart disease, renal anomalies, lymphatic
malformations

Gene panel for RASopathies

Piebaldism

KIT (AD)

Hypopigmented patches of skin and hair,
hyperpigmentation of skin, CALMs, and axillary/
inguinal freckling

KIT gene testing

PTEN hamartoma
tumor syndrome

PTEN (AD)

Hamartomas, trichilemmomas, papillomatous papule,
acral and plantar keratoses, lipomas, autism spectrum
disorder, and macrocephaly

PTEN gene testing

Ring chromosome
syndrome 7, 11, 12,
15, and 17

Sporadic

Depends on which chromosome but may include
CALMs, nevus flammeus, dark pigmented nevi, patchy
hypopigmented areas, microcephaly, mental delay,
short stature, and skeletal abnormalities

Karyotype

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 694 u Hypopigmented Lesions
Table 693.2

4071

Conditions Featuring Café au Lait Macules—cont’d
ADDITIONAL TESTING TO
CONSIDER

CONDITION

GENE (INHERITANCE)

ASSOCIATED FEATURES*

RSS

11p15 locus
Chromosome 7 (sporadic)
CDKN1C, IGF2, PLAGL2,
HMGA2 (AD)

Growth restriction, relative macrocephaly, craniofacial
abnormalities, mild cognitive impairment, and delay

Tuberous sclerosis

TSC1, TSC2 (AD)

Facial angiofibromas, ash leaf macules, thumbprintTSC1 and TSC2 gene testing
like macules, confetti-­like skin lesions, shagreen
patch, Koenen tumors, hamartomas, multisystem
lymphangioleiomyomatosis, epilepsy, cognitive deficits

Molecular and methylation
testing of 11p15 and
uniparental disomy 7 ± RSS
gene panel testing

* All disorders listed have had multiple CALMs associated with them.
AD, Autosomal dominant; AFP, alpha fetoprotein; AR, autosomal recessive; ATM, ataxia telangiectasia variant gene; BRAF, B-­RAF proto-­oncogene; CDKN1C, cyclin-­dependent kinase
inhibitor 1C; EPCAM, epithelial cell adhesion molecule; FANCA, FA complementation group A; GNAS, GNAS complex locus; HMGA2, high mobility group AT-­hook 2; IFG2, insulin-­
like growth factor 2; KIT, KIT proto-­oncogene receptor tyrosine kinase; KITLG, KIT ligand; MAP2K1/2; mitogen-­activated protein kinase 1, MLH1; MutL, Escherichia coli homolog
of 1; MSH2; MutS, E. coli homolog of 2; MSH6, MutS , E. coli homolog of 6; NF1, neurofibromin 1; NF2, neurofibromin 2; PLAGL2, PLAG1-­like zinc finger 2; PTEN, phosphate and
tensin homolog; PMS2, postmeiotic segregation increased Saccharomyces cerevisiae 2; PTPN11, protein tyrosine phosphatase nonreceptor type 11; RSS, Russel-­Silver syndrome;
SPRED 1, sprouty-­related EVH1 domain-­containing protein 1; SOS2, SOS RAS/RAC guanine nucleotide exchange factor 2; TSC1, TSC1 gene; TSC2, TSC2 gene.
From Albaghdadi M, Thibodeau ML, Lara-­Corrales I. Updated approach to patients with multiple café au lait macules. Dermatol Clin. 2022;40:9–23, Table 2.

Chapter 694

Hypopigmented Lesions
Joel C. Joyce
ALBINISM

Congenital oculocutaneous albinism (OCA) consists of partial or
complete failure of melanin production in the skin, hair, and eyes
despite the presence of normal number, structure, and distribution
of melanocytes. These disorders are autosomal recessive in inheritance and result from pathogenic variants in genes related to melanin synthesis or the transport and storage of melanin within cells
(Table 694.1). Tyrosinase is the copper-­containing enzyme that catalyzes multiple steps in melanin biosynthesis (see Chapter 105.2),
and gene variants resulting in abnormal function of tyrosinase and
associated transporter proteins result in various OCA phenotypes.
Gene variants resulting in abnormal structure and function of several cellular organelles may result in OCA with other extracutaneous complications.

Oculocutaneous Albinism with Abnormal Melanin
Production

Oculocutaneous albinism type 1 (OCA1) is characterized by great
reduction in or absence of tyrosinase activity caused by pathogenic
gene variants in TYR. OCA1-­A, the most severe form, is characterized by a lack of visible pigment in hair, skin, and eyes (Fig. 694.1).
This manifests as photophobia, nystagmus, defective visual acuity,
white hair, and white skin. The irises are blue-­gray in oblique light
and prominent pink in reflected light. OCA1-­B, or yellow albinism,
manifests at birth as white hair, pink skin, and gray eyes. This type
is particularly prevalent in Amish communities. Progressively the
hair becomes yellow-­red, the skin tans lightly on exposure to the
sun, and the irises may accumulate some brown pigment, with a
resultant improvement in visual acuity. Photophobia and nystagmus are present but mild. OCA-­TS is a temperature-­sensitive type
of albinism. The abnormal tyrosinase has decreased activity at
35–37°C (95–98.6°F). Therefore cooler regions of the body such as
the limbs and head pigment to some degree, whereas other areas
remain depigmented.

Oculocutaneous albinism type 2 (OCA2) ranges from nearly
normal to closely resembling type 1 albinism. This is the most
common form of albinism seen worldwide. Little or no melanin is
present at birth, but pigment, particularly red-­yellow pigment, may
accumulate during childhood to produce straw-­colored or light
brown skin in White individuals. Pigmented nevi may develop. Progressive improvement in visual acuity and nystagmus occurs with
aging. Black individuals may have yellow-­brown skin, dark-­brown
freckles in sun-­exposed areas, and brown coloration of the irises.
Brown OCA is an allelic variant of OCA2. Prader-­Willi and Angelman syndromes, which include hypopigmentation, have deletions
that include the gene (OCA2) involved in OCA2.
Oculocutaneous albinism type 3 (OCA3), also known as rufous
albinism, is seen predominantly in patients of African descent. It
is characterized by red hair, reddish-­brown skin, pigmented nevi,
freckles, reddish-­brown to brown eyes, nystagmus, photophobia, and
decreased visual acuity. Vision abnormalities tend to be milder than in
other forms of OCA. Abnormal gene variants in TYRP1 are typically
associated with development of OCA3.
Oculocutaneous albinism type 4 (OCA4) is a rare OCA with clinical findings similar to those in OCA2. Gene variants in SLC45A2 are
known to cause OCA4.
Additional rare variants of OCA exist that may present with similar
clinical features to those noted earlier. See Table 694.1.
Cross-­McKusick-­Breen syndrome consists of tyrosinase-­positive
albinism with ocular abnormalities, cognitive impairment, spasticity,
and athetosis. The genetic defect is unidentified.
Because of the absence of normal protection by adequate amounts of
epidermal melanin, persons with albinism are predisposed to development of actinic keratoses and cutaneous carcinoma secondary to skin
damage by ultraviolet light. Protective clothing and a broad-­spectrum
sunscreen (see Chapter 697) should be worn during exposure to
sunlight.

Oculocutaneous Albinism with Organelle Dysfunction

Hermansky-­Pudlak syndrome is a collection of autosomal recessive genetic disorders characterized by OCA, ceroid accumulation in lysosomes, and platelet dysfunction, resulting in prolonged
bleeding time (Table 694.2). Ceroid accumulation over time can
cause damage to the lung, kidneys, and gastrointestinal tract, with
risk of development of granulomatous colitis and/or pulmonary
fibrosis. Abnormalities in the development of platelet-­dense granules lead to platelet dysfunction.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 694 u Hypopigmented Lesions
Table 693.2

4071

Conditions Featuring Café au Lait Macules—cont’d
ADDITIONAL TESTING TO
CONSIDER

CONDITION

GENE (INHERITANCE)

ASSOCIATED FEATURES*

RSS

11p15 locus
Chromosome 7 (sporadic)
CDKN1C, IGF2, PLAGL2,
HMGA2 (AD)

Growth restriction, relative macrocephaly, craniofacial
abnormalities, mild cognitive impairment, and delay

Tuberous sclerosis

TSC1, TSC2 (AD)

Facial angiofibromas, ash leaf macules, thumbprintTSC1 and TSC2 gene testing
like macules, confetti-­like skin lesions, shagreen
patch, Koenen tumors, hamartomas, multisystem
lymphangioleiomyomatosis, epilepsy, cognitive deficits

Molecular and methylation
testing of 11p15 and
uniparental disomy 7 ± RSS
gene panel testing

* All disorders listed have had multiple CALMs associated with them.
AD, Autosomal dominant; AFP, alpha fetoprotein; AR, autosomal recessive; ATM, ataxia telangiectasia variant gene; BRAF, B-­RAF proto-­oncogene; CDKN1C, cyclin-­dependent kinase
inhibitor 1C; EPCAM, epithelial cell adhesion molecule; FANCA, FA complementation group A; GNAS, GNAS complex locus; HMGA2, high mobility group AT-­hook 2; IFG2, insulin-­
like growth factor 2; KIT, KIT proto-­oncogene receptor tyrosine kinase; KITLG, KIT ligand; MAP2K1/2; mitogen-­activated protein kinase 1, MLH1; MutL, Escherichia coli homolog
of 1; MSH2; MutS, E. coli homolog of 2; MSH6, MutS , E. coli homolog of 6; NF1, neurofibromin 1; NF2, neurofibromin 2; PLAGL2, PLAG1-­like zinc finger 2; PTEN, phosphate and
tensin homolog; PMS2, postmeiotic segregation increased Saccharomyces cerevisiae 2; PTPN11, protein tyrosine phosphatase nonreceptor type 11; RSS, Russel-­Silver syndrome;
SPRED 1, sprouty-­related EVH1 domain-­containing protein 1; SOS2, SOS RAS/RAC guanine nucleotide exchange factor 2; TSC1, TSC1 gene; TSC2, TSC2 gene.
From Albaghdadi M, Thibodeau ML, Lara-­Corrales I. Updated approach to patients with multiple café au lait macules. Dermatol Clin. 2022;40:9–23, Table 2.

Chapter 694

Hypopigmented Lesions
Joel C. Joyce
ALBINISM

Congenital oculocutaneous albinism (OCA) consists of partial or
complete failure of melanin production in the skin, hair, and eyes
despite the presence of normal number, structure, and distribution
of melanocytes. These disorders are autosomal recessive in inheritance and result from pathogenic variants in genes related to melanin synthesis or the transport and storage of melanin within cells
(Table 694.1). Tyrosinase is the copper-­containing enzyme that catalyzes multiple steps in melanin biosynthesis (see Chapter 105.2),
and gene variants resulting in abnormal function of tyrosinase and
associated transporter proteins result in various OCA phenotypes.
Gene variants resulting in abnormal structure and function of several cellular organelles may result in OCA with other extracutaneous complications.

Oculocutaneous Albinism with Abnormal Melanin
Production

Oculocutaneous albinism type 1 (OCA1) is characterized by great
reduction in or absence of tyrosinase activity caused by pathogenic
gene variants in TYR. OCA1-­A, the most severe form, is characterized by a lack of visible pigment in hair, skin, and eyes (Fig. 694.1).
This manifests as photophobia, nystagmus, defective visual acuity,
white hair, and white skin. The irises are blue-­gray in oblique light
and prominent pink in reflected light. OCA1-­B, or yellow albinism,
manifests at birth as white hair, pink skin, and gray eyes. This type
is particularly prevalent in Amish communities. Progressively the
hair becomes yellow-­red, the skin tans lightly on exposure to the
sun, and the irises may accumulate some brown pigment, with a
resultant improvement in visual acuity. Photophobia and nystagmus are present but mild. OCA-­TS is a temperature-­sensitive type
of albinism. The abnormal tyrosinase has decreased activity at
35–37°C (95–98.6°F). Therefore cooler regions of the body such as
the limbs and head pigment to some degree, whereas other areas
remain depigmented.

Oculocutaneous albinism type 2 (OCA2) ranges from nearly
normal to closely resembling type 1 albinism. This is the most
common form of albinism seen worldwide. Little or no melanin is
present at birth, but pigment, particularly red-­yellow pigment, may
accumulate during childhood to produce straw-­colored or light
brown skin in White individuals. Pigmented nevi may develop. Progressive improvement in visual acuity and nystagmus occurs with
aging. Black individuals may have yellow-­brown skin, dark-­brown
freckles in sun-­exposed areas, and brown coloration of the irises.
Brown OCA is an allelic variant of OCA2. Prader-­Willi and Angelman syndromes, which include hypopigmentation, have deletions
that include the gene (OCA2) involved in OCA2.
Oculocutaneous albinism type 3 (OCA3), also known as rufous
albinism, is seen predominantly in patients of African descent. It
is characterized by red hair, reddish-­brown skin, pigmented nevi,
freckles, reddish-­brown to brown eyes, nystagmus, photophobia, and
decreased visual acuity. Vision abnormalities tend to be milder than in
other forms of OCA. Abnormal gene variants in TYRP1 are typically
associated with development of OCA3.
Oculocutaneous albinism type 4 (OCA4) is a rare OCA with clinical findings similar to those in OCA2. Gene variants in SLC45A2 are
known to cause OCA4.
Additional rare variants of OCA exist that may present with similar
clinical features to those noted earlier. See Table 694.1.
Cross-­McKusick-­Breen syndrome consists of tyrosinase-­positive
albinism with ocular abnormalities, cognitive impairment, spasticity,
and athetosis. The genetic defect is unidentified.
Because of the absence of normal protection by adequate amounts of
epidermal melanin, persons with albinism are predisposed to development of actinic keratoses and cutaneous carcinoma secondary to skin
damage by ultraviolet light. Protective clothing and a broad-­spectrum
sunscreen (see Chapter 697) should be worn during exposure to
sunlight.

Oculocutaneous Albinism with Organelle Dysfunction

Hermansky-­Pudlak syndrome is a collection of autosomal recessive genetic disorders characterized by OCA, ceroid accumulation in lysosomes, and platelet dysfunction, resulting in prolonged
bleeding time (Table 694.2). Ceroid accumulation over time can
cause damage to the lung, kidneys, and gastrointestinal tract, with
risk of development of granulomatous colitis and/or pulmonary
fibrosis. Abnormalities in the development of platelet-­dense granules lead to platelet dysfunction.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 694.1  Forms of Oculocutaneous Albinism
4072
Part XXIX u The Skin
TYPE

PERCENTAGE
OF PATIENTS
WORLDWIDE

OCA1A

50%

GENETIC VARIANT

FUNCTION OF AFFECTED GENE

COMMENTS

TYR (absence) =
tyrosinase negative

Rate-­limiting steps in melanin formation;
hydroxylates L-­tyrosine to L-­DOPA and
L-­DOPA to DOPA-­quinone

1:40,000; most severe cutaneous and
ocular defects; highest risk of skin
cancer; most common type in Whites

OCA1B

TYR (decreased)

Critical enzyme in melanin formation

Subtypes: yellow (yellow hair); platinum
(metallic tinge); minimal pigment (only
eyes darken)

OCA1-­TS

TYR (variant site
functions at higher
temperatures)

Temperature sensitive

Melanin at cooler sites (arms, legs)
Occurs in Siamese cats
1:36,000 (Whites); TYR-­positive; includes
brown albinism (1:3,900-­1:10,000; most
common form in patients of African
origin; more pigment with advancing
age); also includes red OCA2 with
concomitant MC1R pathogenic variant
and red hair

OCA2

30%

P protein

Transmembrane protein that is key for
melanosome biogenesis and normal
processing and transport of TYR
and TRYP1

OCA3
(Rufous)

3%

TRYP1

Catalyzes oxidation of 5,6-­dihydroxyindole-­ 1:8,500 Africans; reddish-­bronze color to
2-­carboxylic acid monomers into melanin
skin and hair
and stabilizes TYR so it can leave
endoplasmic reticulum for incorporation
into melanosomes

OCA4

17%

MATP/SLC45A2

Membrane transporter in melanosomes
and regulates pH

Rare (Whites); 27% of OCA in Japan;
resembles OCA2

OCA5

Unknown (4q24)

—

One Pakistani family

OCA6

SLC24A5

Na+/K+/Ca+ + solute carrier protein
involved in melanosome maturation and
melanin biosynthesis

Heterogeneous extent of pigmentation

OCA7

LRMDA

Melanocyte differentiation

Rare; skin color lighter only when
compared with relatives

LRMDA, Leucine-­rich melanocyte differentiation associated protein; MATP, membrane-­associated transporter protein; OCA, oculocutaneous albinism; P protein, pink-­eyed dilution
protein; TS, temperature sensitive; TYR, tyrosinase; TRYP1, tyrosinase-­related protein 1.
From Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Table 11.1, p. 291.

Chédiak-­Higashi syndrome (see Chapter 170) is another genetic
abnormality associated with dysfunction of lysosome-­related organelles. Patients with Chédiak-­
Higashi syndrome have hypopigmentation of the skin, eyes, and hair; prolonged bleeding times and easy
bruising; recurrent infections; abnormal natural killer cell function;
and peripheral neuropathy. Chédiak-­Higashi syndrome is caused by
pathogenic gene variants in the CHS1/LYST gene, which is a lysosomal
trafficking regulatory gene.

MELANOBLAST MIGRATION ABNORMALITIES
Piebaldism

A congenital autosomal dominant disorder, piebaldism is characterized by sharply demarcated amelanotic patches that occur most frequently on the forehead, anterior scalp (producing a white forelock),
ventral trunk, elbows, and knees. Islands of normal or darker-­than-­
normal pigmentation may be present within the amelanotic areas (Fig.
694.2). The plaques are a result of a permanent localized absence of
melanocytes as a result of a defect in the KIT protooncogene, which
encodes the cell surface receptor transmembrane tyrosine kinase. The
pattern of depigmentation arises from defective melanoblast migration
from the neural crest during development. The reason that piebaldism is a localized and not a generalized process remains unknown. Piebaldism must be differentiated from vitiligo, which may be progressive
and is not usually congenital, nevus depigmentosus, and Waardenburg
syndrome.

Waardenburg Syndrome

Fig. 694.1 White hair and skin in oculocutaneous albinism type 1
(OCA1).

Waardenburg syndrome also manifests at birth as localized areas of
depigmented skin and hair. There are four main types of Waardenburg syndrome with additional subtypes identified. The hallmark of
Waardenburg type 1 (WS1) is the white forelock, which is seen in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 694 u Hypopigmented Lesions

4073

Table 694.2  Clinical Features of Hermansky-­Pudlak Syndrome
TYPE

PATHOGENIC VARIANT

UNDERLYING CAUSE

FINDINGS ASSOCIATED WITH THE
CUTANEOUS PIGMENT DILUTION

HPS-­1
HPS-­4

HPS1 (82% of HPS in Puerto
Ricans; 37% in non–Puerto
Ricans)
HPS4

BLOC-­3 deficiency: HPS1 and HPS4 associate
in a complex (BLOC-­3) that regulates
biogenesis of melanosomes, platelet-­dense
bodies, and the lung lamellar body

Nystagmus, decreased visual acuity; prolonged
bleeding; pulmonary fibrosis (typical onset in
young adults); granulomatous colitis (up to
one third of patients)

HPS-­2
HPS-­10

AP3B1 (∼10% of non–Puerto
Ricans) and AP3D1 (rare)

AP-­3 deficiency: AP3B1 and APSD1 encode
subunits of AP-­3, which mediates protein
trafficking into transport vesicles of the
lysosome (and is thus also involved in
immune function)

Nystagmus, decreased visual acuity; prolonged
bleeding; congenital neutropenia and
impaired NK cell cytotoxicity; recurrent
bacterial and viral infections; conductive
hearing loss; fibrosing lung disease (30–50%)
beginning during childhood; seizures in
HPS-­10

HPS-­3
HPS-­5
HPS-­6

HPS3 (∼20% in Puerto Ricans and
∼12% in non–Puerto Ricans)
HPS5 (∼9% in non–Puerto Ricans)
HPS6 (∼16% in non–Puerto Ricans)

BLOC-­2 deficiency: HPS3, HPS5, and HPS6
are associated in a complex (BLOC-­2) that
localizes tyrosinase and TRYP1, allowing
them to function normally

Nystagmus, decreased visual acuity; mild
extraocular manifestations (bleeding, skin
pigmentation)

HPS-­7
HPS-­8
HPS-­9

DTNBP1
BLOC1S3
BLOC1S6/PLDN

BLOC-­1 deficiency: Dysbindin, BLOC1S3, and
BLOC1S6 are subunits of BLOC-­1 and also
involved in skin melanosome biogenesis
and platelet function

Nystagmus, decreased visual acuity;
prolonged bleeding (may not be a feature
with BLOC1S6 pathogenic variant)

BLOC, Biogenesis of lysosome-­related organelles complex; DTNBP1, dystrobrevin binding protein 1; HPS, Hermansky-­Pudlak syndrome.
From Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Table 11.2, p. 295.

Hypomelanosis of Ito

Fig. 694.2 Depigmented macule with islands of hyperpigmentation
in piebaldism.

20–60% of patients. Only 15% of patients have areas of depigmented
skin. Deafness occurs in 9–37%, heterochromia irides in 20%, and
unibrow (synophrys) in 17–69% of those affected. Dystopia canthorum (i.e., telecanthus) is seen in all patients with WS1. Waardenburg type 2 is similar to type 1, except that patients with type 2 lack
dystopia canthorum, but they also have a higher incidence of deafness. Waardenburg type 3 is similar to WS1, except that patients
also have limb abnormalities. It is also called Klein-­Waardenburg
syndrome. Waardenburg type 4 is also called Shah-­Waardenburg
syndrome. Patients with this type all have Hirschsprung disease. Dystopia canthorum is seldom seen in these patients. Multiple pathogenic variants in multiple genes have been identified as
causative of the various types of Waardenburg syndrome (Table
694.3).

Tuberous Sclerosis Complex (TSC1, TSC2 Genes)
See Chapter 636.2 for a discussion of this complex.

Hypomelanosis of Ito is a rare congenital skin disorder affecting children that can have associated defects in several organ systems. There
is no evidence for genetic transmission; chromosomal mosaicism and
chromosomal translocations have been reported. Hypomelanosis of Ito
is a descriptive diagnosis. Blaschkoid or mosaic hypomelanosis may
be better descriptive terms. It is also known as incontinentia pigmenti
achromians.
The skin lesions of hypomelanosis of Ito are generally present at birth
but may be acquired in the first 2 years of life. The lesions are similar to
a negative image of those present in incontinentia pigmenti, consisting
of patterned, hypopigmented macules arranged over the body surface
in sharply demarcated whorls, streaks, and patches that follow the lines
of Blaschko (Fig. 694.3). The palms, soles, and mucous membranes are
spared. The hypopigmentation remains unchanged throughout childhood but fades during adulthood. The degree of depigmentation varies
from hypopigmented to achromic. Neither inflammatory nor vesicular lesions precede the development of the pigmentary changes as in
incontinentia pigmenti. The hypopigmented areas demonstrate fewer
and smaller melanocytes and a decreased number of melanin granules
in the basal cell layer than normal. Inflammatory cells and pigment
incontinence are lacking.
The majority of patients with hypomelanosis of Ito have no associated abnormalities, but involvement of other organ systems can rarely
occur. The most commonly associated abnormalities involve the nervous system, including intellectual disability (70%), seizures (40%),
microcephaly (25%), and muscular hypotonia (15%). The musculoskeletal system is the second most frequently involved system, affected
by scoliosis and thoracic and limb deformities. Minor ophthalmologic
defects (strabismus, nystagmus) are present in 25% of patients, and
10% have cardiac defects. These frequencies are likely to be overestimated because patients with isolated skin disease often do not seek further evaluation. The differential diagnosis includes systematized nevus
depigmentosus, which is a stable leukoderma not associated with systemic manifestations. Differentiation from incontinentia pigmenti,
particularly the hypopigmented fourth stage, is critical for genetic
counseling because incontinentia pigmenti, unlike hypomelanosis of
Ito, is inherited.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4074 Part XXIX u The Skin
Table 694.3  Subtypes of Waardenburg Syndrome
DISORDER

INHERITANCE

GENE(S)

OTHER COMMENTS

WS1

AD

PAX3

Most common form; dystopia canthorum

WS2

AD

MITF, SOX10, SLUG, KITLG, KIT

No facial dysmorphism; high risk of hearing
loss; iris heterochromia

WS3

AD/AR

PAX3

Associated limb abnormalities

WS4A

AD/AR

EDNRB

Aganglionic megacolon

WS4B

AD/AR

EDN3

Aganglionic megacolon

WS4C

AD

SOX10

Aganglionic megacolon

PCWH

AD

SOX10

Severe hypotonicity with central nervous
system and peripheral nerve abnormalities

AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; EDN, endothelin; EDNRB, endothelin receptor beta; PCWH, peripheral demyelinating neuropathy, central dysmyelination,
Waardenburg syndrome, and Hirschsprung disease.
From Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Table 11.4, p. 298.

Table 694.4  Vitiligo Subgroups

Fig. 694.3 Marbled hypopigmented streaks on the abdomen in
hypomelanosis of Ito.

Vitiligo
Epidemiology and Etiology

Vitiligo is an acquired macular depigmentation disorder associated
with the destruction of melanocytes. The disorder represents a clinical end-­point resulting from a complex interaction of environmental,
genetic, and immunologic factors. Autoimmune, genetic, autocytotoxic, and neural theories have been postulated. The prevalence is 0.5–
2% of most populations.
There is an autoimmune component to vitiligo. Eighty percent of
patients with active disease have anti-­melanocyte antibodies to one
of several antigens on melanocytes. These antibodies appear to be
cytotoxic for melanocytes. There is also a correlation between disease
activity and the titer of serum anti-­melanocyte antibody. Melanocyte-­
specific CD8+ T lymphocytes are also involved in the pathogenesis of
vitiligo. These antibodies and T cells recognize a variety of melanocyte
enzymatic and structural proteins.
The genetic epidemiology of vitiligo is part of a broader genetically
determined autoimmune and autoinflammatory diathesis. Between
15 and 20% of patients with generalized vitiligo have one or more
affected first-­degree relatives. In these families the genetic pattern
is suggestive of polygenic, multifactorial inheritance. In the other
patients, the disease occurs sporadically. Genome-­wide association
studies in patients with vitiligo have identified a substantial number of associated genes, of which consistent association is seen with
DDR1, XBP1, NLRP1, PTPN22, and COMT, although many other
genes have been implicated.

DERMATOMAL OR
SEGMENTAL

NONDERMATOMAL OR
NONSEGMENTAL

Onset in childhood

Can begin in childhood; 50%
before 20 yr of age

Less common

More common

Rapid onset; stabilizes in ∼1 yr

Progressive, with flare-­ups; lifelong

Involves hair after onset

Involves hair in later stages

Autoimmune diseases
uncommon

Personal or family history of
autoimmunity* common

Often occurs on the face or
upper extremities

Occurs at sites sensitive to
pressure, friction, or trauma;
Koebner phenomenon

Responsive to autologous
grafting, with repigmentation

Relapses after autologous grafting

Difficult to distinguish from
nevus depigmentosus

Associated with halo nevus
formation

*Autoimmune thyroid diseases, type 1 diabetes, psoriasis, pernicious anemia, systemic
lupus erythematosus, Addison disease, alopecia areata.

Fig. 694.4 Sharply demarcated, symmetric, depigmented areas of vitiligo.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 694 u Hypopigmented Lesions

A

C

E

B

D

F

4075

Fig. 694.5 Koebner phenomenon in relation to daily living activities. A and B, Eye rubbing. C and D, Underwear print. E and F, Shoe print. (From
Ezzedine K, Eleftheriadou V, Whitton M, van Geel N. Vitiligo. Lancet. 2015;386:74–82, Fig. 5.)

Many authorities believe that the cause of melanocyte destruction
in vitiligo is an interferon gamma–based immune destruction and
melanocyte apoptosis. It has also been suggested that melanocytes are
destroyed because of the accumulation of a toxic melanin synthesis
intermediate and/or lack of protection from hydrogen peroxide and
other oxygen radicals. There is in vitro evidence that some of these
metabolites may be lethal to melanocytes.

Clinical Manifestations

There are two subtypes of vitiligo, generalized (nonsegmental) and
segmental, which likely are distinctly different diseases (Table 694.4).
Generalized vitiligo (85–90% of cases) may be divided into widespread
(type A) and localized (type B). Approximately 50% of all patients
with vitiligo have onset before 18 years of age, and 25% demonstrate
depigmentation before age 8 years. Most children have the generalized
form, but the segmental type is more common among children than
among adults. Patients with the generalized form usually present with
a remarkably symmetric pattern of white macules and patches (Fig.
694.4); the margins may be somewhat hyperpigmented. The patches
tend to be acral and/or periorificial. Occasionally, almost the entire
skin surface becomes depigmented. Vitiligo lesions may develop in
areas of traumatized skin (Koebner phenomenon) (Fig. 694.5).
There are several varieties of localized vitiligo. One form is halo nevus
phenomenon, whereby benign moles develop depigmented rings at the
periphery (see Chapter 692). Premature graying of scalp hair (canities)
has also been considered a form of localized vitiligo. In segmental vitiligo, depigmented areas are typically limited to a dermatomal distribution. This type of vitiligo has a rapid onset and progression in a localized
area without the development of depigmentation in other areas.
A number of autoimmune diseases occur in up to 20% of patients
with vitiligo, including Addison disease, Hashimoto thyroiditis, pernicious anemia, diabetes mellitus, hypoparathyroidism, and polyglandular

autoimmune syndrome with selective immunoglobulin A deficiency. In
addition, other diseases with possible immune defects, such as alopecia
areata and morphea, have been seen in patients with vitiligo.
Vogt-­Koyanagi-­Harada syndrome is vitiligo associated with uveitis, dysacusia, meningoencephalitis, and depigmentation of the skin,
scalp hair, eyebrows, and eyelashes. In Alezzandrini syndrome, vitiligo is associated with tapetoretinal degeneration and deafness. It is typically unilateral. Light microscopic examination of early lesions shows
mild inflammatory change. Over time, degenerative changes occur in
melanocytes, leading to their complete disappearance.
The differential diagnosis of vitiligo includes other causes of widespread acquired leukoderma. The two most common alternative diagnoses are pityriasis versicolor and postinflammatory hypopigmentation.

Treatment

Localized areas of vitiligo may respond to a potent topical steroid
(class I or II) and/or topical calcineurin inhibitor (tacrolimus or
pimecrolimus), depending on the location of involvement. Therapy
with Janus kinase inhibitors has been effective in adults with vitiligo.
In patients with more extensive involvement, narrow-­band ultraviolet light B (NBUVB) [UVB311] is the treatment of choice. Treatment
with NBUVB is often undertaken simultaneously with topical therapy.
Systemic therapy and whole-­body depigmentation are rarely used in
children, although systemic corticosteroids can be given to slow the
rate of change in rapidly progressive depigmentation. In all forms of
vitiligo, response to therapy may be slow, taking many months to years.
For those not interested in treatment, cover-­up cosmetics may be used.
All areas of vitiligo are susceptible to sun damage, and care should be
taken to minimize sun exposure of affected areas. Spontaneous remission may be seen in a small percentage of cases.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4076 Part XXIX u The Skin

Chapter 695

Vesiculobullous Disorders
Joel C. Joyce
Many diseases are characterized by vesiculobullous lesions; they vary
considerably in cause, age of onset, and pattern. The morphology and
distribution of the blisters in these blistering disorders often provides
a visual clue to the location of the lesion within the skin. Blisters localized to the epidermal layers are thin-­walled, relatively flaccid, and easily ruptured. Subepidermal blisters are tense, thick-­walled, and more
durable. Biopsies of blisters can be diagnostic because the level of
cleavage within the skin and associated findings, such as the nature
of the inflammatory infiltrate, are characteristic for a particular disorder. Other diagnostic procedures, such as direct immunofluorescence
on affected tissue and indirect immunofluorescence from a patient’s
serum to detect circulating antibodies, can often help to distinguish
vesiculobullous disorders that have nearly identical histopathologic
findings (Table 695.1).

695.1 Erythema Multiforme

targetoid (target-­like, iris, or bull’s-­eye) papules with an erythematous
outer border, an inner pale ring, and a dusky purple to necrotic center
(which sometimes blisters and erodes; Figs. 695.1 and 695.2).
EM is characterized by an abrupt, symmetric cutaneous eruption,
most commonly on the extensor upper extremities; lesions are relatively sparse on the face, trunk, and legs. Lesions can be seen on the
palms and soles. The eruption often appears initially as red macules or
urticarial plaques that evolve and expand centrifugally to form lesions
up to 2 cm in diameter with a dusky to necrotic center. Lesions of a
particular episode typically appear within 72 hours and remain fixed in
place (average duration: 7 days). Oral lesions may occur with a predilection for the vermilion border of the lips and the buccal mucosa, but
other mucosal surfaces are usually spared. EM may manifest initially
as urticaria-­like lesions, but in contrast to urticaria, a given lesion of
EM does not fade within 24 hours. Prodromal symptoms are generally absent. Prognosis is favorable with limited long-­term morbidity.
Lesions typically resolve without sequelae in approximately 2 weeks,
but in darker pigmented individuals, pigmentary alterations at the site
of lesions can be long-­standing. Progression to Stevens-­Johnson syndrome does not occur. Many authors distinguish between EM minor
(mainly cutaneous typical or atypical targetoid lesions affecting <10%
body surface area plus no or limited mucosal involvement, often limited to one site, such as the mouth) and EM major (same cutaneous
involvement pattern as EM minor plus two or more mucosal sites with
more severe oral involvement). EM major and Stevens-­Johnson syndrome are separate entities.

Joel C. Joyce

ETIOLOGY

Among the numerous factors implicated in the etiology of erythema
multiforme (EM), infection with herpes simplex virus (HSV) is the
most common. Other viral infections, as well as vaccinations, have
been implicated as triggers. Infection with Mycoplasma pneumoniae
and other pathogens may produce a similar lesion, particularly in children and young adults; differentiation from Stevens-­Johnson syndrome
and reactive infectious mucocutaneous eruptions (RIMEs; see Chapter
695.2) can be difficult. HSV labialis and, less commonly, HSV genitalis
are implicated in 60–70% of episodes of EM and are believed to trigger
nearly all episodes of recurrent (six or more episodes per year) EM,
frequently in association with sun exposure. HSV antigens and DNA
are present in skin lesions of EM but are absent in nonlesional skin.
The presence of the human leukocyte antigens A33, B62, B35, DQw3
(DQB1*0301 split), and DR53 is associated with an increased risk of
HSV-­induced EM, particularly the recurrent form. Most patients experience a single self-­limited episode of EM. Lesions of HSV-­induced
recurrent EM typically develop 10-­14 days after onset of recurrent HSV
eruptions and have a similar appearance from episode to episode, but
they may vary in frequency and duration in a given patient. Not all episodes of recurrent HSV evolve into EM in susceptible patients.
Drug-­related EM is less common (<10% of patients) and may be
associated with nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents, including
acetaminophen, sulfonamides, and other antibiotics. The differential
diagnosis in drug-­related EM should include severe cutaneous adverse
reactions such as Stevens-­Johnson syndrome (see Chapter 695.3) and
drug hypersensitivity syndrome (sometimes called drug reaction [rash]
with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms [DRESS] or drug-­induced
hypersensitivity syndrome [DIHS]) (see Chapter 686.2).

Fig. 695.1 Early fixed papules with a central dusky zone on the dor-

sum of the hand of a child with erythema multiforme caused by herpes
simplex virus. (From Weston WL, Lane AT, Morelli J. Color Textbook of
Pediatric Dermatology, 3rd ed. St. Louis: Mosby; 2002:156.)

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

EM has numerous morphologic manifestations on the skin, varying
from erythematous macules, papules, vesicles, bullae, or urticarial
plaques to patches of confluent erythema. The eruption appears most
commonly in patients between the ages of 10 and 40 years (with highest
incidence in males in the second decade) and usually is asymptomatic,
although a burning sensation or pruritus may be present. The diagnosis
of EM is established by finding the classic lesion: doughnut-­shaped,

Fig. 695.2 “Target” or “iris” lesions with characteristic central dusky

zone on palms of a child with erythema multiforme caused by herpes
simplex virus. (From Weston WL, Lane AT, Morelli J. Color Textbook of
Pediatric Dermatology, 3rd ed. St. Louis: Mosby; 2002:156.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 695 u Vesiculobullous Disorders

4077

Table 695.1  Sites of Blister Formation and Diagnostic Studies for the Vesiculobullous Disorders
DISORDER

BLISTER CLEAVAGE SITE

DIAGNOSTIC STUDIES

Acrodermatitis enteropathica

IE

Serum zinc level

Bullous impetigo

GL

Smear, culture

Bullous pemphigoid

SE (junctional)

Direct and indirect immunofluorescence

Candidiasis

SC

KOH preparation, culture

Dermatitis herpetiformis

SE

Direct immunofluorescence

Dermatophytosis

IE

KOH preparation, culture

Dyshidrotic eczema

IE

Routine histopathology

EB simplex

IE

Electron microscopy, immunofluorescence
mapping, genetic testing

Junctional EB

SE (junctional)

Electron microscopy, immunofluorescence
mapping, genetic testing

Recessive dystrophic EB

SE

Electron microscopy, immunofluorescence
mapping, genetic testing

Dominant dystrophic EB

SE

Electron microscopy, immunofluorescence
mapping, genetic testing

Epidermolytic ichthyosis

IE

Routine histopathology

Erythema multiforme

SE

Routine histopathology

Erythema toxicum

SC, IE

Smear for eosinophils

Incontinentia pigmenti

IE

Smear for eosinophils
Routine histopathology

Insect bites

IE

Routine histopathology

Kindler syndrome

IE, SE

Electron microscopy, immunofluorescence
mapping, genetic testing

Linear IgA dermatosis

SE

Direct immunofluorescence

Mastocytosis

SE

Routine histopathology

Miliaria crystallina

IC

Routine histopathology

Neonatal pustular melanosis

SC, IE

Smear for neutrophils

Pemphigus foliaceus

GL

Direct and indirect immunofluorescence
studies
Tzanck smear

Pemphigus vulgaris

Suprabasal

Direct and indirect immunofluorescence
studies
Tzanck smear

Scabies

IE

Skin scraping

Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome

GL

Routine histopathology

Toxic epidermal necrolysis

SE

Routine histopathology

Viral blisters

IE

Viral PCR (preferred) or direct
immunofluorescence testing for HSV and
VZV
Routine histopathology

EB, Epidermolysis bullosa; GL, granular layer; HSV, herpes simplex virus; IC, intracorneal; IE, intraepidermal; KOH, potassium hydroxide; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; SC,
subcorneal; SE, subepidermal; VZV, varicella-­zoster virus.

Pathogenesis

The pathogenesis of EM is unclear, but it may be a host-­specific, cell-­
mediated immune response to an antigenic stimulus, resulting in damage to keratinocytes. The HSV Pol1 gene expressed in HSV-­induced
recurrent EM lesions upregulates/activates the transcription factor SP1
and inflammatory cytokines. These cytokines, released by activated
mononuclear cells and keratinocytes, may contribute to epidermal cell
death and constitutional symptoms.

Pathology

Microscopic findings in EM are variable but may aid in diagnosis.
Early lesions typically have slight intercellular edema, rare dyskeratotic keratinocytes, and basal vacuolation in the epidermis, as well as
a perivascular lymphohistiocytic infiltrate with edema in the upper
dermis. More mature lesions demonstrate accentuation of these characteristics and the development of lymphocytic exocytosis, as well
as an intense, perivascular, and interstitial mononuclear infiltrate in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4078 Part XXIX u The Skin
the upper third of the dermis. In severe cases, the entire epidermis
becomes necrotic.

Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis of EM also includes RIME, bullous pemphigoid, pemphigus vulgaris, linear immunoglobulin (Ig) A dermatosis,
graft-­versus-­host disease, fixed-­drug eruption, bullous drug eruption,
urticaria, viral infections such as HSV, reactive arthritis syndromes,
Kawasaki disease, Sweet syndrome, Behçet disease, vasculitis, erythema annulare centrifugum, and polymorphous drug eruption.
EM that primarily involves the oral mucosa may be confused with
Stevens-­Johnson syndrome, bullous pemphigoid, pemphigus vulgaris,
vesiculobullous or erosive lichen planus, Behçet syndrome, recurrent
aphthous stomatitis, and primary herpetic gingivostomatitis. In contrast to EM, Stevens-­Johnson syndrome manifests with erythematous
or purpuric macules (no papules) and usually begins on the trunk.
Serum sickness–like reaction to cefaclor (or other antibiotics) may also
manifest as EM-­like lesions; the lesions may develop a dusky to purple
center, but in most cases, the eruption of cefaclor-­induced serum sickness–like reaction is pruritic, transient, and migratory and is probably
urticarial rather than true EM.

Treatment

Treatment of EM is supportive. If secondary to underlying infection,
the infection should be treated. Topical emollients, systemic antihistamines, and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents do not alter the
course of the disease but may provide symptomatic relief. For individuals with severe mucosal disease, opioids can be used to control
pain, and diligent oral hygiene is essential. No controlled, prospective studies support the use of corticosteroids in the management of
EM. Prophylactic oral acyclovir given for 6 months may be effective in
controlling recurrent episodes of HSV-­associated EM. On discontinuation of acyclovir, both HSV and EM may recur, although episodes
may be less frequent and milder. For recurrent cases not responsive
to antiviral therapy, steroid-­sparing agents used to decrease frequency
of recurrence include azathioprine, mycophenolate mofetil, and dapsone. Appropriate laboratory monitoring is recommended. See Chapter 695.2.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

695.2 Reactive Infectious Mucocutaneous
Eruption
Joel C. Joyce
Originally named Mycoplasma-­induced rash and mucositis (MIRM),
RIME may also be caused by other infectious agents such as Chlamydophila, enterovirus, COVID-­19, and others. It is believed to be a
distinct entity not classified as EM or Stevens-­Johnson syndrome/toxic
epidermal necrosis (SJS/TEN).

A

B

RIME presents 1-­2 weeks after a prodrome characterized by
fever, malaise, headache, and cough or features more characteristic
of a specific infection (pneumonia secondary to M. pneumoniae or
COVID-­19). The dominant feature is severe mucositis (Fig. 695.3,
Table 695.2) most often involving the oral (∼95%), ocular (∼80%),
and urogenital mucosa. Rash may be absent in ∼30%, but when
present is sparse; lesions are vesiculobullous (∼75%) or atypical targeted (∼45%), papules, macules, or morbilliform. Lesions
involve <10% of body surface area but rarely may be extensive in
severe RIME.
The differential diagnosis includes EM, which manifests with an
acral rash that evolves from macules to papules to plaques and target
lesions. In addition, severe RIME may resemble SJS/TEN, which presents with macules, purpura, erythroderma, atypical target lesions, and
extensive blistering.
Treatment includes mouth care and pain management. Azithromycin is used when there is evidence of Mycoplasma infection (positive
PCR plus IgM) or Chlamydophila infection. Steroids have been used,
as has etanercept, for more severe disease. In general, RIME is a self-­
limiting disease that heals without residua. Recurrences are rare.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

695.3 Stevens-­Johnson Syndrome
Joel C. Joyce

ETIOLOGY

Drugs, particularly sulfonamides, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory
agents, antibiotics (particularly β-­lactams), and anticonvulsants, are
the most common precipitants of the blistering drug rashes known
as Stevens-­Johnson syndrome (SJS) and toxic epidermal necrolysis
(TEN). SJS and TEN exist along a spectrum: SJS is defined as affected
body surface area <10%, SJS-­TEN overlap syndrome as affected body
surface area between 10% and 30%, and TEN as affected body surface area >30%. TEN is the most severe disorder in the clinical spectrum of the disease, involving considerable constitutional toxicity and
extensive necrolysis of the mucous membranes and >30% of the body
surface area. Approximately 80% of cases are classified as SJS. In children in the United States, the risk of death is 0.3–1.5%. Human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-­B*1502 and HLA-­B*5801 are implicated in the
development of these two disorders in Han Chinese patients receiving
carbamazepine and in Japanese patients receiving allopurinol, respectively. Current thinking defines most cases of classic SJS as secondary
to medications.

Clinical Manifestations

Cutaneous lesions in SJS generally consist initially of erythematous
macules that rapidly and variably develop central necrosis to form
vesicles, bullae, and areas of denudation on the face, trunk, and
extremities. The Nikolsky sign (denudation of the skin with gentle

C

Fig. 695.3 Manifestations of mycoplasma-­induced rash and mucositis. A, Bilateral conjunctivitis. B, Oral mucositis. C, Cutaneous targetoid vesi-

cles; sutures are visible at sites where skin biopsy sample was taken. (From Sandhu R, Mareddy C, Itskowitz M, et al. Mycoplasma-­induced rash and
mucositis in a young patient with red eyes, oral mucositis, and targetoid cutaneous vesicles. Lancet Infect Dis. 2017;17:562.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 695 u Vesiculobullous Disorders

4079

Table 695.2  Mucocutaneous Lesions of Mycoplasma
pneumoniae–Induced Rash and Mucositis
ORAL
Erosions
Ulcers
Vesiculobullae
Denudation
Hemorrhagic crusting
OCULAR
Conjunctival injection
Conjunctivitis
Photophobia
Eyelid edema
Lid margin ulceration
Conjunctival pseudomembranes
Corneal involvement (rare)

A

UROGENITAL
Erosions
Ulcerations
Vesiculobullae
Oro-­esophageal
Mucositis

B

ANAL
Mucositis
CUTANEOUS
Vesiculobullae
Targetoid
Papules
Macules
Morbilliform
From Ramien ML. Reactive infectious mucocutaneous eruption: Mycoplasma
pneumoniae-­induced rash and mucositis and other parainfectious eruptions. Clin Exper
Dermatol. 2021;46:420–429.

tangential pressure) may be positive. The skin lesions are typically
more widespread than in EM and are accompanied by involvement of two or more mucosal surfaces, namely the eyes, oral cavity, upper airway or esophagus, gastrointestinal tract, or anogenital
mucosa (Fig. 695.4). A burning sensation, edema, and erythema
of the lips and buccal mucosa are often the presenting signs, followed by development of bullae, ulceration, and hemorrhagic crusting. Lesions may be preceded by a flulike upper respiratory illness.
Pain from mucosal ulceration is often severe, but skin tenderness
is minimal to absent in SJS, in contrast to pain in TEN. Corneal
ulceration, anterior uveitis, panophthalmitis, bronchitis, pneumonitis, myocarditis, hepatitis, enterocolitis, polyarthritis, hematuria,
and acute tubular necrosis leading to renal failure may occur. Disseminated cutaneous bullae and erosions may result in increased
insensible fluid loss and a high risk of bacterial superinfection and
sepsis. New lesions occur in crops, and complete healing may take
4-­6 weeks, and ocular scarring, visual impairment, and strictures of
the esophagus, bronchi, vagina, urethra, or anus may remain. Nonspecific laboratory abnormalities in SJS include leukocytosis, elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and, occasionally, increased
liver transaminase levels and decreased serum albumin values.

Pathogenesis

Pathogenesis is related to drug-­specific CD8+ cytotoxic T cells, with
perforin/granzyme B and granulysin triggering keratinocyte apoptosis.
This process is followed by expanded enactment of apoptosis involving
the interaction of soluble Fas ligand with Fas receptor. Consideration
has been given to the role that macrophages/monocytes play in the
development of SJS/TEN via tumor necrosis factor-­α, tumor necrosis
factor–related apoptosis-­inducing ligand (TRAIL), and tumor necrosis
factor–inducer of apoptosis weak (TWEAK) signaling pathways. It is
likely that many affected individuals have yet unrecognized underlying
genetic predispositions.

C
Fig. 695.4 Bullae are present on the conjunctivae (A) and in the

mouth (B) with Stevens-­Johnson syndrome. C, Sloughing, ulceration,
and necrosis in the oral cavity interfere with eating. Genital lesions
cause dysuria and interfere with voiding. (From Habif TP, ed. Clinical
Dermatology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2004:631.)

Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis of SJS includes TEN, urticaria, RIME, DRESS
(sometimes called DIHS; see Chapter 686), other drug eruptions,
and viral exanthems, as well as Kawasaki disease. SJS has rarely been
reported in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus.

Treatment

Management of SJS is supportive and symptomatic. Potentially
offending drugs must be discontinued as soon as possible. Ophthalmologic consultation is mandatory because ocular sequelae such
as corneal scarring can lead to vision loss. Application of cryopreserved amniotic membrane to the ocular surface during the acute
phase of the disease limits the destructive and long-­term sequelae.
Early topical steroid treatment may also reduce ocular sequelae.
Oral lesions should be managed with mouthwashes and glycerin
swabs. Urogenital lesions should be observed closely and treated
to prevent stricture or fusion. Topical (oral) anesthetics (diphenhydramine, dyclonine, viscous lidocaine) may provide relief from
pain, particularly when applied before eating. Denuded skin lesions
can be cleansed with saline or Burrow solution compresses. Treatment may require admission to an intensive care unit, IV fluids,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4080 Part XXIX u The Skin
nutritional support, sheepskin or air-­fluid bedding, daily saline
or Burrow solution compresses, paraffin gauze or colloidal gel
(Hydrogel) dressing of denuded areas, saline compresses on the
eyelids, lips, or nose, analgesics, and urinary catheterization (when
needed). A daily examination for infection and ocular lesions,
which constitute the major cause of long-­term morbidity, is essential. Systemic antibiotics are indicated for documented urinary or
cutaneous infections and for suspected bacteremia (Staphylococcus
aureus or Pseudomonas aeruginosa) because infection is the leading cause of death. Prophylactic systemic antibiotics are not necessary. Systemic antiinflammatory and immunosuppressive therapies
have been controversial. A large systematic review concluded that
patients who received IV immunoglobulin (IVIG) and systemic
corticosteroids had better outcomes than supportive care alone.
Other publications have found that these agents have not improved
outcomes such as decreased time to healing or shortened hospital
stay. Nevertheless, advocates for use remain, and IVIG (1.5-­2.0 g/
kg/day × 3 days) may be considered in early disease. Total dose >2
g/kg has shown improved but not statistically significant outcomes
in children compared with adults. Case reports/series have demonstrated rapid efficacy with cyclosporine (3 mg/kg/day divided twice
daily), as well as with infliximab (5 mg/kg intravenously for one
dose) or with etanercept (0.8 mg/kg injection once and then a second dose 1 week later). Emerging evidence has supported the use of
anti–tumor necrosis factor therapy in the acute setting, particularly
in adults but also in children.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

695.4 Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis

A

B
Fig. 695.5 A, Large sheets of full-­thickness epidermis are shed. B,

Toxic epidermal necrolysis begins with diffuse, hot erythema. In hours
the skin becomes painful, and with slight thumb pressure, the skin
wrinkles, slides laterally, and separates from the dermis (Nikolsky sign).
(From Habif TP, ed. Clinical Dermatology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby;
2004:633.)

Joel C. Joyce

Differential Diagnosis
EPIDEMIOLOGY AND ETIOLOGY

The pathogenesis of toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) is not proven
but may involve a hypersensitivity phenomenon that results in damage primarily to the basal cell layer of the epidermis. Epidermal
damage appears to result from keratinocyte apoptosis. This condition, typically attributed as a drug rash, is triggered by many of the
same factors that are thought to be responsible for SJS (see Chapter
695.3), principally drugs such as the sulfonamides, β-­lactam antibiotics, anticonvulsants, and allopurinol. TEN is defined by (1) widespread blister formation and morbilliform or confluent erythema,
associated with skin tenderness; (2) absence of target lesions; (3)
sudden onset and generalization within 24-­48 hours; and (4) histologic findings of full-­thickness epidermal necrosis and a minimal-­
to-­absent dermal infiltrate. Skin involvement should be 30% or
greater in contrast to SJS (10% or less) or SJS-­TEN overlap (10–
30%). These criteria categorize TEN as a separate entity from EM.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The prodrome consists of fever, malaise, localized skin tenderness,
and diffuse erythema. Inflammation of the eyelids, conjunctivae,
mouth, and genitals may precede skin lesions. Flaccid bullae may
develop, although this is not a prominent feature. Characteristically, full-­thickness epidermis is lost in large sheets (Fig. 695.5). The
Nikolsky sign (denudation of the skin with gentle tangential pressure) is present, but only in the areas of erythema (see Fig. 695.5).
Healing takes place over 14 or more days. Scarring, particularly of
the eyes, may result in corneal opacity. The course may be relentlessly progressive, complicated by severe dehydration, electrolyte
imbalance, shock, and secondary localized infection and septicemia. Loss of nails and hair may also occur. Long-­term morbidity
includes alterations in skin pigmentation, eye problems (lack of
tears, conjunctival scarring, loss of lashes), and strictures of mucosal surfaces.

The differential diagnosis includes staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome, in which the blister cleavage plane is intraepidermal; graft-­
versus-­
host disease; chemical burns; drug eruptions; toxic shock
syndrome; and pemphigus. The use of skin histopathology to differentiate SJS-­TEN from other similar blistering disorders can be difficult,
but early full-­thickness epidermal necrosis tends to portend a worse
clinical prognosis.
Drug hypersensitivity syndrome (sometimes called DRESS or DIHS;
see Chapter 686), is a multisystem reaction that appears approximately
several weeks to 3 months after the start of therapy with the offending
agent. The skin eruption is variable but can be a red-­pink morbilliform
eruption often associated with facial swelling; lymphadenopathy; fever;
hepatic, renal, and pulmonary disease; eosinophilia; atypical lymphocytosis; and leukocytosis.

TREATMENT

Appreciation of the specific etiologic factor is crucial in the treatment of
TEN. Because most cases are drug-­induced, cessation of the offending
agent as soon as possible is critical. Management is similar to that for
severe burns and may be best accomplished in a burn unit (see Chapter 89). It may include strict reverse isolation, meticulous fluid and
electrolyte therapy, use of an air-­fluid bed, and daily cultures. Systemic
antibiotic therapy is indicated when secondary infection is evident or
suspected. Skin care consists of cleansing with isotonic saline or Burrow solution. Biologic or colloid gel (Hydrogel) dressings alleviate pain
and reduce fluid loss. Opiates are often required for pain relief. Mouth
and eye care, as for EM major and SJS, may be necessary. Similar considerations as in the treatment of SJS (see Chapter 695.3) with systemic
agents may be considered, although controversies remain over relative
efficacy and best treatment regimens.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 695 u Vesiculobullous Disorders

695.5 Mechanobullous Disorders
Joel C. Joyce

EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA

Diseases categorized under the general term epidermolysis bullosa (EB) are a heterogeneous group of congenital, genetic blistering disorders. They differ in severity and prognosis, clinical and
histologic features, and inheritance patterns but are all characterized by induction of blisters by trauma and exacerbation of blistering in warm weather. The disorders can be categorized under
three major headings with multiple subgroupings: epidermolysis
bullosa simplex (EBS), junctional epidermolysis bullosa (JEB),
and dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (DEB) (Tables 695.3-­695.8).
Kindler syndrome, which includes poikiloderma and photosensitivity, as well as easy blistering, is also considered a separate form
of EB. Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita is an autoimmune disorder
producing antibodies to the α chain of type VII collagen. It is rare
in children. It is often acquired secondary to other autoimmune diseases or malignancy but has rare congenital forms. Affected mothers may pass the autoantibody to the fetus, resulting in similar but
transient lesions in the newborn.

EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA SIMPLEX

EBS is a nonscarring, autosomal dominant or recessive disorder.
The defect in most common types of EBS is in keratin 5 or 14, which
makes up intermediate filaments of the basal keratinocytes (see
Table 695.6). The intraepidermal bullae result from cytolysis of the

Table 695.3  Epidermolysis Bullosa Simplex (EBS) Clinical
Subtypes

basal cells. There are multiple other rare variants with defects that
also result in intraepidermal blistering (see Table 695.3).
Localized EBS (formerly Weber-­C ockayne disease) predominantly affects the hands and feet and often manifests when a child
begins to walk; onset may be delayed until puberty or early adulthood, when heavy shoes are worn or the feet are subjected to
increased trauma. Bullae are usually restricted to the hands and feet
(Fig. 695.6); rarely, they occur elsewhere, such as the dorsal aspect
of the arms and the shins. The disorder ranges from mildly incapacitating to crippling at times, with severe exacerbations. Blisters
should be drained by puncturing, but the blister top should be left
intact to protect the underlying skin. Erosions may be covered with
a semipermeable dressing. Diligent wound care and protection of
areas subject to pressure are beneficial. Observation for infection is
important and should be treated promptly.
In intermediate EBS (formerly Koebner type), blisters are usually
present at birth or during the neonatal period. Sites of predilection
are the hands, feet, elbows, knees, legs, and scalp. Intraoral lesions are
minimal, nails rarely become dystrophic and usually regrow even when
they are shed, and dentition is normal. Bullae heal with minimal to no
scar or milia formation. Secondary infection is the primary complication. The propensity to blister decreases with age, and the long-­term
prognosis is good. Treatment is similar to that noted earlier.
Severe EBS (formerly EBS Dowling-­Meara or EBS herpetiformis)
is characterized by grouped blisters resembling those of herpes simplex
(Fig. 695.7). During infancy, blistering may be severe and extensive,
may involve mucous membranes, and may result in shedding of nails,
formation of milia, and mild pigmentary changes, without scarring.
After the first few months of life, warm temperatures do not appear to
exacerbate blistering. Hyperkeratosis and hyperhidrosis of the palms
and soles may develop, but generally, the condition improves with age.
Maintenance of nutritional status and treatment of infections is important, particularly in infancy. Day-­to-­day management may involve
wound care techniques as described.

JUNCTIONAL EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA

MOST COMMON EBS
CLINICAL SUBTYPES

TARGETED PROTEIN(S)

AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT EBS
Localized

Keratin 5, keratin 14

Intermediate

Keratin 5, keratin 14

Severe

Keratin 5, keratin 14

With mottled pigmentation

Keratin 5*

Migratory circinate erythema

Keratin 5

Intermediate

Plectin

Intermediate with
cardiomyopathy

Kelch-­like member 24

AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE EBS
Intermediate or severe

Keratin 14, keratin 5

Intermediate

Plectin

Localized or intermediate with
BP230 deficiency

Bullous pemphigoid antigen 230
(BP230) (syn. BPAG1e)

Localized or intermediate with
exophilin-­5 deficiency

Exophilin-­5 (syn. Slac2-­b)

Intermediate with muscular
dystrophy

Plectin

Severe with pyloric atresia

Plectin

Localized with nephropathy

CD151 (CD151 antigen) (syn.
tetraspanin 24)

*Typical recurrent mutation in keratin 5, but cases with other keratin 5, keratin 14 or
exophilin-­5 mutations have been reported; syndromic EBS subtypes in bold.
From Has C, Bauer JW, Bodemer C, et al: Consensus reclassification of inherited epidermolysis bullosa and other disorders with skin fragility. Br J Dermatol 2020;183:614-­617;
Table 3, p. 617.)

4081

Severe JEB (formerly Herlitz syndrome) is an autosomal recessive
condition that is life threatening (see Tables 695.5 and 695.6). Blisters
appear at birth or develop during the neonatal period, particularly on
the perioral area, scalp, legs, diaper area, and thorax. Nails eventually
become dystrophic and then often permanently lost. Mucous membrane involvement may be severe, and ulceration of the respiratory,
gastrointestinal, and genitourinary epithelium has been documented
in many affected children, although less frequently than in severe
recessive DEB. Healing is delayed, and vegetating granulomas may persist for a long time. Large, moist, erosive plaques (Fig. 695.8) may provide a portal of entry for bacteria, and septicemia is a frequent cause of
death. Mild atrophy may be seen in areas of recurrent blistering. Defective dentition with early loss of teeth as a result of rampant caries is
characteristic. Growth retardation and recalcitrant anemia are almost
invariable. In addition to infection, cachexia and circulatory failure are
common causes of death. Most patients die within the first years of life.
Intermediate JEB (formerly non-­Herlitz syndrome) is a heterogeneous group of disorders. Blistering may be severe in the neonatal
period, making differentiation from severe JEB difficult. All conditions
associated with severe JEB may be seen but are usually milder. Localized JEB and JEB with pyloric atresia are similar disorders.
In all types of JEB, a subepidermal blister is found on light microscopic examination, and electron microscopy demonstrates a cleavage
plane in the lamina lucida, between the plasma membranes of the basal
cells and the basal lamina. Absence or a great reduction of hemidesmosomes is seen on electron micrographs in severe JEB and some cases
of intermediate JEB. The defect in severe JEB is in laminin 332 (pathogenic gene variants in LAMA3, LAMB3, or LAMC2), a glycoprotein
associated with anchoring filaments beneath the hemidesmosomes. In
intermediate JEB, defects have also been described in other hemidesmosomal components, such as type XVII collagen (BP180) (gene variants of COL17A1). In JEB with pyloric atresia, the defect is in the α6β4
integrin (gene variants of ITGA6 or ITGB4).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4082 Part XXIX u The Skin
Treatment for JEB is supportive. The diet should provide adequate
calories and supplemental iron. Infections should be treated promptly.
Transfusions of packed red blood cells may be required if the patient
shows no response to iron and erythropoietin therapy. Strict adherence
to wound care regimens is essential. Wound care regimens include
highly specialized nonadherent bandages designed specifically for children with chronic skin fragility. Tissue-­engineered skin grafts (artificial skin derived from human keratinocytes and fibroblasts) may be
beneficial. Birch bark extract topical gel containing betulin is approved
by the European Union and promotes wound healing and controls
inflammation.

Table 695.6  Characteristics of Major Forms of Junctional
Epidermolysis Bullosa
TYPE

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

JEB, severe (formerly
Herlitz)

50% of patients die by 2 yr old
Blisters heal with atrophic scarring but no
milia
Periungual and fingerpad blistering,
erythema
Blistering of oral and esophageal mucosae
Laryngeal and airway involvement with
early hoarseness
Later, perioral granulation tissue with
sparing of lips
Anonychia
Dental enamel hypoplasia, excessive caries
Growth retardation
Anemia

JEB, intermediate
(formerly non-­Herlitz)

Less severe, but similar manifestations to
Herlitz type, including dental, nail, and
laryngeal involvement
Granulation tissue is rare
Perinasal cicatrization
Less mucosal involvement
Alopecia
Anemia but not as severe as JEB,
generalized severe

JEB, localized

Localized blisters without residual scarring
or granulation tissue
Minimal mucosal involvement
Dental and nail abnormalities as in JEB,
generalized severe

JEB, with pyloric
atresia

Usually lethal in neonatal period
Generalized blistering, leading to atrophic
scarring
May be born with large areas of cutis
aplasia
No granulation tissue
Nail dystrophy or anonychia
Pyloric atresia, genitourinary malformations
Rudimentary ears
Dental enamel hypoplasia (survivors)
Variable anemia, growth retardation,
mucosal blistering

Table 695.4  Characteristics of Major Forms of
Epidermolysis Bullosa Simplex
TYPE

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Localized EBS (formerly
Weber-­Cockayne)

Easy blistering on palms and soles
May be focal keratoderma of palms
and soles in adults
25% show oral mucosal erosions
Rarely show reticulated pigmentation,
especially on arms and trunk and
punctate keratoderma (EBS with
mottled pigmentation)

Intermediate EBS (formerly
Koebner)

Generalized blistering
Variable mucosal involvement
Focal keratoderma of palms and soles
Nail involvement in 20%
Improves with advancing age

Severe EBS (formerly
Dowling-­Meara or EB
herpetiformis)

Most severe in neonate, infant;
improves beyond childhood
Large, generalized blisters; later,
smaller (herpetiform) blisters
Mucosal blistering, including
esophageal
Nails thickened, shed but regrow
May have natal teeth

EBS with mottled
pigmentation

Reticulated hyperpigmentation,
especially on arms and trunk
Punctate keratoses and keratoderma

EBS, Epidermolysis bullosa simplex.
From Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 6th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Table 13.2, p. 319.

JEB, Junctional epidermolysis bullosa.
From Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 6th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Table 13.4, p. 321.

Table 695.5  Junctional Epidermolysis Bullosa (JEB) Clinical Subtypes
MOST COMMON JEB CLINICAL SUBTYPES

TARGETED PROTEIN(S)

Severe

Laminin 332*

Intermediate

Laminin 332

Intermediate

Type XVII collagen

With pyloric atresia

Integrin α6β4

Localized

Laminin 332, type XVII collagen, integrin α6β4, integrin α3 subunit

Inversa

Laminin 332

Late onset

Type XVII collagen

LOC syndrome

Laminin α3A

With interstitial lung disease and nephrotic syndrome

Integrin α3 subunit

*JEB severe is rarely caused by pathogenic variants affecting the type XVII collagen gene; syndromic JEB subtypes in bold.
LOC, laryngo–onycho–cutaneous.
From Has C, Bauer JW, Bodemer C, et al: Consensus reclassification of inherited epidermolysis bullosa and other disorders with skin fragility. Br J Dermatol 2020;183:614-­617; Table 4,
p. 617.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 695 u Vesiculobullous Disorders

4083

Table 695.7  Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa (DEB)
Clinical Subtypes
DEB SUBTYPES

TARGETED PROTEIN

AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT DEB (DDEB)
Type VII collagen
Intermediate
Localized
Pruriginosa
Self-­improving
AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE DEB (RDEB)
Type VII collagen
Severe
Intermediate
Inversa
Localized
Pruriginosa
Self-­improving
DOMINANT AND RECESSIVE (COMPOUND HETEROZYGOSITY)
DEB, severe
Type VII collagen

Fig. 695.6 Bullae of the feet in localized epidermolysis bullosa simplex.

bold, most common subtypes.
From Has C, Bauer JW, Bodemer C, et al: Consensus reclassification of inherited epidermolysis bullosa and other disorders with skin fragility. Br J Dermatol 2020;183:614-­617;
Table 5, p. 617.)

Table 695.8  Characteristics of Major Forms of Dystrophic
Epidermolysis Bullosa
TYPE

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Dominant
dystrophic

Onset at birth to early infancy
Blistering predominates on dorsum of hands,
elbows, knees, and lower legs
Milia associated with scarring
Some patients develop scarlike lesions, especially
on the trunk
80% have nail dystrophy

Recessive
dystrophic,
severe
generalized

Present at birth
Widespread blistering, scarring, milia
Deformities: pseudosyndactyly, joint contractures
Severe involvement of mucous membranes, nails;
alopecia
Growth retardation, poor nutrition
Anemia
Mottled, carious teeth
Osteoporosis, delayed puberty, cardiomyopathy,
glomerulonephritis, renal amyloidosis, IgA
nephropathy
Predisposition to squamous cell carcinoma in
heavily scarred areas

Recessive
dystrophic,
generalized
intermediate

Generalized blisters from birth with milia, scarring
Less anemia, growth retardation, mucosal but more
esophageal issues with advancing age

Fig. 695.7 Grouped vesicle on an erythematous base in severe epidermolysis bullosa simplex.

Fig. 695.8 Nonhealing granulation tissue in junctional epidermolysis
bullosa.

IgA, Immunoglobulin A.
From Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 6th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Table 13.6, p. 323.

DYSTROPHIC EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA

All forms of DEB result from pathogenic variants in collagen VII, a
major component of anchoring fibrils that tether the basement membrane and overlying epidermis to its dermal foundation (see Tables
695.7 and 695.8). The blister is subepidermal in all types of DEB. The
type and location of the pathogenic gene variant within COL7A1 dictate the severity of the phenotype.
Dominant DEB is the most common type. The spectrum of dominant DEB is varied. Blisters may be manifest at birth and are often
limited and characteristically form over acral bony prominences.

The lesions heal promptly, with the formation of soft, wrinkled scars;
milia; and alterations in pigmentation (Fig. 695.9). Abnormal nails
and nail loss are common. In many cases, the blistering process is
mild, causing little restriction of activity and not impairing growth
and development. Mucous membrane involvement tends to be
minimal.
Recessive DEB, severe generalized (formerly recessive DEB–
Hallopeau-­Siemens syndrome) is the most incapacitating form of
EB, although the clinical spectrum is wide. Some patients have blisters,
scarring, and milia formation primarily on the hands, feet, elbows, and
knees (Fig. 695.10). Others have extensive erosions and blister formation at birth that seriously impede their care and feeding. Mucous
membrane lesions are common and may cause severe nutritional

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4084 Part XXIX u The Skin

Fig. 695.9 Scarring with milia formation over the knee in dominant
dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa.

Fig. 695.11 Mitten-­hand deformity of recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa.

Fig. 695.10 Severe scarring of the hands and knees in recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa.

deprivation, even in older children, whose growth may be restricted.
During childhood, esophageal erosions and strictures, scarring of the
buccal mucosa, flexion contractures of joints secondary to scarring of
the integument, development of cutaneous squamous cell carcinomas,
and the development of digital fusion may significantly limit the quality of life (Fig. 695.11). Squamous cell carcinomas and infection are
major causes of morbidity and mortality.
Although the skin becomes less sensitive to trauma with aging
in patients with recessive DEB, the progressive and permanent
deformities complicate management, and the overall prognosis is
poor. Foods that traumatize the buccal or esophageal mucosa should
be avoided. If esophageal scarring develops, a semiliquid diet
and esophageal dilatations may be required. Stricture excision or
colonic interposition may be needed to relieve esophageal obstruction. In infants, severe oropharyngeal involvement may necessitate
the use of special feeding devices such as a gastrostomy tube. Iron
therapy for anemia, intermittent antibiotic therapy for secondary
infections, and periodic surgery for release of digits may reduce
morbidity. Wound care dressings, including nonstick dressings
made from silicone, are a mainstay of treatment and the daily maintenance of the skin barrier to reduce new skin trauma and promote
healing. Compounds for treating itch, reducing inflammation, and
fighting infection, particularly with antimicrobial peptides, aid in
promoting more effective wound healing when dressings are used,
therefore reducing morbidity.
Beyond wound care and care of comorbid conditions in EB, a
number of new technologies offer a wider array of practical and
hypothetical treatment options for EB patients. Tissue-­engineered
skin grafts containing keratinocytes and fibroblasts are of some
benefit. Skin grafts that have undergone gene editing may show
promise. Pluripotent stem cells, taken from areas of revertant
mosaicism of a patient’s own skin, provide personalized options

for treatments for affected patients. Redosable gene therapy with
a herpes simplex virus type 1 vector carrying the COL7A1 gene is
FDA approved for patients ≥6 months of age. The therapy is applied
directly to wounds and produces normal collagen type VII alpha
chains. Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation has been shown to
be beneficial in some cases but warrants further study.

KINDLER SYNDROME

Kindler syndrome, often considered a distant subtype of EB, contains features of both EB, such as congenital blistering, and congenital poikilodermas, such as Rothmund-­Thomson syndrome and
Bloom syndrome (see Chapter 697), which include photosensitivity,
congenital poikiloderma, and progressive cutaneous atrophy. Blisters tend to appear on acral sites in infancy or early childhood and
are provoked by trauma. Photosensitivity can appear as increased
susceptibility to sunburn. Both blistering and photosensitivity can
improve greatly with advancing age, but poikilodermatous changes
can be progressive. Sclerodermoid-­like changes and nail abnormalities of the hands and feet, as well as dental abnormalities, have been
reported.
Kindler syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder caused
by pathogenic gene variants in KIND1 (also known as FERMT1),
which encodes kindlin-­1, a protein thought to regulate interactions
between the extracellular matrix and actin filaments. Blister formation has been shown to occur within the epidermis, within the basement membrane zone, and below the basement membrane. Because
Kindler syndrome is often confused with EB, at least initially, it can
be confirmed by electron microscopy, immunostaining for anti–
kindlin-­1 antibodies within the skin, or genetic analysis of the KIND1
gene.
Treatment is similar to that for EB, with efforts to reduce trauma to
the skin, meticulous wound care, and treatment of skin infections. In
addition, sun avoidance measures are beneficial because they can slow
the rate of the development of poikiloderma.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 695 u Vesiculobullous Disorders

4085

695.6 Pemphigus
Joel C. Joyce

PEMPHIGUS VULGARIS
Etiology/Pathogenesis

Pemphigus vulgaris (PV) is a rare autoimmune blistering disorder
caused by circulating antibodies to desmoglein III that results in suprabasal cleaving with consequent blister formation. Desmoglein III is a
30-­kDa glycoprotein that is complexed with plakoglobin, a plaque protein of desmosomes. The desmogleins are a subfamily of the cadherin
family of cell adhesion molecules.

Clinical Manifestations

PV usually first appears as painful oral ulcers, which may be the only
evidence of the disease for weeks or months. Subsequently, large,
flaccid bullae emerge on nonerythematous skin, most commonly
on the face, trunk, pressure points, groin, and axillae. The Nikolsky
sign is present. The lesions rupture and enlarge peripherally, producing painful, raw, denuded areas that have little tendency to heal.
When healing occurs, it is without scarring, but hyperpigmentation
is common. Malodorous, verrucous, and granulomatous lesions may
develop at sites of ruptured bullae, particularly in the skinfolds; as
this pattern becomes more pronounced, the condition may be more
properly referred to as pemphigus vegetans. Because the course may
rapidly lead to debility, malnutrition, and death, prompt diagnosis
is essential. Neonatal PV develops in utero as a result of placental
transfer of maternal antidesmoglein antibodies from women who
have active PV, although it may occur when the mother is in remission. High antepartum maternal titers of PV antibodies and increased
maternal disease activity correlate with a poor fetal outcome, including demise.

Pathology

Biopsy of a fresh small blister reveals a suprabasal (intraepidermal)
blister containing loose, acantholytic epidermal cells that have lost
their intercellular bridges and thus their contact with one another.
Immunofluorescence staining with an IgG antibody produces a characteristic pattern (“chicken wire”) on direct immunofluorescence
preparations of both involved and uninvolved skin of essentially all
patients. Serum IgG antibody titers to desmoglein correlate with the
clinical course in many patients; thus serial determinations may have
predictive value.

Differential Diagnosis

PV must be differentiated from EM, bullous pemphigoid (BP), SJS, and
TEN.

Treatment

The disease is best treated initially with systemic methylprednisolone
1-­2 mg/kg/day. Azathioprine, cyclophosphamide, mycophenolate
mofetil, and methotrexate therapy all have been useful in maintenance
regimens. IVIG given in cycles may be beneficial to patients whose disease does not respond to steroids. Rituximab with IVIG replacement
has been very effective in the management of severe PV. Excellent control of the disease may be obtained, but relapse is common. It has been
successfully used in children.

Fig. 695.12 Superficial erosions in pemphigus foliaceus.
Nikolsky sign is present. Focal lesions are usually localized to the scalp,
face, neck, and upper trunk. Mucous membrane lesions are minimal
or absent. Pruritus, pain, and a burning sensation are frequent complaints. The clinical course varies but is generally more benign than
that of PV. Fogo selvagem (endemic pemphigus foliaceus), which is
endemic in certain areas of Brazil, is identical clinically, histopathologically, and immunologically to pemphigus foliaceus. Anti–desmoglein­1 antibodies in individuals with fogo selvagem cross react with sand fly
(Lutzomyia sp.) salivary proteins, suggesting an environmental trigger
for this autoimmune disease.

Pathology

An intraepidermal acantholytic bulla high in the epidermis is diagnostic. It is imperative to select an early lesion for biopsy. Immunofluorescent staining with an IgG antibody reveals a characteristic intercellular
staining pattern similar to that of PV but higher in the epidermis.

Differential Diagnosis

When generalized, pemphigus foliaceus may resemble an exfoliative
dermatitis or any of the chronic blistering disorders; localized erythematous plaques simulate seborrheic dermatitis, psoriasis, impetigo,
eczema, and systemic lupus erythematosus.
For localized disease, super-­potent topical corticosteroids used twice
a day may be all that is needed for control until remission. For more
generalized disease, long-­term remission is usual after suppression of
the disease by systemic methylprednisolone (1 mg/kg/day) therapy.
Dapsone (25-­100 mg/day) also may be used, with appropriate laboratory monitoring.

BULLOUS PEMPHIGOID
Etiology/Pathogenesis

BP is caused by circulating antigens to either the 180-­kDa or 230-­kDa
BP antigen that result in a subepidermal blister. The 230-­kDa protein
(BP230) is part of the hemidesmosome, whereas the 180-­kDa protein (BP180, now known as type XVII collagen) localizes to both the
hemidesmosome and the upper lamina lucida and is a transmembrane
collagenous protein.

Clinical Manifestations

Pemphigus foliaceus is caused by circulating antibodies to a 50-­kDa
portion of the 160-­kDa desmosomal glycoprotein desmoglein I, which
result in subcorneal cleavage leading to superficial erosions. This
extremely rare disorder is characterized by subcorneal blistering; the
site of cleavage is high in the epidermis rather than suprabasal as in PV.

The blisters of BP typically arise in crops on a normal, erythematous,
eczematous, or urticarial base. Bullae appear predominantly on the
flexural aspects of the extremities, in the axillae, and on the groin
and central abdomen. Infants have involvement of the palms, soles,
and face more frequently than older children do. Individual lesions
vary greatly in size, are tense, and are filled with serous fluid that may
become hemorrhagic or turbid. Oral lesions occur less frequently and
are less severe than in PV. Pruritus, a burning sensation, and subcutaneous edema may accompany the eruption, but constitutional symptoms are not prominent.

Clinical Manifestations

Pathology

PEMPHIGUS FOLIACEUS
Etiology/Pathogenesis

The superficial blisters rupture quickly, leaving erosions surrounded
by erythema that heal with crusting and scaling (Fig. 695.12). The

Biopsy material should be taken from an early bulla arising
on an erythematous base. A subepidermal bulla and a dermal

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4086 Part XXIX u The Skin
inflammatory infiltrate, predominantly of eosinophils, can be identified histopathologically. In sections of a blister or perilesional
skin, a band of Ig (usually IgG) and C3 can be demonstrated in
the basement membrane zone by direct immunofluorescence. Indirect immunofluorescence studies of serum have positive results in
~70% of cases for IgG antibodies to the basement membrane zone;
however, the titers do not correlate well with the clinical course.

Diagnosis and Differential Diagnoses

BP rarely occurs in children but must be considered in the differential
diagnosis of any chronic blistering disorder. The differential diagnosis
includes bullous EM, PV, linear IgA dermatosis, bullous drug eruption, dermatitis herpetiformis (DH), herpes simplex infection, and
bullous impetigo, which can be differentiated by histologic examination, immunofluorescence studies, and cultures. The large, tense
bullae of BP can generally be distinguished from the smaller, flaccid
bullae of PV.

Fig. 695.13 Multiple excoriations around the elbows in dermatitis
herpetiformis.

TREATMENT

Treatment

Localized BP can be successfully suppressed with super-­potent topical corticosteroids (clobetasol propionate) twice a day. Generalized
disease usually requires systemic methylprednisolone (1 mg/kg/day)
therapy. Doxycycline has some benefits but is not as effective as prednisone. Rarely are other immunosuppressive treatments necessary, such
as azathioprine or mycophenolate mofetil. Refractory cases have been
treated with rituximab, but the condition usually remits within a year
in most children.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

695.7 Dermatitis Herpetiformis
Joel C. Joyce

ETIOLOGY/PATHOGENESIS

In dermatitis herpetiformis (DH), IgA antibodies are directed at
epidermal transglutaminase (transglutaminase 3). Gluten-­sensitive
enteropathy (celiac disease) is found in all patients with DH,
although the majority are asymptomatic or have minimal gastrointestinal symptoms (see Chapter 384). The severity of the skin
disease and the responsiveness to gluten restriction do not correlate with the severity of the intestinal inflammation. An antibody
to smooth muscle endomysium is found in 70–90% of patients
with DH. Ninety percent of patients with the disease express
HLA-­D Q2. HLA-­D Q2–negative patients with DH usually express
HLA-­D Q8.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

DH is characterized by symmetric, grouped, small, tense, erythematous, stinging, intensely pruritic papules and vesicles. The eruption is
pleomorphic, including erythematous, urticarial, papular, vesicular,
and bullous lesions. Sites of predilection are the knees, elbows, shoulders, buttocks, forehead, and scalp; mucous membranes are usually
spared. Hemorrhagic lesions may develop on the palms and soles.
When pruritus is severe, excoriations may be the only visible sign (Fig.
695.13).

PATHOLOGY

Subepidermal blisters composed predominantly of neutrophils are
found in dermal papillae. The presence of granular IgA on direct
immunofluorescence in the dermal papillary tips is diagnostic.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

DH may mimic other chronic blistering disorders and may also resemble scabies, papular urticaria, insect bites, contact dermatitis, and papular eczema.

Patients with DH show response within weeks to months to a gluten-­
free diet. Oral administration of dapsone (0.5-­2.0 mg/kg/day daily or
divided twice daily) provides immediate relief from the intense pruritus
but must be used with caution because of possible serious side effects
(methemoglobinemia, hemolysis, and drug hypersensitivity syndrome
[sulfone syndrome]). Dapsone alone may not relieve the intestinal
inflammation of celiac disease. Local antipruritic measures may also be
useful. Jejunal biopsy is indicated to diagnose gluten-­sensitive enteropathy because cutaneous manifestations may precede malabsorption.
The disease is chronic, and either a gluten-­free diet or dapsone must be
continued indefinitely to prevent relapse.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

695.8 Linear Immunoglobulin A (IgA)
Dermatosis (Chronic Bullous
Dermatosis of Childhood)
Joel C. Joyce

ETIOLOGY/PATHOGENESIS

Linear IgA dermatosis is a heterogeneous autoimmune disorder with
antibodies targeting multiple antigens. It has been reported to be the
most common autoimmune blistering disorder in children. It is caused
by circulating IgA antibodies, most commonly to LABD97 and LAD-­1,
which are degradation proteins of BP180 (type XVII collagen). Linear IgA dermatosis may also be seen as a drug eruption. Most cases
of drug-­induced linear IgA dermatosis are related to vancomycin,
although anticonvulsants, ampicillin, cyclosporine, and captopril are
implicated.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

This rare dermatosis is most common in the first decade of life, with
a peak incidence during the preschool years. The eruption consists
of many large, symmetrically located, tense bullae filled with clear or
hemorrhagic fluid. The bullae are often clustered together and develop
on a normal or erythematous urticarial base. Areas of predilection are
the genitals and buttocks (Fig. 695.14), the perioral region, and the
scalp. Sausage-­shaped bullae may be arranged in an annular or rosette-­
like fashion around a central crust (Fig. 695.15). Erythematous plaques
with gyrate margins bordered by intact bullae may develop over larger
areas. Pruritus may be absent or very intense, and systemic signs or
symptoms are absent.

PATHOLOGY

The subepidermal bullae are infiltrated with a mixture of inflammatory
cells. Neutrophilic abscesses may be noted in the dermal papillary tips,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 696 u Eczematous Disorders

4087

Chapter 696

Eczematous Disorders
Julie M. Dhossche and Yvonne E. Chiu

Fig. 695.14 Erosion on an erythematous base after loss of blister roof
in linear IgA dermatosis.

Eczematous disorders are a broad group of cutaneous eruptions characterized by erythema, edema, and pruritus. Acute eczematous lesions demonstrate erythema, weeping, oozing, and the formation of microvesicles
within the epidermis. Chronic lesions are generally thickened, dry, and
scaly, with coarse skin markings (lichenification) and altered pigmentation. Many types of eczema occur in children; the most common is atopic
dermatitis (see Chapter 186), although seborrheic dermatitis, allergic and
irritant contact dermatitis, nummular eczema, and acute palmoplantar
eczema (dyshidrosis) are also relatively common in childhood.
Once the diagnosis of eczema has been established, it is important to
further classify the eruption more specifically for proper management.
Pertinent historical data often provide the clue. In some instances, the
subsequent course and character of the eruption permit classification.
Histologic changes are relatively nonspecific, but all types of eczematous
dermatitis are characterized by intraepidermal edema known as spongiosis.

696.1 Contact Dermatitis
Julie M. Dhossche and Yvonne E. Chiu
The form of eczema known as contact dermatitis can be subdivided into
irritant dermatitis, in which nonspecific injury to the skin causes immediate inflammation, and allergic contact dermatitis, resulting from a delayed
hypersensitivity reaction. Irritant dermatitis is more frequent in children,
particularly during the early years of life. Allergic reactions increase in frequency upon maturation of the immune system.

IRRITANT CONTACT DERMATITIS

Fig. 695.15 Linear IgA bullous dermatitis. (Modified from Gouveia AI,

Teixeira A, Freitas JP, et al. Linear immunoglobulin A bullous dermatosis. J Pediatr. 2016;170:338, Fig. 1A.)

indistinguishable from those of DH. The infiltrate may also be largely
eosinophilic, resembling that in BP. Therefore direct immunofluorescence
studies are required for a definitive diagnosis of linear IgA dermatosis; perilesional skin demonstrates linear deposition of IgA and sometimes IgG
and C3 at the dermal-­epidermal junction. Immunoelectron microscopy
has localized the immunoreactants to the sublamina densa, although a
combined sublamina densa and lamina lucida pattern has also been seen.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The eruption can be distinguished by histopathologic and immunofluorescence studies from PV, BP, DH, scabies, and EM. Gram stain and
culture preclude the diagnosis of bullous impetigo.

TREATMENT

Many cases of linear IgA dermatosis respond favorably to oral dapsone (see treatment of DH) or sulfapyridine. Other antibiotics, including erythromycin and dicloxacillin, have been used, but the response
is often transient. Children who show no response to dapsone may
benefit from oral therapy with methylprednisolone (1 mg/kg/day) or
a combination of these drugs. The usual course is 2-­4 years, although
some children have persistent or recurrent disease; there are typically
no long-­term sequelae. IgA nephropathy is a rare complication.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Irritant contact dermatitis can result from prolonged or repetitive contact with physical, chemical, or mechanical irritants, including saliva,
urine, feces, fragrance, detergents, dyes, henna, plants, caterpillars,
abrasive materials, and chafing.
Irritant contact dermatitis may be difficult to distinguish from atopic
dermatitis or allergic contact dermatitis. A detailed history and consideration of the sites of involvement, the age of the child, and contactants usually provide clues to the etiologic agent. The propensity for
development of irritant dermatitis varies considerably among children;
some may respond to minimal injury, making it difficult to identify
the offending agent through history. Children with atopic dermatitis
are more prone to irritant contact dermatitis as an exacerbating factor.
Irritant contact dermatitis usually clears after removal of the stimulus
and temporary treatment with a topical corticosteroid preparation (see
Chapter 687). Education of patients and parents about the causes of
contact dermatitis is crucial to successful therapy.
Dry skin dermatitis results from repetitive wet-­to-­dry behaviors
such as lip licking (Fig. 696.1), thumb sucking, frequent handwashing, or excessive sweating. Involved skin is erythematous and fissured,
localized to the area of exposure. Treatment of dry skin dermatitis
begins with eliminating the offending wet-­to-­dry behavior. A thick
moisturizer (cream or ointment based) applied twice daily decreases
transepidermal water loss and replenishes skin lipids to improve hydration. A topical steroid is usually necessary to treat the inflammation.
Juvenile plantar dermatosis occurs mainly in prepubertal children
with hyperhidrosis who wear occlusive synthetic footwear. Weight-­bearing
surfaces of the foot may be pruritic or painful and develop a fissured or
glazed appearance (Fig. 696.2). Immediate application of a thick emollient when socks and shoes are removed or immediately after swimming
usually minimizes juvenile plantar dermatosis. Severe inflammatory cases
may require short-­term (1-­2 weeks) application of a medium-­to high-­
potency topical steroid.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4088 Part XXIX u The Skin

Fig. 696.1 Perioral irritant contact dermatitis from lip licking.

Fig. 696.3 Severe, erosive diaper dermatitis.

Fig. 696.2 Red, scaly juvenile plantar dermatosis.

DIAPER DERMATITIS

Diaper dermatitis refers to any rash in the diaper region; the most
common of these is irritant diaper dermatitis. Elevated pH in the diaper area and synergistic activity of urinary and fecal enzymes lead to
inflammation, which disrupts the normal skin barrier and increases
susceptibility to other irritants and organisms. Additional factors are
occlusion, friction, and use of diaper wipes and topical preparations.
Loose or frequent stooling predisposes an infant to diaper dermatitis.
Diaper dermatitis presents with erythema and scaling in a patchy or
confluent pattern and, in severe cases, may have papulovesicular or
bullous lesions, fissures, and/or erosions (Fig. 696.3). The genitocrural
folds are often spared because concave areas are relatively protected.
Chronic hypertrophic, flat-­topped papules and infiltrative nodules may
occur. Candidal infection typically represents a secondary process. It
is characterized by “beefy” red-­pink, tender skin that has numerous 1-­
to 2-­mm pustules and satellite papules and involves both concave and
convex areas. Discomfort may be marked because of intense inflammation. Allergic contact dermatitis, seborrheic dermatitis, psoriasis,
candidiasis, atopic dermatitis, child abuse, and rare disorders such as
Langerhans cell histiocytosis, nutritional deficiencies, and acrodermatitis enteropathica should be considered when the eruption is persistent or is recalcitrant to simple therapeutic measures (Table 696.1).
Diaper dermatitis often responds to simple measures; some infants
are predisposed to diaper dermatitis, and management may be difficult.
The damaging effects of overhydration of the skin and prolonged contact
with feces and urine can be obviated by frequent changing of the diapers
and periods of “rest” free of diaper use. Cleansing of affected skin is best
accomplished with a soft cloth and lukewarm water, patted dry. Overwashing should be avoided because it leads to chapping and may worsen the
dermatitis. Disposable diapers containing a superabsorbent material may
help to maintain a relatively dry environment. First-­line therapy for diaper
dermatitis is application of a protective barrier agent (ointment or paste)

containing petroleum or zinc oxide at every diaper change. Topical sucralfate is an effective barrier with some antibacterial activity and is useful for
recalcitrant cases. Low-­potency nonhalogenated topical corticosteroids,
such as 2.5% hydrocortisone, may be used for short periods (3-­5 days).
Treatment with a topical anticandidal agent is indicated for secondary candidal infection. Topical preparations containing triamcinolone-­nystatin
and betamethasone dipropionate-­clotrimazole are generally inappropriate for diaper dermatitis in infants because of the higher potency of the
corticosteroid component. If using multiple topical agents, the protective
barrier should be applied last. When diaper dermatitis does not respond to
typical prevention and treatment strategies, non–diaper-­associated causes
must be considered.

ALLERGIC CONTACT DERMATITIS

Allergic contact dermatitis is a delayed hypersensitivity cutaneous reaction to environmental allergens and should be considered in any child with
recalcitrant eczema. It has been estimated to affect 16.4% of all children in
the United States, though children are likely underdiagnosed, especially
those with concomitant atopic dermatitis. Children of all ages may develop
allergic contact dermatitis, though it is more common in older children.
Allergic contact dermatitis is a T-­cell–mediated hypersensitivity reaction
that is provoked by application of an antigen to the skin surface. The antigen penetrates the skin, where it is conjugated with a cutaneous protein,
and the hapten-­protein complex is transported to the regional lymph
nodes by antigen-­presenting Langerhans cells. A primary immunologic
response occurs locally in the nodes and becomes generalized, presumably because of dissemination of sensitized T cells. Sensitization requires
several days and, when followed by a fresh antigenic challenge, manifests
as allergic contact dermatitis. Generalized distribution may also occur if
enough antigen finds its way into the circulation, such as by consumption.
Once sensitization has occurred, each new antigenic challenge may provoke an inflammatory reaction within 8-­12 hours; sensitization to a particular antigen usually persists for many years.
Acute allergic contact dermatitis is an erythematous, intensely pruritic,
eczematous dermatitis. Acute cases may be edematous and vesiculobullous. The chronic condition has the features of long-­standing eczema:
lichenification, scaling, fissuring, and pigmentary change. Distinguishing
allergic contact dermatitis from other eczematous disorders can be challenging, especially with irritant contact dermatitis, which can be clinically
identical. The distribution of the eruption often provides a clue to the diagnosis. Airborne sensitizers usually affect exposed areas, such as the face
and arms. Jewelry, topical agents, shoes, clothing, henna tattoo dyes, plants,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 696 u Eczematous Disorders

4089

Table 696.1  Diaper Dermatitis
DISEASE

CLINICAL MANIFESTATION

OTHER FEATURES

TREATMENT

Friction

Inner surface of thighs, genitalia, buttocks,
abdomen

Course waxes and wanes
Aggravated by talc

Responds well to diaper changes
Avoidance of diapers

Irritant

Mild erythema with shiny surface and
occasional papules
Confined to convex surfaces
Spares intertriginous areas

Exacerbated by heat, moisture, and
sweat retention

Gentle cleansing
Regular diaper changes
Barrier creams (zinc oxide, Vaseline)
Low-­potency topical steroids can
help

Allergic contact

Typically confined to convex surfaces
Skin involved is in direct contact with offending
agent
Mild cases: diffuse erythema, papules, vesicles,
scaling
Severe cases: papules, plaques, psoriasiform
lesions, ulcerations, infiltrative nodules

Often related to topical antibiotics
(neomycin, bacitracin)
Certain emulsifiers in topical
products
Preservatives in wet wipes can be an
offender

Remove offending agent
Judicious use of low-­potency
topical steroids
Barrier creams/ointments

Seborrheic
dermatitis

Salmon-­colored patches
Often have yellow, greasy scale
Fissures, erosions, maceration, and weeping
can be seen

Axillae, ear creases, and neck are
often involved
“Cradle cap” on scalp
Hypopigmentation often seen in
patients with darker skin tones

Low-­potency topical steroids
If coexistent infection—antifungal
or antibacterial agents

Candidiasis

Usually involves intertriginous areas and convex
surfaces
Bright-­red papules and plaques
Satellite lesions on abdomen and thighs

Oral thrush may be present
Often occurs after treatment with
systemic antibiotics or local
topical steroid use

Topical anticandidal agent,
including nystatin

Intertrigo

Well-­demarcated, macerated plaques with
weeping
Gluteal cleft and fleshy folds of thighs

May be associated with miliaria

Avoiding excessive heat
Cool clothing

Psoriasis

Bright red, scaly, well-­demarcated plaques
Can persist for months
Less responsive to topical treatment

Red, sometimes scaly
Can be present on extremities or
trunk
Nail changes seen
Family history

Low-­potency topical steroids
Moisturizers

Staphylococcal
infection

Many thin-­walled pustules with pink-­red base
Collarette of scale after rupturing

Acrodermatitis
enteropathica
(zinc deficiency)

Early lesions are vesicular and pustular
Become confluent, pink, dry, scaly, crusty
plaques

Perioral skin typically also involved
Irritability or listlessness
Failure to thrive, alopecia, diarrhea

Secondary to zinc deficiency or
inborn error of zinc transporter
Treat with zinc replacement

Langerhans cell
histiocytosis

May mimic candidiasis or seborrheic dermatitis
Persistent, does not improve with standard
treatments
Clusters of infiltrative, crusted, hemorrhagic
papules
Ulceration can be seen

Involvement of groin, axillae,
periauricular skin, hairline, and
scalp
Anemia, thrombocytopenia,
hepatosplenomegaly, and osseous
lesions

Chemotherapy

Antistaphylococcal therapy

From Humphrey S. Congenital cutaneous lesions and infantile rashes. In: Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, Basel D, eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based Diagnosis, 2nd ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023: Table 60.2, p. 1144.

and even toilet seats cause dermatitis at points of contact. Careful evaluation of environmental exposures, cultural customs, daily activity, animal exposures, ear piercing, tattooing, and personal product usage in the
patient and all caregivers is essential. Other potential diagnoses to consider
include herpes simplex virus, impetigo, cellulitis, and dermatophytoses.
Rhus dermatitis (poison ivy, poison sumac, poison oak), a response
to the plant allergen urushiol, is the most common allergic contact dermatitis. It is often vesiculobullous and may be distinguished by linear
streaks of vesicles where the plant leaves have brushed against the skin
(Fig. 696.4). Fluid from ruptured cutaneous vesicles does not spread the
eruption; antigen retained on skin, clothing, or under fingernails initiates new plaques of dermatitis if not removed by washing with soap
and water. Antigen may also be carried by animals on their fur. “Black
spot” poison ivy dermatitis is a rare variant that results from oxidation of concentrated urushiol left on the skin and manifests as small
discrete black lacquer–like glossy papules with surrounding erythema
and edema. Sensitization to one plant produces cross reactions with the
others. Spontaneous resolution occurs in 1-­3 weeks, with the most common complication being secondary bacterial infection with normal skin
flora. Exposure avoidance and thorough washing after exposure are the

mainstays for prevention. Barrier creams or organoclay compounds such
as bentoquatam may be effective if applied before expected exposure.
Nickel dermatitis develops from contact with jewelry, metal closures
on clothing, or even cell phones. Metal closures on pants frequently cause
periumbilical dermatitis (Fig. 696.5). Some children are exquisitely sensitive to nickel, with even the trace amounts found in gold jewelry provoking
eruptions. The most frequently involved sites from jewelry are the earlobes
from nickel-­containing earrings. Early ear piercing increases risk of sensitization, and it is recommended to delay piercing until after 10 years of age.
Patch testing for nickel sensitivity is unreliable in infants and toddlers and
should only be performed if there is high clinical suspicion.
Shoe dermatitis typically affects the dorsum or soles of the feet and
toes, sparing the interdigital spaces; it is usually symmetric. Other
forms of allergic contact dermatitis, in contrast to irritant dermatitis,
rarely involve the palms and soles. Common allergens are the antioxidants and accelerators in shoe rubber, adhesives, and the chromium
salts in tanned leather or shoe dyes. Excessive sweating often leaches
these substances from their source.
Apparel contains a number of sensitizers, including dyes, dye fixative,
fabric finishes, fibers, resins, and cleaning solutions. Dye may be poorly

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4090 Part XXIX u The Skin

Fig. 696.4 Linear lesions in poison ivy.

Topical medications and cosmetics may be unsuspected as allergens, particularly if a medication is being used for a preexisting dermatitis. The most common offenders are neomycin, topical antihistamines,
topical anesthetics, fragrances, topical corticosteroids, oxybenzone and
octocrylene in chemical sunscreens, preservatives, dye in temporary tattoos, and ethylenediamine, a stabilizer present in many medications. All
types of cosmetics can cause facial dermatitis; involvement of the eyelids
is characteristic for nail polish sensitivity. Another pediatric allergen has
been methylisothiazolinone (MI), a chemical preservative found in rinse-­
off products including liquid soaps and shampoos, as well as paints and
glues, which may be used in making homemade “slime” and lead to hand
dermatitis.
Neomycin sulfate is present in many nonprescription topical antibiotic
preparations, and thus children are frequently exposed at an early age. It is
one of the most common causes of allergic contact dermatitis, and use of
combination products of neomycin with other antibiotics, antifungals, or
corticosteroids may induce co-­reactivity with these chemically unrelated
substances.
As mentioned previously, diagnosis of allergic contact dermatitis is usually based on history; however, patch testing may be helpful, especially in
older children. Identification and avoidance of the offending agent is the
mainstay of managing allergic contact dermatitis. First-­line treatment for
acute eruption is a mid-­potency topical corticosteroid ointment for 2-­3
weeks and symptom management with nonsensitizing and fragrance-­
free emollients/moisturizers, wet dressings, and sedating antihistamines
to allow for sleep. Systemic corticosteroids are used when >10% of skin is
involved (0.5-­1.0 mg/kg prednisone to a maximum of 60 mg/day for 7-­10
days, followed by a 7-­10 day taper). More chronic allergic contact dermatitis
is treated with low-­to mid-­potency topical corticosteroids. Desensitization
therapy is rarely indicated. Topical calcineurin inhibitors, such as tacrolimus, may be a potential steroid-­sparing alternative agent in select patients.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

696.2 Nummular Eczema
Julie M. Dhossche and Yvonne E. Chiu
Nummular eczema is characterized by coin-­shaped, severely pruritic,
eczematous plaques, commonly involving the extensor surfaces of the
extremities (Fig. 696.6), buttocks, and shoulders with facial sparing. The
plaques are relatively discrete, boggy, vesicular, slightly scaly, and exudative; when chronic, they often become thickened and lichenified and may
develop central clearing. Nummular eczema may be an atypical morphology in someone with underlying atopic dermatitis or may be an independent disorder. Flares are generally sporadic but may be precipitated
by xerosis, irritants, allergens, or occult staphylococcal infection. Most
frequently, these lesions are mistaken for tinea corporis, but plaques of
nummular eczema are distinguished by the lack of a raised, sharply circumscribed border, the lack of fungal organisms on a potassium hydroxide (KOH) preparation, and frequent weeping or bleeding when scraped.
First-­line treatment is with emollients, wet dressings, and potent topical
corticosteroids. Steroid-­impregnated tapes may simultaneously treat and
provide barrier protection to these circumscribed eczematous plaques. An
oral antihistamine may be helpful, particularly a sedating antihistamine at
night. Antibiotics are indicated for secondary infection. Methotrexate and
dupilumab have been described as systemic treatments.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Fig. 696.5 Chronic periumbilical nickel dermatitis.
fixed to clothing and so may be leached out with sweating, as can partially cured formaldehyde resins. The elastic in garments is a frequent
cause of clothing dermatitis, and contact allergy to the ink “tag” of tagless
baby clothing has been reported. Exposure to other items with fabric,
such as infant car seats, may induce reactions similar to clothing.

696.3 Pityriasis Alba
Julie M. Dhossche and Yvonne E. Chiu
Pityriasis alba occurs mainly in children and causes lesions that are
hypopigmented, ill-­defined, round or oval patches (Fig. 696.7). They
may be mildly erythematous and finely scaly. Lesions occur on the face,
neck, upper trunk, and proximal portions of the arms and are most pronounced on darker skin tones or after tanning of surrounding skin. Itching

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 696 u Eczematous Disorders

Fig. 696.6 Discrete, boggy plaque of nummular dermatitis.
is minimal or absent. The cause is unknown, but the eruption appears to
be exacerbated by dryness and is often regarded as a mild form of atopic
dermatitis. Pityriasis alba is frequently misdiagnosed as vitiligo, tinea versicolor, or tinea corporis. The lesions wax and wane but eventually disappear, and normal pigmentation often takes months to return. Application
of a lubricant or emollient may ameliorate the condition, and avoidance of
sun exposure and daily sunscreen use can help reduce the appearance of
existing lesions by allowing for natural lightening of adjacent unaffected
skin. If pruritus is troublesome or if the lesions are active with erythema
and fine scale, a low-­potency topical steroid or calcineurin inhibitor may
be used.

4091

Fig. 696.7 Patchy hypopigmented lesions with diffuse borders characteristic of pityriasis alba.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

696.4 Lichen Simplex Chronicus
Julie M. Dhossche and Yvonne E. Chiu
Lichen simplex chronicus is a secondary skin disorder resulting from
excessive scratching or rubbing. It is characterized by a chronic pruritic,
eczematous, circumscribed plaque that is usually lichenified and hyperpigmented (Fig. 696.8). All affected areas must be accessible to scratching, with the most common sites being the posterior neck, genitalia,
wrists, ankles, and dorsal feet. Although the initiating event may be a
transient lesion such as an insect bite, trauma from rubbing and scratching accounts for persistence of the plaque. Lichen simplex chronicus may
also be seen in other chronic eczematous dermatoses such as atopic dermatitis, typically when poorly controlled. Pruritus must be controlled to
permit healing; thus a covering to prevent scratching may be necessary.
A high-­potency topical corticosteroid under occlusion is often helpful
and hastens resolution. Second-­line therapy includes adding 6% salicylic
acid gel to the topical corticosteroid preparation.

696.5 Acute Palmoplantar Eczema
Julie M. Dhossche and Yvonne E. Chiu
A recurrent, sometimes seasonal, blistering disorder of the hands and
feet, acute palmoplantar eczema (also known as dyshidrotic eczema or
pompholyx) occurs in all age-­groups but is uncommon in infancy. The
pathogenesis is unknown, although possible predisposing factors include
a history of atopy, exposure to contact allergens (especially metals) or
irritants, or IV immunoglobulin therapy. The disease is characterized by
recurrent crops of small, deep-­seated, “tapioca-­like” vesicles, which are
intensely pruritic and may coalesce into tense bullae (Fig. 696.9). Sites
of predilection are the palms, soles, and lateral aspects of the fingers
and toes. Primary lesions are noninflammatory and are filled with clear
fluid, which, unlike sweat, has a physiologic pH and contains protein.
Maceration and secondary infection are frequent because of scratching.
The chronic phase is characterized by thickened, fissured plaques that
may cause considerable discomfort and dystrophic nails. Although acute

Fig. 696.8 Thickened plaque of lichen simplex chronicus.
palmoplantar eczema is frequently seen in patients with hyperhidrosis,
histologic examination reveals an eczematous reaction around sweat
ducts, without any structural or functional abnormalities of the sweat
ducts themselves. The diagnosis is made clinically. The disorder may be
confused with allergic contact dermatitis, which usually affects the dorsal rather than the volar surfaces, and with dermatophytosis, which can
be distinguished by a KOH preparation of the roof of a vesicle and by
appropriate cultures.
Acute palmoplantar eczema responds to wet dressings, liberal emollient use, and potent topical corticosteroid ointment applied twice daily
for 2-­4 weeks. Weeping skin benefits from twice-­daily soaking in an
astringent solution, such as aluminum subacetate. Second-­line treatment includes phototherapy and systemic immunomodulators. Severe
disease may require oral corticosteroids with a 2-­week taper. Secondary bacterial infection should be treated systemically with an appropriate antibiotic. Patients should be told to expect recurrence and should
protect their hands and feet from the damaging effects of excessive
sweating, chemicals, harsh soaps, and adverse weather. Unfortunately,
it is impossible to prevent recurrence or to predict its frequency.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

696.6 Seborrheic Dermatitis
Julie M. Dhossche and Yvonne E. Chiu

ETIOLOGY

Seborrheic dermatitis is a chronic inflammatory disease most common in
infancy and adolescence that parallels the distribution, size, and activity of
the sebaceous glands. The cause is unknown, as is the role of the sebaceous
glands in the disease. Malassezia furfur is implicated as a causative agent,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4092 Part XXIX u The Skin

Fig. 696.9 Vesicular palmar lesions of acute palmoplantar eczema
with large bullae.

Fig. 696.10 Cradle cap in an infant.

although it remains unclear whether dermatitis results from the action of
the fungus, its by-­products, or an exaggerated response of the host. In adolescence, seborrheic dermatitis typically occurs after puberty, indicating a
possible role for sex hormones.
It is also unknown whether infantile seborrheic dermatitis and adolescent seborrheic dermatitis are the same or different entities. There
is no evidence that children with infantile seborrheic dermatitis will
experience seborrheic dermatitis as adolescents.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The disorder may begin in the first month of life and typically self-­resolves
by 1 year. Diffuse or focal scaling and crusting of the scalp, sometimes
called cradle cap (Fig. 696.10), may be the initial and, at times the only,
manifestation. A greasy, scaly, erythematous papular dermatitis, which
is usually nonpruritic in infants, may involve the face, neck, retroauricular areas, axillae, umbilicus, and diaper area. The dermatitis may be
patchy and focal or may spread to involve almost the entire body (Fig.
696.11). Postinflammatory pigmentary changes are common, particularly in infants with darker skin. When the scaling becomes pronounced,
the condition may resemble psoriasis and, at times, can be distinguished
only with difficulty. The possibility of coexistent atopic dermatitis must
be considered when there is an acute weeping dermatitis with pruritus,
and the two are often clinically inseparable at an early age. An intractable
seborrhea-­like dermatitis with chronic diarrhea and failure to thrive may
reflect systemic dysfunction of the immune system. A chronic treatment-­
resistant seborrhea-­like pattern may also result from cutaneous histiocytic
infiltrates in infants with Langerhans cell histiocytosis. Seborrheic dermatitis is a common cutaneous manifestation of AIDS in young adults and is
characterized by thick, greasy scales on the scalp and large hyperkeratotic
erythematous plaques on the face, chest, and genitals.
During adolescence, seborrheic dermatitis is more localized and may
be confined to the scalp, chest, and intertriginous areas. Also noted
may be marginal blepharitis and involvement of the external auditory
canal. Scalp changes vary from diffuse, brawny scaling to focal areas
of thick, oily, yellow crusts with underlying erythema. Loss of hair is
uncommon, and pruritus may be absent to marked. When the dermatitis is severe, erythema and scaling occur at the frontal hairline, the
medial aspects of the eyebrows, and in the nasolabial and retroauricular folds. Red, scaly plaques may appear in the axillae, inguinal region,
gluteal cleft, and umbilicus. On the extremities, seborrheic plaques may
be more eczematous and less erythematous and demarcated. Unlike
infantile seborrheic dermatitis, adolescent seborrheic dermatitis generally does not self-­resolve and has a chronic relapsing course.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The differential diagnosis of seborrheic dermatitis includes psoriasis,
atopic dermatitis, dermatophytosis, Langerhans cell histiocytosis, and
candidiasis. Secondary bacterial infections and superimposed candidiasis are common.

TREATMENT

Initial management for infantile seborrheic dermatitis is generally conservative given the self-­limited nature of this condition.

Fig. 696.11 Seborrheic dermatitis may occasionally be more wide-

spread. (From Tom WL, Eichenfield LF. Eczematous disorders. In:
Eichenfield LF, Frieden IJ, eds. Neonatal and Infant Dermatology, 3rd
ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015: Fig. 15.11, p. 225.)

Emollients, baby oil, gentle shampooing with nonmedicated baby
shampoo, and gentle use of a soft brush to remove scales are usually effective measures. Persistent lesions may be treated with low-­
potency topical corticosteroids if inflamed (applied once daily for 1
week) and a topical antifungal (e.g., ketoconazole 2% cream twice
daily). Antifungal shampoos such as ketoconazole 2% shampoo
should be used cautiously because they are not tear-­free.
First-­line therapy for children and adolescents with scalp seborrheic dermatitis is antifungal shampoo used several times weekly
to daily (selenium sulfide, ketoconazole, ciclopirox, zinc pyrithione, salicylic acid, or tar). Mid-­
potency topical corticosteroids
such as fluocinolone 0.01% oil or triamcinolone 0.1% lotion may
also be used for inflamed lesions, applied once daily for 2-­4 weeks.
Nonscalp lesions are treated with topical corticosteroid cream
(low-­potency for facial lesions, mid-­potency elsewhere), as well
as topical antifungals such as ketoconazole 2% cream or ketoconazole 2% shampoo used as a body or face wash. Second-­line therapy
for seborrheic dermatitis includes topical calcineurin inhibitors
and keratolytic agents such as urea. Severe adult cases improve
with oral antifungal agents; however, pediatric studies are lacking.
Once acute disease is controlled, antifungal shampoo used on a
twice-­weekly basis is effective maintenance to reduce the risk of
relapse.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 697 u Photosensitivity

Chapter 697

Photosensitivity
Julie M. Dhossche and Yvonne E. Chiu
Photosensitivity denotes an abnormal cutaneous reaction to UV radiation, either in sunlight or artificial light. The UV light spectrum contains UVA (320-­400 nm wavelength), UVB (290-­320 nm wavelength),
and UVC (100-­290 nm wavelength) subtypes. Transmitted radiation
<300 nm is largely absorbed in the epidermis, whereas >300 nm is
mostly transmitted to the dermis after variable epidermal melanin
absorption. Children vary in susceptibility to UV radiation, depending
on their skin type (i.e., its amount of pigment; Table 697.1).

ACUTE SUNBURN REACTION

The most common photosensitive reaction seen in children is acute
sunburn, which is caused mainly by UVB radiation. Sunlight contains many times more UVA than UVB radiation, but UVA must be
encountered in much larger quantities than UVB radiation to produce
sunburn. Immediate pigment darkening is caused by UVA radiation–
induced photo-­oxidative darkening of existing melanin and its transfer from melanocytes to keratinocytes. This effect generally lasts for
a few hours and is not photoprotective. UVB-­induced effects appear
6-­12 hours after initial exposure and reach a peak in 24 hours. Effects
include redness, tenderness, edema, and blistering (Fig. 697.1). Severe
sunburn induces systemic symptoms of fever, nausea, and headache.
Reactive oxidation species generated by UVB induce keratinocyte
membrane damage and are involved in the pathogenesis of sunburn.
A portion of the vasodilation seen in UVB-­induced erythema is mediated by prostaglandins E2, E3, and F2A. Other inflammatory cytokines
induced by UVB include interleukins 1, 6, and 8 and tumor necrosis
factor-­α. Acute sunburn is a self-­limited condition that resolves within
1 week with desquamation and without scarring. Delayed melanogenesis as a result of UVB radiation begins in 2-­3 days and lasts several days
to a few weeks. Manufacture of new melanin in melanocytes, transfer of melanin from melanocytes to keratinocytes, increase in size and
arborization of melanocytes, and activation of quiescent melanocytes
produce delayed melanogenesis and pigment darkening (tanning).
This effect reduces skin sensitivity to future UV-­induced erythema. The
amount of protection afforded depends on the skin type of the patient.
Additional effects and possible complications of sun exposure include
increased thickness of the stratum corneum, recurrence or exacerbation of herpes simplex labialis, lupus erythematosus, and many other
conditions (Table 697.2).
Acute sunburn should be managed conservatively with cool compresses, aloe vera products, and calamine lotion. Oral analgesics such
as ibuprofen and acetaminophen may decrease pain. Topical corticosteroids are only helpful in the acute phase and generally should not
Table 697.1  Sun-­Reactive Skin Types
FITZPATRICK SKIN TYPE

SUNBURN, TANNING HISTORY

I

Always burns easily, no tanning

II

Usually burns, minimal tanning

III

Sometimes burns, gradual light
brown tan

IV

Minimal to no burning, always tans

V

Rarely burns, tans profusely dark
brown

VI

Never burns, pigmented black

4093

be used to treat sunburn once peak erythema has been reached (∼24
hours). Topical anesthetics are relatively ineffective and potentially
hazardous because of their propensity to cause contact dermatitis. A
bland emollient, such as plain petrolatum, is effective in the desquamative phase.
The long-­term sequelae of chronic and intense sun exposure are
not often seen in children, but most individuals receive >50% of their
lifetime UV dose by age 20 years; therefore pediatricians have a pivotal role in educating patients and their parents about the harmful
effects, potential malignancy risks, and irreversible skin damage that
result from prolonged exposure to the sun and tanning lights. Premature aging, senile elastosis, actinic keratoses, squamous and basal cell
carcinomas, and melanomas all occur with greater frequency in sun-­
damaged skin. In particular, blistering sunburns in childhood and adolescence significantly increase the risk for development of malignant
melanoma.
Sun protection is best achieved by sun avoidance, which includes
minimizing time in the midday sun (10 am to 4 pm), staying in the
shade, and wearing protective clothing including wide-­brimmed hats.
Protection is enhanced by a wide variety of sunscreen agents. Physical sunscreens (zinc oxide, titanium dioxide) that block UV light are
preferred, whereas chemical sunscreens (para-­
aminobenzoic acid
[PABA], PABA esters, salicylates, benzophenones, avobenzone, cinnamates, and ecamsule) absorb damaging radiation. Some of these
products may be systemically absorbed and achieve levels higher than
permitted by the FDA. Most chemical sunscreens are effective for only
UVB wavelengths but benzophenones and avobenzone provide protection in both the UVA and UVB ranges; ecamsule is a UVA sunscreen.
Stabilizers such as octocrylene and diethyl 2,6-­naphthalate increase the
time of function of the chemical sunscreens. “Broad-­spectrum” sunscreens are combination products that absorb both UVA and UVB, and
families should be advised to use products labeled as “broad spectrum”
with a sun protective factor (SPF) of at least 30, reapply liberally at least
every 2 hours while outdoors, and reapply after swimming. Infants
younger than 6 months of age should not be exposed to direct sunlight
but may have SPF 15 physical sunscreens applied to small areas of skin
if sunlight avoidance is not possible. SPF is defined as the minimal dose
of sunlight required to produce cutaneous erythema after application
of a sunscreen, divided by the dose required with no use of sunscreen.
SPF applies only to UVB protection; there is no associated rating for
UVA protection in the United States aside from the “broad spectrum”
designation.

PHOTOSENSITIVE REACTIONS

Photosensitizers in combination with a particular wavelength of light
(typically UVA) cause dermatitis that can be classified as phototoxic or
photoallergic reactions. Contact with the photosensitizer may occur
externally on the skin, internally by enteral or parenteral administration, or through host synthesis of photosensitizers in response to an
administered drug.
Photoallergic reactions occur in only a small percentage of persons
exposed to photosensitizers and light and require a time interval for
sensitization to take place. Thereafter, dermatitis appears within 24
hours of reexposure to the photosensitizer and light. Typically, patients
present with an eczematous eruption in sun-­exposed areas with sparing
behind the ear, under the chin, and under clothing. Photoallergic dermatitis is a T-­cell–mediated delayed hypersensitivity reaction in which
the drug, acting as a hapten, may combine with a skin protein to form
the antigenic substance. Table 697.2 lists some of the important classes
of drugs and chemicals responsible for photosensitivity reactions. The
most common photoallergens are chemicals present in sunscreens.
Phototoxic reactions occur in all individuals who accumulate adequate amounts of a photosensitizing drug or chemical within the skin.
UV radiation excites the agent to a state capable of causing cell or tissue damage through reactive oxygen species formation. Prior sensitization is not required. Dermatitis develops within hours after exposure
to radiation in the range of 285-­450 nm. The eruption is confined to
light-­exposed areas and often resembles exaggerated sunburn, but it

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4094 Part XXIX u The Skin
Table 697.2  Cutaneous Reactions to Sunlight
Sunburn
Photoallergic Drug Eruptions
• Systemic drugs include tetracyclines, psoralens, chlorothiazides,
sulfonamides, barbiturates, griseofulvin, thiazides, quinidine,
phenothiazines
• Topical agents include coal tar derivatives, psoralens,
halogenated salicylanilides (soaps), perfume oils (e.g., oil of
bergamot), sunscreens (e.g., PABA, cinnamates, benzophenones)

Fig. 697.1 Sunburn. Well-­demarcated, severe erythema.
may be urticarial or bullous. It results in postinflammatory hyperpigmentation. All the drugs that cause photoallergic reactions may also
cause a phototoxic dermatitis if given in sufficiently high doses. Several
additional drugs and contactants cause phototoxic reactions (see Table
697.2). Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation develops rapidly and can
be the presenting sign. Contact with furocoumarin-­containing plants
causes a nonallergic disorder called phytophotodermatitis (Figs. 697.2
and 697.3). The most common phytophotodermatitis seen in children
is caused by lime juice, which presents as hyperpigmentation in streaky
patterns on sun-­exposed skin consistent with dripping juice or handprints (see Table 697.2).
Diagnosis of photosensitive reactions caused by drugs or chemicals
relies on a high index of suspicion, an appreciation of the distribution
pattern of the eruption, and a history of application or ingestion of a
known photosensitizing agent. Phototesting and photopatch testing are
also helpful when available. First-­line treatment for both photoallergy
and phototoxicity consists of discontinuation of the offending agent and
good sun protection practices, including avoidance of sun exposure.
Photoallergic reactions are treated similarly to contact dermatitis, with
a topical corticosteroid to alleviate pruritus when necessary. Severe reactions may necessitate a 2-­to 3-­week course of systemic corticosteroid
therapy. Phototoxic reactions are treated similarly to sunburn, with comfort measures such as cool compresses, emollients, and oral analgesics.

PORPHYRIAS

See Chapter 112.
Porphyrias are acquired or inborn disorders due to genetic variants
of specific enzymes in the heme biosynthetic pathway. Some have childhood photosensitivity as a consistent feature. The pathogenesis of photosensitivity in porphyria relates to deposition of excess porphyrins in
the skin; UV radiation excites these molecules, causing cell and tissue
damage via generation of reactive oxygen species. Signs and symptoms
may be negligible during the winter, when sun exposure is minimal.
Congenital erythropoietic porphyria (Günther disease) is a rare
autosomal recessive disorder affecting the enzyme uroporphyrinogen
III synthase. It may cause hydrops fetalis, but more typically manifests in the first few months of life as hemolytic anemia and exquisite
sensitivity to light, which may induce repeated severe bullous eruptions that result in mutilating scars (Fig. 697.4). Hyperpigmentation,
hyperkeratosis, vesiculation, and fragility of skin, as well as various nail
changes, develop in light-­exposed areas. Light therapy for an affected
neonate presenting with jaundice may inadvertently induce skin manifestations. Hirsutism in areas of mild involvement, scarring alopecia
in severely affected areas, pink to red urine, brown teeth (erythrodontia), splenomegaly, and corneal ulceration are additional characteristic
manifestations. Laboratory findings include uroporphyrin I and coproporphyrin I in urine, plasma, and erythrocytes and coproporphyrin I
in feces. Teeth and urine from affected patients fluoresce reddish pink
under a Wood lamp as a result of the presence of porphyrins. Hepatoerythropoietic porphyria, a separate entity, has skin findings that
closely resemble those seen in congenital erythropoietic porphyria; this
extremely rare disorder presents in early childhood and is discussed in
greater depth in Chapter 112.

Phototoxic Drug Eruptions
• Systemic agents include nalidixic acid, furosemide, nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory agents (naproxen, piroxicam), and high doses of
agents causing photoallergic eruptions
• Topical agents include 5-­fluorouracial, furocoumarins and high
doses of agents causing photoallergic eruptions
Phytophotodermatosis
• Furocoumarin-­containing plants: fig tree leaves and sap, limes,
celery, fennel, carrots, parsley, dill, parsnips
Genetic Disorders with Photosensitivity
• Xeroderma pigmentosum
• Bloom syndrome
• Cockayne syndrome
• Rothmund-­Thomson syndrome
• Trichothiodystrophy
• Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz syndrome
• Kindler syndrome
Inborn Errors of Metabolism
• Porphyrias
• Hartnup disease and pellagra
Infectious Diseases Associated with Photosensitivity
• Recurrent herpes simplex infection
• Viral exanthems (accentuated photodistribution; e.g., varicella)
Skin Diseases Exacerbated or Precipitated by Light
• Lichen planus
• Darier disease
• Lupus erythematosus, including neonatal
• Dermatomyositis
• Psoriasis
• Erythema multiforme
• Atopic dermatitis
• Hailey-­Hailey disease
Deficient Protection Because of a Lack of Pigment
• Vitiligo
• Oculocutaneous albinism
• Phenylketonuria
• Chédiak-­Higashi syndrome
• Hermansky-­Pudlak syndrome
• Waardenburg syndrome
• Piebaldism
PABA, para-­aminobenzoic acid.

Erythropoietic protoporphyria may be autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, or X-­linked and most commonly involves the enzyme
ferrochelatase (FECH), the final enzyme in the heme synthetic pathway. Symptoms develop in early childhood and manifest as intense
pain, tingling, or pruritus within 30 minutes of sun exposure, followed
by erythema, edema, urticaria, or mild systemic symptoms; these
acute manifestations resolve completely within days. The absence of
blistering distinguishes erythropoietic protoporphyria from the other
cutaneous porphyrias. Nail changes consist of opacification of the nail
plate, onycholysis, pain, and tenderness. Recurrent sun exposure produces a subtle chronic eczematous dermatitis with thickened, lichenified skin, especially over the finger joints (Fig. 697.5A), as well as mild
facial scarring (see Fig. 697.5B). Pigmentation, hypertrichosis, skin fragility, and mutilation are not seen. Gallstones develop frequently; however, severe liver disease occurs in <5% of patients. Protoporphyrin is
detected in plasma, erythrocytes, and feces. X-­linked protoporphyria

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 697 u Photosensitivity
is a similar disorder to erythropoietic protoporphyria but is due to a
pathogenic genetic variant in 5-­aminolevulinic acid synthetase (the
first and rate-­controlling enzyme of heme synthesis) and therefore does
not have iron overload or associated anemia.
The wavelengths of light mainly responsible for eliciting cutaneous
reactions in porphyria are in the region of 400 nm (UVA light). Window
glass, including that in automobiles, transmits wavelengths >320 nm
and is not protective, and fluorescent indoor lights may be pathogenic.
Patients must avoid direct sunlight, wear protective clothing, and use
a sunscreen agent that effectively blocks UVA light. Oral beta-­carotene
also provides some photoprotective benefit. Afamelanotide, an alpha-­
melanocyte–stimulating hormone (α-­MSH) analog, is approved by the
FDA for treatment of erythropoietic protoporphyria to increase pain-­
free light exposure. This drug serves to increase skin pigmentation by
increasing melanin production by melanocytes, resulting in increased
UV tolerance.
Cutaneous porphyria symptoms are typically constant throughout
life, and secondary bacterial infections commonly complicate the disease course. Cutaneous porphyrias do not appear to increase the risk
for skin malignancies. Additional diagnostic and treatment recommendations for the porphyrias are outlined in Chapter 112.

4095

Pseudoporphyria is a porphyria-­like reaction characterized by erythema, blistering, and scarring on sun-­exposed skin seen occasionally
in patients with juvenile idiopathic arthritis taking nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents.

COLLOID MILIUM

Colloid milium is a rare, asymptomatic disorder that occurs on the face
(nose, upper lip, and upper cheeks) and may extend to the dorsum of
the hands and the neck as a profuse eruption of tiny, ivory to yellow,
firm, grouped papules. Lesions appear before puberty on otherwise
normal skin, unlike the adult variant that develops on sun-­damaged
skin. Onset may follow an acute sunburn or long-­term sun exposure. Most cases reach maximal severity within 3 years and remain
unchanged thereafter, although the condition may remit spontaneously
after puberty. Treatment is usually not necessary.

HYDROA VACCINIFORME

Hydroa vacciniforme is a vesiculobullous disorder with unclear etiology, although chronic or latent Epstein-­Barr virus infections or lymphoproliferative disorders have been implicated. It begins in early
childhood and may remit at puberty, with peak incidence in the spring
and summer. Erythematous, pruritic macules develop symmetrically
within hours of sun exposure over the ears, nose, lips, cheeks, and dorsal
surfaces of the hands and forearms. Lesions progress to stinging tender
papules and hemorrhagic vesicles and bullae, resembling chickenpox.
They become umbilicated, ulcerated, and crusted, eventually healing
with pitted scars and telangiectasias. Associated features are rare but
include fever, malaise, hypersensitivity to mosquito bites, conjunctivitis, and other ocular symptoms. This eruption should be distinguished

Fig. 697.2 Phytophotodermatitis (fig tree leaves). (From Papazoglou A, Mantadakis E. Fig tree leaves phytophotodermatitis. J Pediatr.
2021;239:244–245, Fig.1A.)

Fig. 697.4 Crusted ulcerations in an infant with congenital erythropoietic porphyria.

Fig. 697.3 Phytophotodermatitis

A

B

(lime). A, Linear hyperpigmentation on the left cheek. B, A linear
streak of hyperpigmentation on
the right dorsal hand along with
irregular hyperpigmentation of
the bilateral dorsal fingers. (From
Dreher K, Evans MS. Linear hyperpigmentation in chronic phytophotodermatitis from limes. J Pediatr.
2021;239:245–246.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4096 Part XXIX u The Skin

A
Fig. 697.6 Urticaria after 5 min of exposure to artificial ultraviolet A
radiation.

B
Fig. 697.5 Erythropoietic protoporphyria. A, Erythematous thicken-

ing over the metacarpal phalangeal joints. B, Linear crusts and scarring.

from erythropoietic protoporphyria, which rarely shows vesicles. Typical lesions have been reproduced with repeated doses of UVA or UVB
light. First-­line treatment includes sun avoidance, broad-­spectrum
sunscreens, and other sun-­protective habits. Other potential therapies
include mid-­potency topical corticosteroids for inflamed lesions, low-­
dose courses of narrow-­band UVB (NB-­UVB) therapy, beta-­carotene,
hydroxychloroquine, or antiviral agents such as acyclovir.

SOLAR URTICARIA

Solar urticaria is a rare disorder induced by UV or visible irradiation.
The disorder is mediated by immunoglobulin E antibodies to either an
abnormal photoallergen present only in affected patients (type I) or a
normal photoallergen ordinarily present in skin (type II), leading to
mast cell degranulation and histamine release. Classic urticarial lesions
consisting of erythematous pruritic wheals develop on sun-­exposed
skin (Fig. 697.6) within 5-­10 minutes of sun exposure and fade within
24 hours. Severe reactions involving large areas of skin may lead to systemic symptoms or anaphylaxis. Diagnosis is achieved by history alone
or with phototesting. First-­line treatment is an oral H1 antihistamine,
plus sun avoidance and protection. Second-­line therapy possibilities
include oral or topical corticosteroids, photodesensitization using NB-­
UVB, omalizumab, or intravenous immunoglobulin.

POLYMORPHOUS LIGHT ERUPTION

Polymorphous light eruption (PMLE) is a common photosensitivity
reaction that develops most commonly in females. The first eruption
typically appears in the spring after the first episode of prolonged sun
exposure of the season. Onset of the eruption is delayed by hours to
days after sun exposure and lasts for days to sometimes weeks. PMLE
usually resolves with increased sun exposure throughout the spring
and summer. Areas of involvement tend to be symmetric and are characteristic for a given patient, including some, but not all, of the exposed
or lightly covered skin on the face, neck, upper chest, and distal
extremities. Lesions have various morphologies but most commonly
are pruritic, 2-­to 5-­mm, grouped, erythematous papules or papulovesicles or >5-­cm edematous plaques; lesions are nonscarring. A PMLE
variant known as juvenile spring eruption characteristically occurs

on affected boys’ ears each spring, and pinpoint papular PMLE is a
variant characterized by pinpoint-­sized lesions occurring in darker-­
skinned individuals. Most PMLE cases involve sensitivity to UVA
radiation, although some are UVB induced. PMLE most likely results
from a delayed-­type hypersensitivity reaction to a photo-­induced antigen within the skin, with individuals having a genetic predisposition.
Provocative phototesting, as well as skin biopsy (showing epidermal
spongiosis and superficial and deep lymphocytic infiltrate), aid in diagnosis. Treatment is aimed at prevention with sun avoidance, protective clothing, and broad-­spectrum sunscreens. Topical corticosteroids
(low-­potency for facial lesions, high-­potency for lesions elsewhere) can
be used for mild eruptions. Second-­line approaches include prophylactic NB-­UVB phototherapy or hydroxychloroquine in early spring and
short-­course systemic glucocorticoids for severe flares.

ACTINIC PRURIGO

Actinic prurigo, often classified as a variant of PMLE, is a chronic
familial photodermatitis inherited as an autosomal dominant trait seen
most commonly in Native Americans of North and South America.
Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) DRB1*0407 (60–70%) and HLA
DRB1*0401 (20%) are strongly associated with actinic prurigo. Most
patients are female and are sensitive to UVA radiation. The first episode generally occurs in early childhood, several hours to 2 days after
intense sun exposure. The papulonodular lesions are intensely pruritic, erythematous, and crusted. Areas of predilection include the face
(Fig. 697.7), lower lip, distal extremities, and, in severe cases, buttocks.
Facial lesions may heal with minute pitted or linear scarring. Lesions
often become chronic, without periods of total clearing, merging into
eczematous plaques that become lichenified and occasionally secondarily infected. Associated features that distinguish this disorder from
other photoeruptions and atopic dermatitis include cheilitis, conjunctivitis, and traumatic alopecia of the outer half of the eyebrows. Actinic
prurigo is a chronic condition that generally persists into adult life,
although it may improve spontaneously in the late teenage years. Sun
avoidance, protective clothing, and broad-­spectrum sunscreens may be
helpful in preventing the eruption. Mid-­to high-­potency topical corticosteroids and antihistamines palliate the pruritus and inflammation.
Severe acute eruptions may require oral glucocorticoids. Treatment
with NB-­UVB beginning in springtime has shown improved tolerance
of sunlight during summer months; however, it may induce symptoms
in some patients. Thalidomide 50-­100 mg/day is very effective, but its
use is limited by toxicity, especially severe birth defects when taken by
pregnant females. Dupilumab is described in case reports to be helpful.

COCKAYNE SYNDROME

Cockayne syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive disorder. Onset
occurs at 1 year of age and is characterized by facial erythema in a butterfly distribution after sun exposure. Later characteristics include loss
of adipose tissue and development of thin, atrophic, hyperpigmented

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 697 u Photosensitivity

Fig. 697.7 Erythematous, excoriated papules in actinic prurigo.
skin, particularly over the face. Associated features include stunted
growth; dwarfism; microcephaly; progressive neurologic dysfunction
(caused by leukodystrophy); mental retardation; progressive dementia;
distinct facies (aged look, pinched nose, sunken eyes, large protuberant
ears); long limbs; disproportionately large hands and feet; cool and cyanotic extremities; carious teeth; unsteady gait with tremor; limitation
of joint mobility; progressive deafness; cataracts; retinal degeneration;
optic atrophy; decreased sweating and tearing; and premature graying
of the hair. Complications include diabetes and hepatic or renal impairment. Diffuse extensive demyelination of the peripheral and central
nervous systems ensues, and patients generally die of atheromatous
vascular disease or infections (especially pneumonia) before the third
decade. There are two types of Cockayne syndrome. Type I (CSA gene)
is less severe than type II (CSB gene). Patients may have xeroderma
pigmentosum–Cockayne syndrome overlap, which is phenotypically
more like Cockayne syndrome and is due to genetic variants in XPB,
XPD, or XPG genes. Photosensitivity in Cockayne syndrome is a result
of deficient nucleotide excision repair of UV-­induced damage, specifically within actively transcribing regions of DNA (transcription-­
coupled DNA repair). The etiology of neurologic and other associated
features remains unclear; however, evidence points toward a mitochondriopathy. The syndrome is distinguished from progeria (see Chapter
111) by the presence of photosensitivity and ocular abnormalities and
from xeroderma pigmentosum by the fact that patients with Cockayne
syndrome do not develop sun-­induced pigmentation or increased risk
of skin cancers. Diagnosis is accomplished by genetic testing and performing various tests on cultured fibroblasts. The mainstay of treatment for the photosensitivity of Cockayne syndrome is strict sunlight
avoidance and protective measures.

XERODERMA PIGMENTOSUM

Xeroderma pigmentosum is a rare autosomal recessive disorder that
results from a defect in nucleotide excision repair. Eight genetic
groups have been recognized on the basis of each group’s separate
defect in ability to repair (xeroderma pigmentosum A through G) or
replicate (xeroderma pigmentosum V [variant]) damaged DNA. The
wavelength of light that induces the DNA damage ranges from 280
to 340 nm. Skin changes are first noted during infancy or early childhood in sun-­exposed areas, though lesions may occur at other sites,
including the scalp. The skin lesions consist of erythema, scaling,
bullae, crusting, ephelides (freckles), telangiectasia, keratoses (Fig.
697.8), basal and squamous cell carcinomas, and malignant melanomas. Interestingly, although most patients experience exaggerated
acute sunburn reactions after minimal UV exposure, up to half of
affected patients do not and instead develop progressive freckling.
This difference in presentation depends on genetic subtype. Ocular
manifestations include photophobia, lacrimation, blepharitis, symblepharon, keratitis, corneal opacities, tumors of the lids, and possible eventual blindness. Neurologic abnormalities such as cognitive
deterioration and sensorineural deafness develop in approximately
20% of patients.

4097

Fig. 697.8 Dyspigmentation and actinic keratoses in child with xeroderma pigmentosum.

This disease is a serious mutilating disorder, and the life span
of an affected patient is often brief. Affected families should have
genetic counseling. Xeroderma pigmentosum is detectable in cells
cultured from amniotic fluid or DNA analysis of chorionic villous
samples. Cultured skin fibroblast tests and genetic testing after
birth also confirm diagnosis. Affected children should be totally
protected from sun exposure; protective clothing, sunglasses, and
opaque broad-­spectrum sunscreens should be used even for mildly
affected children. Light from unshielded fluorescent bulbs and sunlight passing through glass windows (including vehicle windows)
are also harmful; thus applied window films are recommended.
Early detection and removal of malignancies is mandatory, and oral
isotretinoin may be used to prevent nonmelanoma skin cancers.
Average age of death of these patients is 32 years. There is crossover
between several subtypes of xeroderma pigmentosum and both
Cockayne syndrome and trichothiodystrophy.

ROTHMUND-­THOMSON SYNDROME

Rothmund-­Thomson syndrome is also known as poikiloderma
congenitale because of the striking skin changes (Fig. 697.9). It is
inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. Pathogenic genetic variants in the RECQL4 gene, which encodes a DNA helicase involved
in repair and replication of DNA and telomeres, are found in
approximately 65% of patients. The other genetic variants causing
Rothmund-­Thomson syndrome are unknown. Skin changes are
noted as early as 3 months of age and begin on the face. Plaques of
erythema and edema appear in a butterfly distribution and on the
forehead, ears, neck, dorsal portions of the hands, extensor surfaces
of the arms, and buttocks. These are replaced gradually by poikiloderma (reticulated, atrophic, hyperpigmented, and hypopigmented
telangiectatic patches or plaques). Palmoplantar hyperkeratosis
develops in one third of patients. Light sensitivity is present in many
cases, and exposure to the sun may provoke formation of bullae.
Areas of involvement, however, are not strictly photodistributed.
Short stature; small hands and feet; sparse eyebrows, eyelashes,
and pubic and axillary hair and sparse, fine, prematurely gray
scalp hair or alopecia; dystrophic nails; various tooth and skeletal
abnormalities; and hypogonadism are common. One of the more
distinguishing features is an increased incidence of juvenile subcapsular bilateral cataracts. Most patients have normal mental development. Keratoses and later squamous cell carcinomas may develop
on exposed skin. The most worrisome association is osteosarcoma,
which occurs in 30% of those patients with Rothmund-­Thomson
syndrome and RECQL4 pathogenic genetic variants. Genetic testing aids in diagnosis. Management of dermatologic findings begins
with sun avoidance and protection behaviors, and telangiectatic
lesions have been shown to respond to pulsed dye laser therapy. In
the absence of malignancy, life expectancy is normal.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4098 Part XXIX u The Skin

Chapter 698

Diseases of the Epidermis
698.1 Psoriasis
Julie M. Dhossche and Yvonne E. Chiu
Psoriasis affects 2–4% of the U.S. population, and pediatric psoriasis
accounts for approximately one third of all cases.
Fig. 697.9 Poikiloderma on the arm of an infant with Rothmund-­
Thomson syndrome.

BLOOM SYNDROME

Bloom syndrome is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner,
most commonly in the Ashkenazi Jewish population. It is caused by
pathogenic genetic variants in the BLM/RECQL3 gene encoding a
DNA helicase. Patients are sensitive to UV radiation, with increased
rates of chromosomal breaks and sister chromatid exchanges. Erythema and telangiectasia develop during infancy in a butterfly
distribution on the face after exposure to sunlight. A bullous eruption on the lips and telangiectatic erythema on the cheeks, hands,
and forearms may develop. Café-­au-­lait spots and hypopigmented
macules may be present. Intrauterine growth deficiency developing into short stature, referred to as “proportionate dwarfism,” and
a distinctive facies consisting of a prominent nose and ears and a
small, narrow face are generally found. Intellect is average to low
average. Immunodeficiency is seen in all patients, manifesting as
recurrent ear and pulmonary infections. Gastrointestinal malabsorption, gastroesophageal reflux, and hypogonadism are common.
Affected children have an unusual tendency to develop both solid
tumors (especially of the skin) and lymphoreticular malignancies,
which often result in death during childhood or early adulthood.
Sister chromatid exchange analysis is generally performed to confirm diagnosis. The only effective measures to reduce skin disease
are sun protection and avoidance.

HARTNUP DISEASE

See Chapter 105.5.
Hartnup disease is a rare inborn error of metabolism with autosomal recessive inheritance. Neutral amino acids, including tryptophan, are not transported across the brush border epithelium
of the intestine and kidneys due to a pathogenic variant in the
SLC6A19 gene encoding the transporter. This results in deficiency
of nicotinamide synthesis and causes a photo-­induced pellagra-­like
syndrome. The urine contains increased amounts of monoamine
monocarboxylic amino acids, distinguishing Hartnup disease
from dietary pellagra. Cutaneous signs, which precede neurologic
manifestations, initially develop during the early months of life.
An eczematous, occasionally vesiculobullous, eruption occurs on
the face and extremities in a glove-­and-­stocking photodistribution.
Hyperpigmentation and hyperkeratosis may supervene and are
intensified by further exposure to sunlight. Episodic flares may be
precipitated by febrile illness, sun exposure, emotional stress, and
poor nutrition. In most cases, mental development is normal, but
some patients display emotional instability and episodic cerebellar
ataxia. Neurologic symptoms are fully reversible. Administration of
nicotinamide and protection from sunlight result in improvement
of both cutaneous and neurologic manifestations.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

ETIOLOGY/PATHOGENESIS

Psoriasis is an inflammatory autoimmune-­related disease characterized
by inflammation and keratinocyte proliferation (Fig. 698.1). Within the
dermis, dendritic cells are activated by self-­antigens and release cytokines
such as interferon-­γ, tumor necrosis factor, and interleukin (IL)-­12, IL-­
17, IL-­22, and IL-­23, which recruit T cells. Once activated, the T cells
release cytokines that induce proliferation and abnormal differentiation
of epidermal keratinocytes; in turn, more cytokines are produced to perpetuate the cycle. Psoriasis has a complex multifactorial genetic basis.
Family history of psoriasis is present in ∼50% of patients, typically a
first-­degree relative. The major psoriasis-­susceptibility gene (PSORS1) is
human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-­CW*0602, encoding a class I major histocompatibility complex protein involved in recognition of self-­antigens.
Numerous other psoriasis susceptibility genes have been identified.
Factors contributing to disease onset/flares in some patients include
bacterial and viral infections, trauma, physical or emotional stress,
tobacco use/secondhand exposure, and certain medications.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

This common chronic skin disorder is first evident within the first 2
decades of life for approximately 30% of affected individuals. Plaque
psoriasis, the most common (>80%) subtype, is characterized by
erythematous papules that coalesce to form plaques with sharply
demarcated, irregular borders (Fig. 698.2A-­D). If they are unaltered
by treatment, a thick silvery or yellow-­white scale (resembling mica)
develops (see Fig. 698.2A). Removal of the scale may result in pinpoint bleeding (Auspitz sign). The Koebner phenomenon, in which
new lesions appear at sites of trauma, is a valuable diagnostic feature.
Lesions may occur anywhere, but preferred sites are the scalp, knees,
elbows, umbilicus, superior intergluteal fold, genitalia, and ear canal.
Nail involvement, a valuable diagnostic sign, is characterized by pitting of the nail plate, detachment of the plate (onycholysis), yellowish-­
brown subungual discoloration, and accumulation of subungual debris
(see Fig. 698.2G, H, and M). Plaques are generally asymptomatic; however, pruritus is more common in children than in adults.
Guttate psoriasis, a variant that occurs predominantly in children,
is characterized by an acute eruption of many oval or round papules
smaller than 1.5 cm that are morphologically identical to the larger
plaques of psoriasis (see Fig. 698.2N-­Q). Sites of predilection are the
trunk, face, and proximal portions of the limbs. The onset usually follows a few weeks after a streptococcal infection such as pharyngitis;
thus throat culture and serologic titers should be obtained. Guttate
psoriasis has also been observed after perianal streptococcal infection,
viral infections, sunburn, and withdrawal of systemic corticosteroid
therapy or tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-­α inhibitors. Clinical course
ranges from spontaneous resolution to chronic disease.
Pustular psoriasis is a multisystem autoinflammatory disease characterized by recurrent episodes with the sudden onset of fever, malaise,
extracutaneous organ involvement, and a diffuse erythematous-­pustular
exanthema. It may be associated with plaque psoriasis in some patients;
unregulated cytokine production as a result of pathogenic genetic variants in the IL36RN, AP1S3, and CARD14 genes are implicated in a subset of patients.
Psoriasis is rare in infants but may be severe and recalcitrant and
may pose a diagnostic problem. Psoriatic diaper rash is a common

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 698 u Diseases of the Epidermis 4099
Immunologic mechanisms underlying the persistence of psoriatic lesions

IL-23 and IL-17 signaling
Keratinocyte

Munro’s microabscesses
and NETosis

Parakeratosis
NF-κB

AP1

Post-transcriptional
mRNA stabilization

C/EBPs

MAPK
TRAF2 and TRAF5

Hyperkeratosis

CCL20
CXCL1
CXCL8

IKK

TAK1

TRAF6

Act1

IL-17RE

IL-17RC

IL-17RB

IL-17RA

IL-17RA

IL-17RA

IL-23
p19

p40

IL-17E

IL-19

IL-22
RORγt

TYK2
STAT3

JAK2

IL-24
AVPs

IL-12Rβ1
IL-23Rα

AMPs

IL-17C

IL-17A/A
IL-17A/F
IL-17F/F

IL-17

TNF-α
IL-17

T17/1 cell

IL-23Rα

IL-26

Th17

A

CCL20
CXCL1
CXCL8

T17 cell
IL-17

Acanthosis

IL-22
RORC

IL-36
IL-17C

IL-22
IL-29

IL-20
Remaining alterations in resolved psoriatic lesions

IFN-γ
IL-23

IL-22

IL-23

TNF-α
Tc17
Macrophages
and dendritic cells

Th22

T22 cell

Extended
capillary net

epidermal
B Strengthened
immune defense

Endothelial activation and
recruitment of immune cells

Th17

Hyperproliferation and altered
terminal differentiation of
keratinocytes

C
Fig. 698.1 Immune pathogenesis of psoriasis. The IL-­23 and IL-­17 pathway in psoriasis with elements of their signaling. A, IL-­23 acts on Th17 cells

via the transmembrane receptor complex composed of IL-­12Rβ1 and IL-­23Rα and intracellular JAK–STAT signaling and induces the expression of
IL-­17A, IL-­17F, and IL-­22, which act on epithelial cells through distinct receptor and signaling pathways. B, In psoriatic skin IL-­23 is essential for the
stabilization of the phenotype of IL-­17–producing lymphocytes, activates these cells, and enhances their cytokine production and pathogenicity.
IL-­17 mostly acts synergistically with other cytokines, leading to massive activation of immunologic pathways and cytokines such as IL-­22, IL-­20, and
IL-­24, promoting the epidermal changes. C, After successful antipsoriatic treatment, potentially pathogenetic T cells remain in the resolved psoriatic skin. Blood capillaries extend during psoriatic inflammation by angiogenic signals and recede slowly. AMP, antimicrobial protein; AVP, antiviral
protein; C/EBP, CCAAT-­enhancer-­binding protein; T17, Th17 and Tc17; T1, Th1 and Tc1; T22, Th22 and Tc22; Th, T helper cell; Tc, cytotoxic T cell;
NETosis, activation and release of neutrophil extracellular traps. (From Ghoreschi K, Balato A, Enerbäck C, Sabat R. Therapeutics targeting the IL-­23
and IL-­17 pathway in psoriasis. Lancet. 2021;397:754–766, Fig. 2.)

presentation in children younger than 2 years old. Other rare forms
include psoriatic erythroderma (>90% body surface area involvement),
linear psoriasis, palmoplantar psoriasis, and inverse psoriasis (occurring in intertriginous areas). Children may also develop juvenile psoriatic arthritis, with or without skin lesions.
Psoriasis may be triggered by mild trauma (piercing, tattoos), sun or
chemical burns, medications (β blockers, NSAIDs), or HIV infection.
Comorbid conditions include arthritis, Crohn disease, depression, and
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Psoriasis is a clinical diagnosis. The differential diagnosis of plaque-­
type psoriasis includes nummular dermatitis, tinea corporis, seborrheic dermatitis, postinfectious arthritis syndromes, and pityriasis
rubra pilaris. Scalp lesions may be confused with seborrheic dermatitis,

atopic dermatitis, or tinea capitis. Diaper area psoriasis may mimic seborrheic dermatitis, eczematous diaper dermatitis, perianal streptococcal disease, candidiasis, or allergic contact dermatitis. Guttate psoriasis
can be confused with viral exanthems, secondary syphilis, pityriasis
rosea, and pityriasis lichenoides chronica (PLC). Nail psoriasis must
be differentiated from onychomycosis, lichen planus, and other causes
of onychodystrophy.

PATHOLOGY

When the diagnosis is in doubt, histopathologic examination of an
untreated lesion can be helpful. Characteristic changes of psoriasis
include parakeratosis, acanthosis, elongated rete ridges, neutrophilic infiltrate in the epidermis sometimes forming microabscesses,
dilated dermal blood vessels, and lymphocytic infiltrate in the
dermis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4100 Part XXIX u The Skin

A

B

G

H

M

N

D

C

I

K

J

O

F

E

P

L

Q

Fig. 698.2 Clinical manifestations of psoriasis. Typical erythematous plaques with silvery scales (A) can be scattered (B, psoriasis nummularis),

cover larger areas of the skin (C, psoriasis geographica), or affect the entire body surface (D, erythrodermic psoriasis). Scalp involvement might be accompanied by nonscarring alopecia (E). Psoriatic arthritis affects up to 30% of all patients (F, thumb interphalangeal joint). Nail changes are frequent
and range from pitting and yellow or brown discoloration (G) to complete dystrophy (H). Psoriasis inversa occurs in intertriginous areas and is usually
devoid of scales (I). Pustular psoriasis might occur in a generalized form (J and K) or localized (L, palmoplantar type and M, acrodermatitis continua
suppurativa type). In children, the onset as guttate psoriasis might follow streptococcal infection of the upper respiratory tract (N) and affect any site
of the body (O-­Q). (From Boehncke WH, Schön MP. Psoriasis. Lancet. 2015;386:983–992, Fig. 1, p. 984.)

TREATMENT

The therapeutic approach varies with the age of the child, type of psoriasis, sites of involvement, and extent of the disease. Physical and
chemical trauma to the skin should be avoided as much as possible to
prevent Koebner-­response lesions. The treatment of psoriasis should
be viewed as a four-­tier process. Efficacy varies with each therapy
(Table 698.1).
The first tier is topical therapy. The first-­line topical agents for
lesions on the body are emollients, vitamin D analogs (calcipotriene
or calcitriol, although calcitriol is less irritating for children), and
mid-­to high-­potency corticosteroids (see Chapter 687). A proprietary formulation containing both calcipotriene and betamethasone
dipropionate (a high-­potency topical corticosteroid) exists in ointment
and solution forms. The preparation that is least potent but effective
should be applied twice a day. Second-­line topical options for lesions
on the body include retinoids (tazarotene), tar preparations, anthralin,
and keratolytics (salicylic acid or urea). Facial or intertriginous lesions
may be treated with low-­potency topical corticosteroids and/or topical
vitamin D analogs or calcineurin inhibitors as corticosteroid-­sparing
agents. For scalp lesions, applications of a phenol and saline solution
(e.g., Baker Cummins P&S liquid) or salicylic acid shampoo followed
by a tar shampoo are effective in the removal of scales. A high-­potency
to superpotency corticosteroid in a foam, solution, or lotion base may
be applied when the scaling is diminished. Nail lesions are difficult to
treat topically; the first-­line approach is a high-­potency topical corticosteroid to the proximal nail fold.

The second tier of therapy is phototherapy. Narrow-­band ultraviolet B (311 nm; NB-­UVB) is an effective and well-­tolerated alternative in
pediatric patients with plaque and guttate psoriasis poorly controlled
with topical treatments. Excimer (308 nm) laser UVB irradiation may
be used for localized treatment-­resistant plaques. Exposure to natural
sunlight is often effective for less severe psoriasis.
The third tier is systemic therapy for children with moderate to
severe, recalcitrant or generalized psoriasis. Methotrexate (0.2-­0.7 mg/
kg/wk to a maximum of 25 mg/week) is the first-­line systemic agent
for children; other options include oral retinoids (0.5-­1.0 mg/kg/day
to a maximum of 50 mg/day) and cyclosporine (modified formulation, 3-­5 mg/kg/day). Oral retinoids may be cautiously combined with
phototherapy, although doses may need to be decreased because of the
photosensitizing effects of the medication. Oral retinoids are also considered for generalized pustular and diffuse guttate psoriasis.
Biologic response modifiers are increasingly used in place of traditional oral agents. TNF-­α inhibitors such as etanercept, infliximab,
and adalimumab have increasingly been used for pediatric psoriasis.
Etanercept has FDA approval for those 4 years and older with psoriasis. One study reported a significant improvement in psoriatic lesions
at 12 weeks with 57% versus 11% of patients receiving etanercept or
placebo, respectively, achieving a 75% improvement in Psoriasis Area
and Severity Index-­75 (PASI-­75, a metric to evaluate psoriasis severity). Ustekinumab, a human monoclonal antibody that blocks IL-­12
and IL-­23 and their cell-­surface receptors, is approved for those 6 years
and older with moderate to severe psoriasis. Biologic IL-­17 inhibitors

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 698 u Diseases of the Epidermis 4101
Table 698.1  Recommendations for Pediatric Psoriasis
STRENGTH OF
RECOMMENDATION

LEVEL OF
EVIDENCE

Topical corticosteroids are recommended for the treatment of pediatric psoriasis as an off-­label
therapy

B

II

The use of ultra-­high-­potency topical corticosteroids as monotherapy is effective for short-­term
treatment of localized psoriasis in pediatric patients

C

II

Tacrolimus 0.1% ointment is recommended for off-­label use as monotherapy for pediatric psoriasis of
the face and genital region

C

II-­III

Calcipotriene/calcipotriol is recommended as a treatment option for childhood plaque psoriasis

B

II

Because of the theoretical risk of increased calcium absorption and systemic effects of hypercalcemia,
occlusion of calcipotriene/calcipotriol applied to large body surface areas is not recommended

B

III

Monitoring of vitamin D metabolites may be considered during calcipotriene/calcipotriol therapy
when applied to a large body surface area

B

I-­II

The combination of calcipotriol/betamethasone dipropionate ointment applied once daily for up
to 4 weeks at a time is recommended as a safe and effective treatment for children ages 12 yr and
older with mild to moderate plaque psoriasis

B

I-­II

The combination of calcipotriol/betamethasone dipropionate suspension applied once daily for up
to 8 wk at a time is recommended as a safe and effective treatment for children ages 12 yr and
older with mild to moderate plaque psoriasis of the scalp

B

II

The use of emollients (at the same time or different time of day) with topical calcipotriene may be
considered to reduce irritation and enhance the efficacy of calcipotriene

C

III

Rotational therapy with topical vitamin D analogues, topical calcineurin inhibitors, emollients,
tar-­based therapies, and topical corticosteroids may be considered in children as steroid-­sparing
regimens that may reduce potential adverse effects from overreliance on topical steroid therapy

C

II

The off-­label use of topical tazarotene may be recommended as monotherapy or in combination
with topical corticosteroids for the treatment of localized pediatric skin or nail psoriasis

C

III

Long-­term use (12 wk or longer) of topical anthralin is recommended for the treatment of mild to
moderate psoriasis. Short-­contact anthralin protocols are recommended to limit adverse effects

B

II

Coal tar preparations can be used as a monotherapy or combined with other topical therapies for
the treatment of pediatric psoriasis

C

II-­III

The use of coal tar preparations in conjunction with phototherapy is effective for the treatment of
psoriasis in children but may be limited by the theoretical long-­term risk of carcinogenesis

B

II-­III

NB-­UVB is recommended as a treatment option for moderate to severe pediatric plaque and guttate
psoriasis

B

II-­III

The use of excimer laser or PUVA therapy in children with psoriasis may be efficacious and well
tolerated but has limited supporting evidence

C

III

Methotrexate is recommended as an effective systemic therapy for moderate to severe plaque
psoriasis and other psoriasis subtypes in children

B

II-­III

Methotrexate is recommended as an effective systemic therapy for pustular psoriasis in children

B

III

Methotrexate weight-­based dosing is recommended in younger children, ranging from 0.2 to 0.7
mg/kg/wk (maximum, 25 mg/wk)

B

III

Folic acid supplementation daily or six times weekly during treatment with methotrexate is
recommended

B

II

Routine clinical and laboratory monitoring is recommended before and during treatment with
methotrexate

B

III

Cyclosporine is recommended as an effective systemic therapy for moderate to severe plaque
psoriasis in children

B

II-­III

Cyclosporine is recommended as an effective systemic therapy for moderate to severe pustular
psoriasis in children

B

III

Cyclosporine is recommended for short-­term crisis management of severe or unstable plaque,
erythrodermic, or pustular psoriasis until the patient can be transitioned to a medication
appropriate for long-­term use

C

III

Routine blood pressure clinical and laboratory monitoring is recommended during therapy with
cyclosporine

A

III

Modified cyclosporine (for microemulsion in capsules or solution) is recommended for use and is not
interchangeable with unmodified forms of cyclosporine

C

III

RECOMMENDATION

Continued
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4102 Part XXIX u The Skin
Table 698.1  Recommendations for Pediatric Psoriasis—cont’d
STRENGTH OF
RECOMMENDATION

LEVEL OF
EVIDENCE

Acitretin is recommended as an effective, nonimmunosuppressive systemic therapy for children with
extensive guttate or moderate to severe (ideally thin plaque) psoriasis vulgaris at a dosage of 0.1-­1
mg/kg/d

B

II

Acitretin is recommended as an effective systemic therapy for pustular psoriasis in children

B

II-­III

Acitretin combined with NB-­UVB therapy may be synergistic for plaque and pustular psoriasis in
childhood and allows for a reduction in dosing of both agents

C

III

Acitretin may be combined with other systemic therapies such as methotrexate or cyclosporine, or
biologics, depending on the individual clinical situation

C

III

Routine clinical and laboratory monitoring is recommended during therapy with acitretin

C

III

Fumaric acid esters may be considered as a potentially effective alternative therapy for pediatric
patients with moderate to severe psoriasis who are candidates for systemic therapy

C

II-­III

Clinical and laboratory monitoring is recommended during treatment with fumaric acid esters

C

III

Etanercept is recommended as an effective therapy for moderate to severe psoriasis in children 6 yr
of age and older

A

I-­III

Etanercept dosing is typically once weekly and is dosed subcutaneously at 0.8 mg/kg with a
maximum of 50 mg weekly

A

I, III

Adalimumab is recommended for off-­label use as an effective therapy in children and adolescents
with moderate to severe psoriasis

B

I, III

The dose of adalimumab is 0.8 mg/kg (maximum, 40 mg) at weeks 0 and 1 and then is given every
other week; adalimumab administered at a dose of 0.8 mg/kg is more efficacious than at a dose of
0.4 mg/kg

B

I

Infliximab can be recommended as monotherapy or in combination with methotrexate for use in
pediatric patients with severe plaque or pustular psoriasis that is unresponsive to other systemic
medications, rapidly progressive, unstable, and/or life threatening

C

III

The starting dose of infliximab is an infusion of 5 mg/kg administered on weeks 0, 2, and 6 and then
every 8 weeks

C

III

Ustekinumab is recommended as an effective therapy for adolescents 12 yr and older with moderate
to severe plaque psoriasis

A

I, III

Ustekinumab can be used as an effective therapy for pediatric patients younger than 12 yr old with
moderate to severe plaque psoriasis

C

III

Ustekinumab is given at weeks 0, 4, and 16 and then every 12 weeks with weight-­based dosing as
follows: 0.75 mg/kg if < 60 kg, 45 mg if 60 to 100 kg, and 90 mg if > 100 kg

B

I

Biologics may be safely combined with topical corticosteroids, with or without a vitamin D analogue,
to augment effectiveness for the treatment of moderate to severe plaque psoriasis

C

III

The major risk for biologics in children is injection site reaction, but patients should be monitored for
their increased risk of infection

B

II

RECOMMENDATION

Data from Menter A, Cordoro KM, Davis DMR, et al. Joint American Academy of Dermatology–National Psoriasis Foundation guidelines of care for the management and treatment
of psoriasis in pediatric patients. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2020;82(1):161–201, Tables XX–XLVIII, pp. 173–189.

secukinumab and ixekizumab are also FDA approved for those 6 and
older. The safety and efficacy data of these biologic agents show they
are generally well tolerated and efficacious in the treatment of moderate to severe plaque psoriasis. The primary risk is injection site reaction. A small-­molecule inhibitor of phosphodiesterase 4, apremilast, is
also used for pediatric psoriasis. IL-­23 inhibitors may also have a role
in the treatment of severe disease and are being studied in pediatric
populations.

PROGNOSIS

Prognosis is best for children with limited disease. Psoriasis is a lifelong disease characterized by remissions and exacerbations. Arthritis
or various eye diseases may be extracutaneous complications. Metabolic and cardiovascular disorders also occur with increased frequency
in patients with psoriasis. For example, an increasing degree of obesity
and the associated metabolic syndrome (hyperglycemia, hyperlipidemia, and hypertension) correlates with psoriasis severity. Patients with
psoriasis also have increased rates of stroke, myocardial infarction,

and other vascular diseases later in adult life. A proposed mechanism
involves the systemic proinflammatory state induced by both psoriasis and these associated conditions, although the direction of causality
remains unclear. Furthermore, children suffering from psoriasis have a
greater risk of taking psychotropic medications for anxiety or depression and are more likely to report impairment in quality of life due to
their chronic disease.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

698.2 Pityriasis Lichenoides
Julie M. Dhossche and Yvonne E. Chiu
Pityriasis lichenoides encompasses a disease spectrum ranging from PLC to pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta
(PLEVA; Mucha-­Habermann disease). The designation of pityriasis

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 698 u Diseases of the Epidermis 4103

Fig. 698.3 Widespread plaques with fine scale in pityriasis lichenoides
chronica.

Fig. 698.4 Necrotic lesion with erythematous halo in pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta.

lichenoides as acute or chronic refers to the morphologic appearance of the lesions rather than to the duration of the disease. No
correlation is found between the type of lesion at the onset of the
eruption and the duration of the disease. Many patients have both
acute and chronic lesions simultaneously, and transition of lesions
from one form into another occurs occasionally. As a result, some
authors advocate using pityriasis lichenoides as the general diagnosis rather than differentiating between PLC and PLEVA. Febrile
ulceronecrotic Mucha-­Habermann disease (FUMHD) is a rare subtype of PLEVA that is more severe and potentially life-­threatening.

ETIOLOGY/PATHOGENESIS

Two main theories exist for the etiology of pityriasis lichenoides. The
first is that it arises in a genetically susceptible individual as a hypersensitivity reaction to an infection. The second is that it represents a
monoclonal T-­cell lymphocytic proliferation on the pathway to cutaneous T-­cell dyscrasia.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Pityriasis lichenoides most commonly manifests in the second and
third decades of life; 30% of cases manifest before age 20 years, with
peaks of incidence at 5 and 10 years of age. The overall eruption
persists for months to years with a tendency to eventually remit.
PLC manifests gradually as generalized, multiple, brown-­red papules
to plaques that are covered by a fine grayish scale (Fig. 698.3). Lesions
may be asymptomatic or may cause minimal pruritus and occasionally
become vesicular, hemorrhagic, crusted, or superinfected. Individual
papules become flat and brownish in 2-­6 weeks, ultimately leaving
hyperpigmented or hypopigmented macules and patches. Scarring is
unusual. Various stages of lesions are present, most commonly on the
trunk and extremities and generally spare the face, palmoplantar surfaces, scalp, and mucous membranes.
PLEVA manifests as an abrupt eruption of numerous 2-­to 3-­mm
papules that have a vesiculopustular and then a purpuric center, are
covered by a dark adherent hemorrhagic or necrotic crust, and are
surrounded by an erythematous halo (Fig. 698.4). Constitutional
symptoms, such as fever, malaise, headache, and arthralgias, may be
present for 2-­3 days after the initial outbreak. Lesions are distributed diffusely on the trunk and extremities, as in PLC. Individual
lesions heal within a few weeks, sometimes leaving a varioliform
scar, and successive crops of papules produce the characteristic
polymorphous appearance of the eruption, with lesions in various
stages of evolution.
FUMHD manifests as high fever and ulceronecrotic nodules up
to a few centimeters in diameter, which are most common on the
anterior trunk and flexor surfaces of the proximal upper extremities.
Histopathology of lesions is consistent with PLEVA. Hemorrhagic bullae, mucosal ulcers, arthritis, cardiomyopathy, vasculitis, abdominal

complaints, hematologic abnormalities (megaloblastic anemia, pancytopenia, and diffuse intravascular coagulation), and superinfection
of cutaneous lesions with Staphylococcus aureus may also develop.
These patients may have a history of previous PLEVA diagnosis.
Although there is no reported standardized treatment and there have
been reports of fatalities, typically the ulceronecrotic lesions heal with
hypopigmented scarring in a few weeks.

PATHOLOGY

PLC histologically shows a parakeratotic, thickened corneal layer;
epidermal spongiosis; a superficial perivascular infiltrate of macrophages and predominantly CD8 lymphocytes that may extend into
the epidermis; and small numbers of extravasated erythrocytes in the
papillary dermis.
The histopathologic changes of PLEVA and FUMHD reflect their
more severe nature. Intercellular and intracellular edema in the epidermis may lead to degeneration of keratinocytes. A dense perivascular
mononuclear cell infiltrate, endothelial cell swelling, and extravasation
of erythrocytes into the epidermis and dermis are additional characteristic features.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The differential diagnosis of pityriasis lichenoides includes guttate
psoriasis, pityriasis rosea, drug eruptions, secondary syphilis, viral
exanthems, lymphomatoid papulosis, and lichen planus. The chronicity of pityriasis lichenoides helps preclude pityriasis rosea, viral
exanthems, and some drug eruptions. A skin biopsy can help distinguish pityriasis lichenoides from other entities in the differential
diagnosis.

TREATMENT

Pityriasis lichenoides should be considered a benign condition
that does not alter the health of the child. A lubricant to remove
excessive scaling may be all that is necessary if the patient is asymptomatic. If treatment is required, first-­line agents are oral antiinflammatory antibiotics such as erythromycin (30-­50 mg/kg/day
to a maximum of 4000 mg/day for 2-­3 months) or doxycycline for
children >8 years. Topical corticosteroids (mid-­potency, applied
twice daily) and topical calcineurin inhibitors may help the pruritus
and inflammation but do not alter the course of the disease. Phototherapy (NB-­UVB) is the second-­line treatment option. Methotrexate should be reserved for severely symptomatic cases. The rare
FUMHD usually requires inpatient treatment; initially, systemic
corticosteroids, methotrexate, intravenous immunoglobulin, or
cyclosporine may be necessary, with eventual transition to another
form of treatment, as mentioned earlier, once the disease improves
and stabilizes.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4104 Part XXIX u The Skin

Fig. 698.5 Keratotic follicular plugs with surrounding erythema in
keratosis pilaris.

Fig. 698.6 Herald patch and surrounding pityriasis rosea.

ETIOLOGY/PATHOGENESIS

698.3 Keratosis Pilaris
Julie M. Dhossche and Yvonne E. Chiu
Keratosis pilaris is a common papular eruption resulting from keratin
plugging of hair follicles. It displays an autosomal dominant transmission with variable penetrance. Typical areas of involvement include the
upper extensor surfaces of the arms and thighs, cheeks, and buttocks. The
lesions may resemble gooseflesh; they are noninflammatory, scaly, follicular papules that do not coalesce. They are generally asymptomatic but
may be pruritic. Irritation of the follicular plugs occasionally causes erythema surrounding the keratotic papules (Fig. 698.5). A subset of patients
has keratosis pilaris associated with facial telangiectasia and ulerythema
ophryogenes, a rare cutaneous disorder characterized by inflammatory
keratotic facial papules that may result in scars, atrophy, and alopecia.
Because the lesions of keratosis pilaris are associated with and accentuated by dry skin, they are often more prominent during the winter.
Keratosis pilaris is more frequent in patients with atopic dermatitis and
is most common during childhood and early adulthood, tending to subside in the third decade of life. Treatment of keratosis pilaris is optional.
Measures to decrease pruritus include moisturization with a bland emollient. Regular applications of a 10–40% urea cream or an alpha-­hydroxy
acid preparation such as 12% lactic acid cream or lotion can improve the
appearance of keratosis pilaris but may further contribute to pruritus and
irritation. Therapy may improve the condition but does not cure it.

698.4 Lichen Spinulosus
Julie M. Dhossche and Yvonne E. Chiu
Lichen spinulosus is an uncommon disorder that occurs principally
in children and more frequently in boys. The cause is unknown. The
lesions consist of sharply circumscribed irregular plaques of spiny, keratotic, follicular plugs. Plaques may occur anywhere on the body and
are often distributed symmetrically on the trunk, elbows, knees, and
extensor surfaces of the limbs. Although sometimes erythematous or
pruritic, the lesions are usually skin colored and asymptomatic.
Treatment is usually unnecessary. For patients who regard the eruption as a cosmetic defect, urea-­containing lubricants (10–40%) are
often effective in flattening the projections. The plaques usually disappear spontaneously after several months or years.

698.5 Pityriasis Rosea
Julie M. Dhossche and Yvonne E. Chiu
Pityriasis rosea is a common benign papulosquamous disorder typically affecting adolescents and young adults 15-­30 years of age. The disease is more commonly seen in the winter and is usually self-­limited.

The cause of pityriasis rosea is unknown; a viral agent is suspected, with a
current focus on human herpesviruses 6 and 7. Supporting evidence for an
infectious etiology includes the tendency for it to occur in (familial) case
clusters, presence of a prodrome and seasonal variation, and infrequent
recurrences, although the rash itself does not appear to be contagious.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

This benign, common eruption occurs most frequently in children and
young adults. Although a prodrome of fever, malaise, arthralgia, and
pharyngitis may precede the eruption, children rarely complain of such
symptoms. A herald patch classically precedes the generalized eruption and may occur anywhere on the body. Herald patches are generally
larger than other lesions and vary from 1 to 10 cm in diameter; they are
annular in configuration and have a raised border with fine, adherent
scales. Approximately 5-­10 days after the appearance of the herald patch,
a widespread, symmetric eruption involving mainly the trunk and proximal limbs becomes evident (Fig. 698.6). In the inverse form of pityriasis
rosea, the face, scalp, and distal limbs may be preferentially involved.
Lesions may appear in crops for several days. Typical lesions are oval
or round, <1 cm in diameter, slightly raised, and pink to brown. The
developed lesion is covered by a fine scale, which gives the skin a crinkly
appearance. Some lesions clear centrally and produce a collarette of scale
that is attached only at the periphery. Papular, vesicular, urticarial, hemorrhagic, large annular, and mucosal lesions are unusual variants. The
long axis of each lesion is usually aligned with the cutaneous cleavage
lines, a feature that creates the so-­called Christmas tree pattern on the
back. Conformation to skin lines is often more discernible in the anterior
and posterior axillary folds and supraclavicular areas. The lesions most
commonly are asymptomatic but may be mildly to severely pruritic.
Duration of the eruption varies from 2 to 12 weeks, with self-­resolution.
After the eruption has resolved, postinflammatory hypopigmentation or
hyperpigmentation may be pronounced, particularly in dark-­skinned
patients. These changes disappear in subsequent weeks to months.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The herald patch may be mistaken for tinea corporis, a pitfall that can
be avoided if microscopic evaluation of a potassium hydroxide preparation of scrapings of the lesion is performed. The generalized eruption
resembles a number of other diseases; secondary syphilis is the most
important. Drug eruptions, viral exanthems, guttate psoriasis, PLC,
and nummular dermatitis can also be confused with pityriasis rosea.

TREATMENT

Therapy is unnecessary for asymptomatic patients with pityriasis rosea. If
scaling is prominent, a bland emollient may suffice. Pruritus may be suppressed by a lubricating lotion containing menthol and camphor or by an
oral antihistamine for sedation, particularly at night, when itching may be
troublesome. Occasionally, a mid-­potency topical corticosteroid preparation may be necessary to alleviate pruritus. Exposure to natural sunlight
and NB-­UVB phototherapy may reduce disease duration and severity. Acyclovir has been used in some cases to treat symptoms and shorten duration.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 698 u Diseases of the Epidermis 4105

698.6 Pityriasis Rubra Pilaris
Julie M. Dhossche and Yvonne E. Chiu

of dermatomyositis may present with a pityriasis rubra pilaris–like
eruption.

HISTOLOGY
ETIOLOGY/PATHOGENESIS

The cause of pityriasis rubra pilaris remains unclear. Pityriasis rubra
pilaris can be subdivided into six clinical subtypes based on age of
onset, characteristics, and other features. Most cases are sporadic,
but familial forms are commonly seen in the fifth subtype, with
gain-­of-­function variants in the CARD14 gene. The sixth subtype
occurs in those with HIV infection. Some studies have indicated a
role for TNF-­α in disease development, whereas other hypotheses
for causal factors include abnormal vitamin A metabolism, trauma,
infections, immunosuppression, and UV light exposure.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

This rare inflammatory dermatosis is known for its variability in
clinical presentation and course of disease. It often has an insidious
onset with diffuse scaling and erythema of the scalp, which is indistinguishable from the findings in seborrheic dermatitis, and with
thick hyperkeratosis of the palms and soles (Fig. 698.7A). Lesions
over the elbows and knees are also common (see Fig. 698.7B), and
generalized erythroderma develops in some patients. The characteristic primary lesion is a firm, dome-­shaped, tiny, acuminate,
pink to red papule, which has a central keratotic plug pierced by
a vellus hair. Masses of these papules coalesce to form large, erythematous, sharply demarcated orange-­pink plaques with overlying
scale, within which islands of normal skin can be distinguished.
Typical papules on the dorsum of the proximal phalanges are readily palpated. Gray plaques or papules resembling lichen planus may
be found in the oral cavity. Dystrophic changes in the nails may
occur and mimic those of psoriasis. Lesions are commonly pruritic. In childhood, the prognosis for eventual resolution is relatively good.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Differential diagnosis includes ichthyosis, seborrheic dermatitis, keratoderma of the palms and soles, and psoriasis. The “Wong” variant

Skin biopsy revealing follicular plugging, epidermal acanthosis, perivascular infiltrate, checkerboard pattern of orthokeratosis and parakeratosis, and an intact granular layer may differentiate this condition
from psoriasis and seborrheic dermatitis.

TREATMENT

The numerous therapeutic regimens recommended are difficult
to evaluate because pityriasis rubra pilaris has a capricious course
with exacerbations and remissions. Moisturization alone is useful
in mild cases. Topical agents, such as mid-­to high-­potency corticosteroids, keratolytics (urea, salicylic acid), vitamin D analogs
(calcipotriene), retinoids (tazarotene, tretinoin), and tar, are used
in combination with systemic agents for widespread disease and
as monotherapy for localized disease. When further treatment is
necessary, oral retinoids (isotretinoin or acitretin 0.5-­1 mg/kg/day;
maximum daily dose of isotretinoin is 80 mg/day and acitretin is
50 mg/day) are used as first-­line agents, whereas methotrexate is
used as a second-­line agent. Third-­line treatment options include
biologic TNF-­α inhibitors, cyclosporine, azathioprine, and NB-­
UVB phototherapy. Ustekinumab and secukinumab have also been
described as efficacious.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

698.7 Darier Disease (Keratosis Follicularis)
Julie M. Dhossche and Yvonne E. Chiu

ETIOLOGY/PATHOGENESIS

A rare genetic disorder, Darier disease is inherited as an autosomal
dominant trait and is caused by pathogenic genetic variants in the
ATP2A2 gene. This gene encodes a cellular calcium pump, SERCA2,
and dysfunction results in loss of adhesion between epidermal cells and
abnormal keratinization.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Onset usually occurs in late childhood and persists throughout life.
Typical lesions are small, firm, skin-­colored, warty papules that are not
always follicular in location. The lesions eventually acquire yellow, malodorous, greasy crusts and coalesce to form large, gray-­brown, vegetative plaques (Fig. 698.8). The scalp, face, neck, shoulders, chest, back,
axillae, limb flexures, and groin are symmetrically involved. Papules,
fissures, crusts, and ulcers may appear on the mucous membranes of
the lips, tongue, buccal mucosa, pharynx, larynx, and vulva. Hyperkeratosis of the palms and soles and nail dystrophy with subungual
hyperkeratosis and longitudinal red and white banding are variable
features. Severe pruritus, secondary infection, offensive odor, and pain
may occur. Several exacerbating triggers have been identified: sweating, UV light exposure, heat, friction, surgery, and infections; thus
Darier disease has a chronic relapsing course that usually worsens in
summertime.

A

HISTOLOGY

Histologic changes seen in Darier disease are diagnostic. Hyperkeratosis with keratin plugging, intraepidermal separation (acantholysis)
with formation of suprabasal clefts, and dyskeratotic epidermal cells
are characteristic features.

B

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Fig. 698.7 Pityriasis rubra pilaris. A, Orange palmar hyperkeratosis.
B, Elbow lesions.

Darier disease is most likely to be confused with seborrheic dermatitis,
acanthosis nigricans, flat warts, or Hailey-­Hailey disease.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4106 Part XXIX u The Skin

Fig. 698.8 Papules coalescing into a large plaque on the back of a
patient with Darier disease.

TREATMENT

Treatment is nonspecific and begins with emollients and avoidance
of triggers. First-­line treatment for mild/localized disease is low-­to
mid-­potency corticosteroids; second-­line treatment are topical retinoids. Further treatment options include topical keratolytic agents
(urea, lactic acid), antiseptic washes (triclosan, chlorhexidine gluconate, or bleach), or calcineurin inhibitors. More severe/generalized disease is treated with oral isotretinoin or acitretin (0.5-­1.0 mg/
kg/day for 3-­4 months; maximum daily dose of isotretinoin is 80
mg/day and acitretin is 50 mg/day). Secondary infections are common and must be treated appropriately. Novel treatments currently
being investigated include anti–IL-­6 antibodies, cyclooxygenase­2 (COX2) inhibitors and miglustat (a glucosylceramide synthase
inhibitor).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Fig. 698.9 Slightly hypopigmented, uniform papules of lichen nitidus.

HISTOLOGY

Although the diagnosis can be made clinically, a biopsy is occasionally
indicated. The lichen nitidus papule consists of sharply circumscribed
nests of lymphocytes and histiocytes in the upper dermis enclosed by
clawlike epidermal rete ridges.

TREATMENT

The course of lichen nitidus spans months to years, but the lesions
eventually involute completely. No treatment is necessary, but mid-­to
high-­potency topical steroids may be used for pruritus.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

698.9 Lichen Striatus
Julie M. Dhossche and Yvonne E. Chiu

698.8 Lichen Nitidus
Julie M. Dhossche and Yvonne E. Chiu

ETIOLOGY/PATHOGENESIS

The etiology of lichen nitidus is unknown but has been linked to
immune alteration.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

This uncommon, chronic, benign, papular eruption is characterized
by minute (1-­2 mm), flat-­topped, shiny, firm papules of uniform
size. The papules are most often skin-­colored but may be pink or
red. In darker-­skinned individuals, they are usually hypopigmented
(Fig. 698.9). Sites of predilection are the genitals, abdomen, chest,
forearms, wrists, and inner aspects of the thighs. The lesions may be
sparse or numerous and may form large plaques; careful examination usually discloses linear papules in a line of a scratch (Koebner
phenomenon), a valuable clue to the diagnosis because it occurs in
only a few diseases. Lichen nitidus occurs in all age-­groups but is
most prevalent in school-­age children and young adults. Patients
with lichen nitidus are usually asymptomatic and constitutionally
well, although pruritus may be severe. The lesions may be confused
with those of lichen planus, and lichen nitidus can rarely occur concurrently with lichen planus.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Widespread keratosis pilaris can also be confused with lichen nitidus,
but the follicular localization of the papules and the absence of Koebner phenomenon in the former distinguish them. Verruca plana (flat
warts), if small and uniform in size, may occasionally resemble lichen
nitidus.

ETIOLOGY/PATHOGENESIS

Lichen striatus is hypothesized to be caused by a combination of a
genetic predisposition present in a mosaic manner in the skin (following the lines of Blaschko) and an infectious trigger.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

A benign, self-­limited eruption, lichen striatus consists of a continuous
or discontinuous linear band of papules in a Blaschkoid distribution.
The primary lesion is a flat-­topped, hypopigmented or pink papule covered with fine scale. Aggregates of these papules form multiple bands
or plaques. The papules are gradually replaced by hypopigmented macules, which may be the presenting lesion in some cases. The eruption
evolves over a period of days or weeks in an otherwise healthy child,
remains stationary for weeks to months, and finally remits without
sequelae, usually within 2 years. Symptoms are usually absent, although
some children complain of itching. Nail dystrophy may occur when the
eruption involves the proximal nail fold and matrix (Fig. 698.10).

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Lichen striatus is occasionally confused with other disorders. The initial plaque may resemble papular eczema or lichen nitidus until the
linear configuration becomes apparent. Linear lichen planus and linear psoriasis are usually associated with typical individual lesions elsewhere on the body. Linear epidermal nevi are permanent lesions that
often become more hyperkeratotic and hyperpigmented than those of
lichen striatus.

TREATMENT

Treatment is not necessary and generally not very effective. A low-­
potency topical corticosteroid preparation or topical calcineurin

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 698 u Diseases of the Epidermis 4107

Fig. 698.10 Lichen striatus with nail dystrophy.
inhibitor can be used when pruritus is a problem in a patient with
lichen striatus.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

698.10 Lichen Planus
Julie M. Dhossche and Yvonne E. Chiu

ETIOLOGY/PATHOGENESIS

The cause of lichen planus is unknown, but an immune attack on the
skin by cytotoxic T cells is postulated. A genetic predisposition may
exist, and other proposed triggers include metal exposure, certain
medications, liver disease, vaccinations (especially hepatitis B vaccination), and infections (especially hepatitis C virus).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

This is a rare disorder in young children and uncommon in older
ones. The classic form of lichen planus is the most common subtype
in children, often exhibiting an acute eruptive onset. The lesions
erupt in an explosive fashion, much like a viral exanthem, and spread
to involve most of the body surface. The primary lesion is a violaceous, sharply demarcated, polygonal papule with fine white lines
(Wickham’s striae) or scale on the surface. Papules may coalesce to
form large plaques (Fig. 676.11). The papules are intensely pruritic,
and additional papules are often induced by scratching (Koebner
phenomenon) so that lines of them are detected. Sites of predilection
are the flexor surfaces of the wrists, the forearms, the inner aspects of
the thighs, and the ankles.
Hypertrophic, linear, bullous, atrophic, annular, follicular, erosive,
ulcerative, and actinic forms of lichen planus may also occur in children. Characteristic lesions of mucous membranes consist of pinhead-­
size white papules that coalesce to form reticulated and lacy patterns on
the buccal mucosa. Erosive ulcers are also common in the oral mucosa
and may also involve the gastrointestinal tract. Nail involvement causes
nail dystrophy. The disorder may persist for months to years, but self-­
resolution eventually occurs in most cases. Intense hyperpigmentation
frequently persists for a long time after the resolution of lesions.

HISTOLOGY

The histopathologic findings in lichen planus are specific, consisting
of hyperkeratosis, irregular acanthosis, wedge-­shaped hypergranulosis,
apoptotic keratinocytes in the lower epidermis and upper dermis, and
basal cell degeneration with a bandlike lymphocytic infiltrate at the
epidermal-­dermal junction. Pigment incontinence is frequently seen.
Biopsy is indicated if the diagnosis is unclear.

Fig. 698.11 Flat-­topped, purple polygonal papules of lichen planus.

TREATMENT

Treatment is directed at alleviation of the intense pruritus and amelioration of the skin lesions. First-­line treatment with a high-­potency
topical corticosteroid applied twice daily is effective for localized disease on the trunk or extremities; lesions on the face and genitals may be
treated with low-­to mid-­potency corticosteroids. Alternatives to topical steroids include topical calcineurin inhibitors or vitamin D analogs.
Thick lesions may require intralesional corticosteroid injection. Oral
antihistamines (hydroxyzine) are often added for the pruritus. Short
courses of systemic glucocorticoids or phototherapy (NB-­UVB) are
used as second-­line approaches for rare cases of widespread, intractable
lesions. Other medications with reported efficacy include oral retinoids
(acitretin), dapsone, metronidazole, griseofulvin, and methotrexate.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

698.11 Porokeratosis
Julie M. Dhossche and Yvonne E. Chiu

ETIOLOGY/PATHOGENESIS

Porokeratoses are a group of uncommon dermatoses due to abnormal
epidermal keratinization. Genetic variants in the mevalonate pathway
with autosomal dominant transmission, chronic sun exposure (particularly with the disseminated superficial actinic form), and immunosuppression (particularly organ transplantation) may contribute.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Porokeratosis is a rare, chronic, progressive disease of keratinization. The prototypical lesion is an atrophic papule or plaque with a
surrounding ridge of hyperkeratosis, called cornoid lamella. Several
forms have been delineated: solitary plaques, linear porokeratosis,
hyperkeratotic lesions of the palms and soles, disseminated eruptive
lesions, and superficial actinic porokeratosis. Classic porokeratosis of
Mibelli begins in childhood and is more common in males. Sites of
predilection are the limbs, face, genitals, mucous membranes, palms,
and soles. The primary lesion is a small, keratotic papule that slowly
enlarges peripherally so that the center becomes depressed, with the
edge forming an elevated wall or collar (Fig. 698.12). The configuration
of the plaque may be round, oval, or gyrate. The elevated border is split
by a thin groove from which minute cornified projections protrude.
The central atrophic area is yellow, gray, or tan and sclerotic, smooth,
and dry, whereas the hyperkeratotic border is a darker gray, brown, or
black. Linear porokeratosis is also more common in childhood and
typically follows the lines of Blaschko. The disease is slowly progressive
but relatively asymptomatic; some patients experience pruritus or pain.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4108 Part XXIX u The Skin

Fig. 698.12 Large plaque of porokeratosis of Mibelli with raised border and depressed center.

Fig. 698.13 Numerous flat-­topped, red papules in Gianotti-­Crosti
syndrome.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
HISTOLOGY

A skin biopsy is usually unnecessary but will disclose the characteristic
cornoid lamella (plug of stratum corneum cells with retained nuclei),
which is responsible for the invariable linear ridge of the lesion. The
granular layer is absent beneath the cornoid lamella.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The differential diagnosis of porokeratosis includes warts, epidermal
nevi, lichen planus, granuloma annulare, tinea corporis, nummular
eczema, pityriasis rosea, and elastosis perforans serpiginosa.

TREATMENT

No treatment is uniformly successful; thus therapeutic decisions depend
largely on lesion size, location, symptoms, and patient preference.
Most lesions are asymptomatic and do not require any intervention;
however, when treatment is necessary, options include pharmacologic management (topical vitamin D analogs, topical retinoids, topical 5-­fluorouracil, topical imiquimod, or oral retinoids [severe cases
only]); destructive therapy (liquid nitrogen cryotherapy, electrodessication and curettage, or various lasers); and surgical removal. In general, the less invasive topical agents should be attempted first. Good UV
protection should also be encouraged. Patients should be monitored
for malignant transformation.

PROGNOSIS

Typically, the course of porokeratosis is slowly progressive, with an
increase in size and number of individual lesions. Some cases undergo
spontaneous resolution, and infrequently porokeratosis lesions may
undergo malignant transformation into squamous cell carcinoma. At-­
risk lesions appear to be long-­standing (average 33.5 years duration),
large size, and location on limbs.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

698.12 Gianotti-­Crosti Syndrome (Papular
Acrodermatitis)

This distinctive eruption is benign and predominantly occurs in children younger than 5 years old about 1 week after a viral illness. Cases
are usually sporadic, but epidemics have been recorded. Skin lesions
are monomorphic, firm, dusky, or coppery red papules ranging in size
from 1 to 10 mm (Fig. 698.13), although there is considerable variation in lesion appearance between patients. The papules often have the
appearance of vesicles; however, when opened, no fluid is obtained.
The papules sometimes become hemorrhagic. Lines of papules (Koebner phenomenon) may be noted on the extremities after minor local
trauma. The papules occur in crops and may become profuse and
coalesce into plaques, forming a symmetric eruption on the face, ears,
buttocks, and limbs, including the palms and soles. The trunk is relatively spared, as are the scalp and mucous membranes. The eruption is
occasionally associated with malaise and low-­grade fever but few other
constitutional symptoms. The underlying viral infection may cause
signs and symptoms, such as lymphadenopathy and hepatomegaly in
patients with hepatitis B viremia. The eruption resolves spontaneously
but may take up to 2 months. Some residual pigment change may occur
but is not scarring.

HISTOLOGY

Skin biopsy in Gianotti-­Crosti syndrome is not specific, being characterized by a dermal perivascular mononuclear cell infiltrate, capillary
endothelial swelling, and epidermal spongiosis and parakeratosis.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Gianotti-­Crosti syndrome can be confused with other viral exanthems,
erythema infectiosum, lichen planus, erythema multiforme, and
Henoch-­Schönlein purpura (IgA vasculitis).

TREATMENT

The lesions are typically asymptomatic and resolve spontaneously, thus
requiring no treatment. If present, pruritus may be relieved by emollients or calamine lotion. Mid-­potency topical steroids may relieve
pruritus but do not alter disease course. Sedating antihistamines at
bedtime are also helpful.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Julie M. Dhossche and Yvonne E. Chiu

698.13 Acanthosis Nigricans
ETIOLOGY/PATHOGENESIS

The pathogenesis of Gianotti-­Crosti syndrome, also known as papular
acrodermatitis, is unclear, but an immunologic reaction to viral infections and immunizations has been postulated. Historically, the most
common associations are with Epstein-­Barr virus, hepatitis B virus
(primarily in countries without routine childhood vaccination programs), coxsackievirus A16, and parainfluenza virus, as well as with
many childhood immunizations.

Julie M. Dhossche and Yvonne E. Chiu
See also Chapter 65.

ETIOLOGY/PATHOGENESIS

The skin lesions of acanthosis nigricans may be genetic due to variants
in the fibroblast growth factor receptor gene or acquired as a manifestation of insulin resistance. In familial cases, acanthosis nigricans

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 698 u Diseases of the Epidermis 4109

Fig. 698.15 Confluent and reticulated papillomatosis. Reticulate tan
Fig. 698.14 Velvety hyperpigmentation of the axilla in acanthosis nigricans.

papules, patches, and plaques involving the epigastrium, inframammary areas, and sternum. (From Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Hurwitz Clinical
Pediatric Dermatology, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022, Fig. 23.34,
p. 641.)

is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait and develops in infancy.
Insulin resistance with compensatory hyperinsulinism may lead to
insulin binding to and activation of insulin-­like growth factor receptors, promoting epidermal and fibroblast growth. Common causes of
insulin resistance in children are obesity and diabetes mellitus, with
acanthosis nigricans seen in >60% of children with a body mass index
>98%. Other endocrinopathies such as pituitary hypogonadism, Cushing syndrome, polycystic ovarian syndromes, thyroid disease, and
acromegaly, as well as certain drugs (insulin, oral contraceptives and
other sex hormones, nicotinic acid, corticosteroids, and heroin) are
also implicated as potential underlying causes. In the paraneoplastic
form (rare in children), tumor-­secreted growth factors induce acanthosis nigricans.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Acanthosis nigricans is characterized by symmetric, hyperpigmented,
velvety, hyperkeratotic plaques with exaggerated skin lines in intertriginous areas. The most common locations are the posterior neck
and axillae (Fig. 698.14), but it is also seen in the inframammary areas,
groin, inner thighs, and anogenital region. Before plaque development,
patients notice a “dirty” appearance of affected skin that does not wash
clean. Skin lesions remain asymptomatic unless maceration or secondary infection occurs. The clinical severity and histopathologic features
of acanthosis nigricans correlate positively with the degree of hyperinsulinism and with the degree of obesity. The differential diagnosis
includes confluent and reticulated papillomatosis (CARP), Addison disease, pellagra, and erythrasma. CARP is an idiopathic disorder
characterized by hyperpigmented papules with reticulation peripheral
to the papules and is commonly distributed in the intermammary
region (Fig. 698.15) and the epigastrium and upper back; less often it
involves the axilla (Fig. 698.16) or neck and face.

HISTOLOGY

The histologic changes are those of papillomatosis and hyperkeratosis
rather than acanthosis or excessive pigment formation. A mild dermal
inflammatory infiltrate may be present.

TREATMENT

Treatment is aimed at the underlying disorder. Acanthosis nigricans in the obese child is associated with risk factors for glucose

Fig. 698.16 Confluent and reticulated papillomatosis. Hyperpig-

mented thin plaques, which were confluent centrally and reticulated
at the periphery, were present in the bilateral axillae of this 16-­year-­old
male patient who also had classic acanthosis nigricans affecting the
neck folds. These axillary changes resolved completely with oral minocycline and lactic acid–containing emollients. (From Paller AS, Mancini
AJ. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022, Fig. 23.35, p. 641.)

homeostasis abnormalities, and counseling families on its causes
and consequences may motivate them to make healthy lifestyle
changes that can decrease the risk for development of cardiac disease and diabetes mellitus. In children with obesity-­related acanthosis nigricans, weight loss should be the primary goal. If a drug
or malignancy is suspected, removal of that agent or treatment of
cancer typically results in resolution. Appearance of skin lesions
responds poorly to local medical management; some patients
benefit from topical keratolytic agents (40% urea cream or 12%
ammonium lactate cream) and agents that inhibit keratinocyte proliferation (topical retinoids and vitamin D analogs).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4110 Part XXIX u The Skin

Chapter 699

Disorders of
Keratinization
Kari L. Martin
DISORDERS OF CORNIFICATION

Mendelian disorders of cornification (ichthyoses) are a primary group
of inherited conditions characterized clinically by patterns of scaling
and histopathologically by hyperkeratosis. They are usually distinguishable by inheritance patterns, clinical features, associated defects,
and histopathologic changes (Tables 699.1, 699.2, and 699.3). The two
main categories of ichthyotic diseases are whether they are limited to
the skin or have syndromic associations.

COLLODION BABY

Collodion baby is not a single entity, but a newborn phenotype that is
most often seen in babies who eventually demonstrate lamellar ichthyosis or congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma (CIE). Less commonly,
collodion babies evolve into babies with Gaucher disease or neutral
lipid storage disease with ichthyosis, Loricrin keratoderma, trichothiodystrophy, Sjögren-­Larsson syndrome, Conradi-­Hünerman syndrome,
or harlequin ichthyosis. A small subset become otherwise healthy
babies without chronic skin disease (self-­healing collodion baby).
Collodion babies are covered at birth by a thick, taut membrane
resembling oiled parchment or collodion (Fig. 699.1), which is subsequently shed. Affected neonates have ectropion (eversion of the eyelid
away from the globe), flattening of the ears and nose, and fixation of the
lips in an O-­shaped configuration. Hair may be absent or may perforate
the abnormal covering. The membrane cracks with initial respiratory
efforts and, shortly after birth, begins to desquamate in large sheets.
Admission to a neonatal intensive care unit and a high-­humidity environment and application of nonocclusive lubricants facilitate shedding
of the membrane. Complete shedding may take several weeks, and a
new membrane may occasionally form in localized areas.
Neonatal morbidity and mortality may be due to cutaneous infection, aspiration pneumonia (squamous material), hypothermia, or
hypernatremic dehydration from excessive transcutaneous fluid losses
as a result of increased skin permeability. The outcome is uncertain,
and accurate prognosis depends on identification of the underlying
ichthyosis.

NONSYNDROMIC ICHTHYOSES
Ichthyosis Vulgaris
Etiology/Pathogenesis

Autosomal dominant or recessive pathogenic variants in the filaggrin
gene cause ichthyosis vulgaris. Filaggrin is a filament-­aggregating protein that assembles the keratin filament cytoskeleton, causing collapse
of the granular cells into a classic flattened squamous cell shape. Pathogenic variants in filaggrin lead to absence of or marked reductions in
keratohyalin granules (see Table 699.2).

Clinical Manifestations

Ichthyosis vulgaris is the most common of the disorders of keratinization, with an incidence of 1/250 live births. Onset generally occurs
in the first year of life. In most cases, it is trivial, consisting only of
slight roughening of the skin surface. Scaling is most prominent on the
extensor aspects of the extremities, particularly the legs (Fig. 699.2).
Flexural surfaces are spared, and the abdomen, neck, and face are relatively uninvolved. Keratosis pilaris—particularly on the upper arms
and thighs, accentuated markings, and hyperkeratosis on the palms
and soles—and atopy are relatively common. Scaling is most pronounced during the winter months and may abate completely during

warm weather. There is no accompanying disorder of hair, teeth, mucosal surfaces, or other organ systems; however, patients are at increased
risk of atopy.

Treatment

Scaling may be diminished by daily applications of an emollient or a
lubricant containing urea (10–40%), salicylic acid, or an alpha-­hydroxy
acid such as lactic acid (5–12%).

X-­Linked Ichthyosis
Etiology/Pathogenesis

X-­linked ichthyosis involves a deficiency of steroid sulfatase, which
hydrolyzes cholesterol sulfate and other sulfated steroids to cholesterol.
Cholesterol sulfate accumulates in the stratum corneum and plasma. In
the epidermis this accumulation causes malformation of intercellular
lipid layers, leading to barrier defects and delay of corneodesmosome
degradation, resulting in corneocyte retention.

Clinical Manifestations

Skin peeling may be present at birth but typically begins at 3-­6 months
of life. Scaling is most pronounced on the sides of the neck, lower face,
preauricular areas, anterior trunk, and the limbs, particularly the legs.
The elbow (Fig. 699.3) and knee flexures are generally spared but may
be mildly involved. The palms and soles may be slightly thickened but
are also usually spared. The condition gradually worsens in severity
and extent. Keratosis pilaris is not present, and there is no increased
incidence of atopy. Deep corneal opacities that do not interfere with
vision develop in late childhood or adolescence and are a useful marker
for the disease because they may also be present in carrier females.
Some patients have larger deletions on the X chromosome that encompass neighboring genes, generating contiguous gene deletion syndromes.
These include Kallmann syndrome (KAL1 gene), which consists of
hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism and anosmia, X-­linked chondroplasia punctata (ARSE gene), short stature, and ocular albinism. The
rate of testicular cancer may be increased in patients with coexistent
Kallmann syndrome. There is also an increased risk of attention-­
deficit/hyperactivity disorder and autism owing to a contiguous gene
defect in neuroligin 4.
Reduced steroid sulfatase enzyme activity can be detected in fibroblasts, keratinocytes, and leukocytes and, prenatally, in amniocytes
or chorionic villus cells. In affected families, an affected male can be
detected by restriction enzyme analysis of cultured chorionic villus cell
DNA or amniocytes or by in situ hybridization, which identifies steroid
sulfatase gene deletions prenatally in chorionic villus cells. A placental
steroid sulfatase deficiency in carrier mothers may result in low urinary and serum estriol values, prolonged labor, and insensitivity of the
uterus to oxytocin and prostaglandins.

Treatment

Daily application of emollients and a urea-­containing lubricant (10–
40%) is usually effective. Glycolic or lactic acid (5–12%) in an emollient
base and propylene glycol (40–60%) in water with occlusion overnight
are alternative forms of therapy.

AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE CONGENITAL
ICHTHYOSES
Harlequin Ichthyosis
Etiology/Pathogenesis

Harlequin ichthyosis is caused by pathogenic variants in the ABCA12
gene. Pathogenic variants in the gene lead to defective lipid transport,
and ABCA12 activity is required for the generation of long-­chain
ceramides that are essential for the development of the normal skin
barrier.

Clinical Manifestations

At birth, markedly thickened, ridged, and cracked skin forms horny
plates over the entire body, disfiguring the facial features and constricting the digits. Severe ectropion and chemosis obscure the orbits, the
nose and ears are flattened, and the lips are everted and gaping. Nails

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 699.1  Inherited Ichthyoses – Syndromic
DISORDER

PREVIOUS NAME

X-­LINKED ICHTHYOSIS SYNDROMES
RXLI (recessive X-­linked
ichthyosis) syndromic
presentation

Conradi-­Hünermann-­
Happle syndrome
(CDPX2)

CHILD syndrome

X-­linked
chondrodysplasia
punctata (Conradi-­
Hünermann
syndrome)

INHERITANCE

CUTANEOUS FINDINGS

EXTRACUTANEOUS FINDINGS

GENE DEFECT(S)

PROTEIN(S)

308100

XR

Large, dark scales
Sparing of body folds

Prolongation of labor
Cryptorchidism
Corneal opacities, asymptomatic

STS
Larger deletions with
contiguous gene
defects

Steroid sulfatase

398205

XR

Spiny follicular ichthyosis
Nail dystrophy
Alopecia

Photophobia
Psychomotor delay
Short stature

MBTPS2

Membrane-­bound
transcription
factor peptidase,
site 2

302960

XD

Striated ichthyosiform
hyperkeratosis
Follicular atrophoderma
Alopecia

Cataracts
Frontal bossing
Short proximal limbs

EBP

Emopamil-­binding
protein

308050

XD

Unilateral ichthyosiform
erythroderma

Chondrodysplasia punctata
Cataracts
Limb reduction defects
Asymmetric organ hypoplasia

NSDHL

3-­β-­hydroxysteroid-­
Δ8,Δ7-­isomerase

Atopic diathesis
Food allergies
Structural hair defects
(trichorrhexis invaginata)
Growth delay

SPINK5

LETKI

AUTOSOMAL ICHTHYOSIS SYNDROMES WITH PROMINENT HAIR ABNORMALITIES
NS (Netherton
256500
AR
Erythroderma in infancy
syndrome)
Ichthyosis linearis
circumflexa
Alopecia
610765

AR

Adherent platelike scale
Hypohidrosis
Hypotrichosis

Photophobia
Pingueculum

ST14

Serine protease 14

IHSC syndrome
(ichthyosis-­
hypotrichosis-­
sclerosing cholangitis)

607626

AR

Fine thin scale
Hypotrichosis with coarse
thick hair

Sclerosing cholangitis
Congenital paucity of bile ducts

CLDN1

Claudin 1

TTD
(trichothiodystrophy)

601675

AR

May have collodion
membrane
Can vary from mild scaling
to marked adherent
plaques

Photosensitivity
Brittle hair with “tiger tail” pattern
Decreased fertility
Short stature
Susceptibility to infection

ERCC2, XPD ERCC3,
XPB GTF2H5, TTDA

Xeropigmentosum
group D protein
Xeropigmentosum
group B protein

TTD (not associated with
congenital ichthyosis)

234050

AR

Delayed onset
Fine scale

Nonphotosensitive
Brittle hair
Short stature
Decreased fertility

C7Orf11, (TTDN1)

M-­phase–specific
PLK1-­interacting
protein,
(TTD non-­
photosensitive 1
protein)

Collodion baby, mild
scaling later

Hepatosplenomegaly retroflexion
of the head, strabismus,
dysphagia, choking spells,
hypertonicity
Death usually occurs in the first
year

GBA

Acid β-­glucosidase

AUTOSOMAL ICHTHYOSIS SYNDROMES WITH FATAL DISEASE COURSE
Gaucher syndrome,
230900
AR
type 2

Continued

4111

IHS (ichthyosis
hypotrichosis
syndrome)

Chapter 699 u Disorders of Keratinization

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

IFAP syndrome
(ichthyosis-­follicularis-­
atrichia-­photophobia)

MIM #

DISORDER

PREVIOUS NAME

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

MIM #

INHERITANCE

CUTANEOUS FINDINGS

EXTRACUTANEOUS FINDINGS

Multiple sulfatase
deficiency

272200

AR

Mild scale

Mental retardation
Mucopolysaccharidosis
Metachromatic leukodystrophy
Death within first year of life

SUMF1

Sulfatase-­
modifying
factor-­1

CEDNIK syndrome
(cerebral dysgenesis-­
neuropathy-­ichthyosis-­
palmoplantar
keratoderma)

609528

AR

Coarse platelike white
scale
Fine, sparse hair

Sensorineural deafness
Cerebral dysgenesis
Neuropathy
Microcephaly
Neurogenic muscle atrophy
Optic nerve atrophy
Cachexia
Lethal within first decade

SNAP29

Synaptosomal-­
associated
protein, 29kDA

ARC syndrome
(arthrogryposis-­
renal dysfunction-­
cholestasis)

208085

AR

Fine scale

Arthrogryposis
Intrahepatic bile duct hypoplasia
with cholestasis
Renal tubular degeneration
Metabolic acidosis
Abnormal platelet function
Death within first year of life

VPS33B

Vacuolar protein
sorting–
associated
protein 33B

Diplegia or tetraplegia
Retinal glistening white dots

ALDH3A2

Long-­chain
aldehyde
dehydrogenase

AUTOSOMAL ICHTHYOSIS SYNDROMES WITH OTHER ASSOCIATED SIGNS
SLS (Sjögren-­Larsson
270200
AR
Fine lamellar scale
syndrome)

GENE DEFECT(S)

PROTEIN(S)

RS (Refsum syndrome)
(HMSN4: hereditary
motor sensory
neuropathy type 4)

Refsum disease

266500

AR

Late onset, fine scale

Retinitis pigmentosa
Cardiac failure

PAHX or PHYH
PEX7

Phytanoyl-­CoA
hydroxylase
Peroxin-­7

KID syndrome
(keratitis-­ichthyosis-­
deafness syndrome)

KID; includes HID
syndrome

242150
602540

AD

Verrucous plaques
Stippled pattern of
keratoderma

Keratitis
Sensorineural deafness

GJB2 (GJB6)

Connexin 26

Neutral lipid storage
disease with ichthyosis

Chanarin-­Dorfman
syndrome (also
termed NCIE2)

275630

AR

Fine scales with occasional
background erythema

Myopathy
Hepatosplenomegaly

ABHD5

CGI-­58

IPS
(ichthyosis prematurity
syndrome)

608649

AR

White caseous scale,
attenuated on scalp and
eyebrows
Follicular keratosis

Atopic manifestations

SLC27A4

Long-­chain fatty
acid transport
protein 4

CHIME syndrome

280000

AR

Ichthyotic erythema
Occasionally migratory
plaques

Colobomas
Conductive hearing loss
Mental retardation

NK

NK

MEDNIK syndrome
(mental retardation-­
enteropathy-­deafness-­
neuropathy-­ichthyosis-­
keratodermia)

Not on
OMIM

AR

Rough, thickened skin

Congenital sensorineural deafness
Psychomotor and growth
retardation
Chronic diarrhea

AP1S1

Adapter-­related
protein complex
1 sigma-­1A
subunit

AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; XD, X-­linked dominant; XR, X-­linked recessive.
Modified from Foley CC, Paller AS, Irvine AD. Disorders of cornification (ichthyosis). In: Eichenfield LF, Frieden IJ, eds. Neonatal and Infant Dermatology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015: Table 19.1, p. 283–284.

4112 Part XXIX u The Skin

Table 699.1  Inherited Ichthyoses – Syndromic—cont’d

Chapter 699 u Disorders of Keratinization

4113

Table 699.2  Inherited Ichthyoses – Nonsyndromic
PREVIOUS
NAME

DISORDER

COMMON ICHTHYOSES
IV (ichthyosis vulgaris)

RXLI (recessive
X-­linked ichthyosis)
(nonsyndromic
presentation)

CUTANEOUS
FINDINGS

EXTRA­
CUTANEOUS
FINDINGS

GENE
DEFECT(S)

MIM #

INHERITANCE

146700

AD (autosomal
semidominant)

Fine, white scale
Accentuated
palmoplantar
markings

Strong
association
with atopic
manifestations

FLG

Filaggrin

308100

XR

Large, dark scales
Sparing of body
folds

Prolongation of
labor
Cryptorchidism
Corneal
opacities,
asymptomatic

STS

Steroid sulfatase

Rigid plates
Severe erythema
Hypohidrosis
Scarring alopecia

Ectropion
Eclabion
Contractures
Failure to thrive
Short stature

ABCA12

ATP-­binding
cassette,
subfamily a,
member 12

AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE CONGENITAL ICHTHYOSIS (ARCI)
MAJOR TYPES
HI (harlequin
242500
AR
ichthyosis)

PROTEIN(S)

LI (lamellar ichthyosis)

242300
601277
604777

AR

Large adherent
plates
Hypohidrosis

Ectropion
Eclabium
Short stature if
severe

TGM1,
ABCA12,
PNPLA1,
LIPN

Transglutaminase
1, ABCA12
transporter,
PNPLA1, lipase N

CIE (congenital
ichthyosiform
erythroderma)

242100

AR

Fine white scales
Background
erythema
Hypohidrosis
Mild PPK
White nails

Failure to thrive
Short stature if
severe
Occasional
neurologic
deficits

TGM1,
ALOX12B,
ALOXE3,
ABCA12,
CYP4F22,
NIPAL4

Transglutaminase 1
Arachidonate
lipoxygenases,
cytochrome
P450 enzyme,
ichthyin, ABCA12
transporter

242300

AR

Collodion baby
at birth, not
subsequent
ichthyotic
phenotype

None

TGM1,
ALOX12B,
ALOXE3

Keratinocyte
transglutaminase 1

Acral SHCB (self-­
healing collodion
baby)

242300

AR

Acral collodion
membranes that
heal

None

TGM1

Transglutaminase 1

BSI (bathing suit
ichthyosis)

242300

AR

Collodion
None
membrane at birth,
extremities heal

TGM1

Transglutaminase 1

AD, rarely AR

Widespread skin
blistering in
neonates
Warty
hyperkeratosis

Growth failure if
severe

KRT1, KRT10

Keratins 1 and 10

146800

AD

Mild flexural
hyperkeratosis
Adherent fine scale
Pruritus

None

KRT2E

Keratin 2

MINOR VARIANTS
AEI (annular
epidermolytic
ichthyosis)

607602

AD

Intermittent
annular, polycyclic
erythematous
scaly plaques

KRT1, KRT10

Keratins 1 and 10

ICM (ichthyosis Curth-­ Ichthyosis
Macklin)
hystrix

146590
146600

AD

Spiky
hyperkeratosis

KRT1

Keratin 1

Epidermolytic
epidermal nevi

Not in
OMIM

Somatic
pathogenic
variants

KRT1, KRT10

Keratins 1 and 10

MINOR VARIANTS
SHCB (self-­healing
collodion baby)

KERATINOPATHIC ICHTHYOSIS (KPI)
MAJOR TYPES
EI (epidermolytic
BCIE/EH
113800
ichthyosis)

SEI (superficial EI)

Ichthyosis
bullosa
of
Siemens

None

Continued
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4114 Part XXIX u The Skin
Table 699.2  Inherited Ichthyoses – Nonsyndromic—cont’d
PREVIOUS
NAME

DISORDER

CUTANEOUS
FINDINGS

EXTRA­
CUTANEOUS
FINDINGS

GENE
DEFECT(S)

MIM #

INHERITANCE

604117

AD

Collodion baby
Mild, fine, white
scale
Diffuse PPK

None

LOR

Loricrin

EKV
(erythrokeratoderma
variabilis)

133200

AD

Transient, migratory
erythematous
patches
Hyperkeratosis
Diffuse PPK

None

GJB3, GJB4

Connexins 31, 30.3

PSD (peeling skin
disease)

270300

AR

None

CDSN,
TGM5

Corneodesmin,
Transglutaminase 5

CRIE (congenital
reticular
ichthyosiform
erythroderma)

609165

AD (isolated
cases)

None

KRT10

Keratin

KLICK (keratosis
linearis-­ichthyosis
congenita-­
keratoderma)

Not in
OMIM

AR

None

POMP

Proteasome
maturation
protein

OTHER FORMS
LK (loricrin
keratoderma)

Linear keratoses in
skin folds
Sclerosing PPK

PROTEIN(S)

AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; XR, X-­linked recessive.
Modified from Foley CC, Paller AS, Irvine AD. Disorders of cornification (ichthyosis). In: Eichenfield LF, Frieden IJ, eds. Neonatal and Infant Dermatology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier; 2015: Table 19.2, p. 285–286.

Table 699.3  Differential Diagnosis of Netherton Syndrome: Disorders with Ichthyosis and Alopecia
(Hereditary Disorders Only)*
FEATURES RESEMBLING NETHERTON
SYNDROME

DIFFERENTIATION FROM
NETHERTON SYNDROME

DSG1

CIE with PPK, no collodion membrane;
failure to thrive; hypernatremia; barrier
defect; dermatitis; high IgE; malabsorption;
eosinophilic esophagitis; multiple food
allergies; recurrent infections; hypotrichosis;
hypoalbuminemia

May have microcephaly, growth
hormone deficiency, developmental
delay, cardiac defects; psoriasiform
dermatitis with acantholysis in skin
sections; absence of desmoglein

AR
Loss-­of-­function
pathogenic
variants

ADAM17

Psoriasiform erythroderma/widespread
pustules; failure to thrive; malabsorption;
short, broken hair; recurrent infections

Bloody diarrhea; cardiomyopathy/
cardiomyositis

EGFR deficiency

AR
Loss-­of-­function
pathogenic
variants

EGFR

Erythema, scaling, and widespread pustules;
alopecia; failure to thrive, watery diarrhea,
high IgE and eosinophils, hypernatremia,
hypoalbuminemia; recurrent bronchiolitis

Cardiovascular issues

Trichothiodystrophy

AR
Loss-­of-­function
pathogenic
variants

ERCC2,
ERCC3,
GTF2H5,
C7Orf11

CIE-­like ichthyosis; short, brittle hair; “tiger tail”
hair shaft defect under polarized microscopy

May have impaired intelligence,
decreased fertility, short stature,
and photosensitivity

IHS (also called
autosomal
recessive
ichthyosis with
hypotrichosis
[ARIH] syndrome)

AR
Loss-­of-­function
pathogenic
variants

ST14 (encodes
matriptase);
abnormal
filaggrin
processing

Generalized, congenital ichthyosis with sparing
of face, palms, and soles; diffuse nonscarring
alopecia of scalp, eyelashes, and eyebrows
from birth, but improves to sparse, unruly hair
during adolescence and merely recession of
the frontal hair line by adulthood

May have patchy follicular
atrophoderma and hypohidrosis;
photophobia from corneal
abnormalities; blepharitis; dental
abnormalities; hair microscopy may
show pili torti or pili bifurcati

IHSC (or NISCH)
syndrome

AR
Loss-­of-­function
pathogenic
variants

CLDN1
(encodes
claudin 1,
structural
protein
of tight
junctions)

Congenital generalized scaling, predominantly
on the limbs and abdomen and sparing
skinfolds, palms, and soles; coarse, curly hair
with frontotemporal cicatricial alopecia

Congenital paucity of bile ducts
or sclerosing cholangitis leads
to neonatal jaundice with
hepatomegaly; oligodontia, and
enamel dysplasia; blood smears
show small eosinophils and
keratinocyte vacuoles without lipid
contents

DISORDER

INHERITANCE

SAM syndrome

AR
Loss-­of-­function
pathogenic
variants

ADAM17 deficiency

GENE

*Netherton syndrome must also be distinguished from severe atopic dermatitis and immunodeficiency disorders.
AR, Autosomal recessive; CIE, congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma; Ig, immunoglobulin; IHS, ichthyosis hypotrichosis syndrome; IHSC, ichthyosis-­hypotrichosis-­sclerosing
cholangitis; NISCH, neonatal ichthyosis sclerosing cholangitis; PPK, palmoplantar keratoderma; SAM, severe dermatitis, multiple allergies, and metabolic wasting.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 699 u Disorders of Keratinization

Fig. 699.1 Typical appearance of a collodion baby.

4115

Fig. 699.4 Generalized scaling of lamellar ichthyosis.
Intubation may be required until nares are patent and parenteral nutrition
required until eclabium has resolved. Consultation with ophthalmology
is often required given the extensive ectropion. If constrictive bands are
around the digits, debridement may be performed to prevent ischemia.

Lamellar Ichthyosis and Congenital Ichthyosiform
Erythroderma (Nonbullous Congenital Ichthyosiform
Erythroderma)

Fig. 699.2 Scale over the shin in ichthyosis vulgaris.

Lamellar ichthyosis and CIE (nonbullous congenital ichthyosiform
erythroderma; non-­harlequin ichthyosis autosomal recessive congenital ichthyoses [ARCI]) are the most common types of autosomal recessively inherited ichthyosis. Both forms are present at or shortly after
birth. Most infants with these forms of ichthyosis present with erythroderma and scaling, but among collodion babies, most turn out to have
one of these ichthyosis variants.

Etiology/Pathogenesis

Six genes have been identified that cause non-­harlequin ichthyosis
ARCI: TGM (the gene encoding transglutaminase), ABCA12, NIPAL4
(also known as ICHTHYIN), CYP4F22, and the lipoxygenase genes
ALOX12B and ALOXE3. Transglutaminase pathogenic variants lead to
abnormalities in the cornified envelope, whereas defects in ABCA12
cause abnormal lipid transport and those in CYP4F22 produce abnormal lamellar granules. The lipoxygenases are likely to play a role in epidermal barrier formation by affecting lipid metabolism.

Clinical Manifestations

Fig. 699.3 Sparing of the antecubital fossa in X-­linked ichthyosis.
and hair may be absent. Joint mobility is restricted, and the hands
and feet appear fixed and ischemic. Affected neonates have respiratory difficulty, suck poorly, and are subject to severe cutaneous infection. Harlequin ichthyosis used to be uniformly fatal in the neonatal
period, but with the use of oral retinoids, more patients survive (∼80%)
beyond infancy and have severe ichthyosis usually resembling lamellar ichthyosis or nonbullous CIE as adolescents and adults. Those with
a compound heterozygous genotype have a better prognosis. Prenatal
diagnosis has been accomplished by fetoscopy, fetal skin biopsy, and
microscopic examination of cells from amniotic fluid.

Treatment

Initial treatment includes high fluid intake to avoid dehydration from
transepidermal water loss and use of a humidified heated incubator,
emulsifying ointments, careful attention to hygiene, and oral retinoids.

After shedding of the collodion membrane, if present, lamellar ichthyosis evolves into large, quadrilateral, dark scales that are free at the edges
and adherent at the center. Scaling is often pronounced and involves
the entire body surface, including flexural surfaces (Fig. 699.4). The
face is often markedly involved, including ectropion and small, crumpled ears. The palms and soles are generally hyperkeratotic. The hair
may be sparse and fine, but the teeth and mucosal surfaces are normal.
Unlike in CIE, there is little erythema.
In CIE, erythroderma tends to be persistent, and scales, although
they are generalized, are finer and whiter than in lamellar ichthyosis (Fig. 699.5). Hyperkeratosis is particularly noticeable around the
knees, elbows, and ankles. Palms and soles are uniformly hyperkeratotic. Patients have sparse hair, cicatricial alopecia, and nail dystrophy.
Neither form includes blistering.

Treatment

Pruritus may be severe and responds minimally to antipruritic therapy. The unattractive appearance of the child and the bad odor from
bacterial colonization of macerated scales may cause severe emotional
distress. A high-­humidity environment in winter and air conditioning in summer reduce discomfort. Generous and frequent applications of emollients and keratolytic agents such as lactic or glycolic acid
(5–12%), urea (10–40%), tazarotene (0.1% gel), and retinoic acid (0.1%
cream) may lessen the scaling to some extent, although these agents

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4116 Part XXIX u The Skin

A
Fig. 699.5 Prominent erythema and scale in congenital ichthyosiform
erythroderma.

B
Fig. 699.7 Erythrokeratoderma variabilis. A, Fixed, hyperkeratotic
plaques. B, Migratory, erythematous lesion.

Fig. 699.6 Superficial erosions and hyperkeratosis in epidermolytic
hyperkeratosis.

produce stinging if applied to fissured skin. Oral retinoids have a beneficial effect in these conditions but do not alter the underlying defect
and therefore must be administered indefinitely. The long-­term risks of
these compounds (teratogenic effects and toxicity to bone) may limit
their usefulness. Ectropion requires ophthalmologic care and, at times,
plastic surgical procedures.

KERATINOPATHIC ICHTHYOSES
Epidermolytic Ichthyosis (Bullous Congenital
Ichthyosiform Erythroderma; Epidermolytic
Hyperkeratosis)
Etiology/Pathogenesis

Epidermolytic ichthyosis is an autosomal dominant trait that has been
shown to be due to defects in either keratin 1 or keratin 10. These keratins are required to form the keratin-­intermediate filaments in cells of
the suprabasilar layers of the epidermis.

Clinical Manifestations

The clinical manifestations are initially characterized by the onset
at birth of widespread blisters and erosions on a background of
generalized erythroderma (Fig. 699.6). Recurrent blistering may be
widespread in neonates and may cause diagnostic confusion with
other blistering disorders. With time, the blister formation ceases,
erythema decreases, and generalized hyperkeratosis develops. The
scales are small, hard, and verrucous. Distinctive, parallel hyperkeratotic ridges develop over the joint flexures, including the axillary,
popliteal, and antecubital fossae, and on the neck and hips. Palmoplantar keratoderma (PPK) is associated with keratin 1 defects.
The hair, nails, mucosa, and sweat glands are normal. Malodorous
secondary bacterial infection is common and requires appropriate
antibiotic therapy.

Histopathology

The histopathology is diagnostic of epidermolytic ichthyosis, consisting
of hyperkeratosis, degeneration of the epidermal granular layer with an
increased number of keratohyalin granules, clear spaces around nuclei,
and indistinct cellular boundaries of cells in the upper epidermis. On
electron microscopic examination, keratin-­intermediate filaments are
clumped, and many desmosomes are attached to only one keratinocyte
instead of connecting neighboring keratinocytes. Localized forms of
the disease may resemble epidermal nevi or keratoderma of the palms
and soles but share the distinctive histopathologic changes of epidermolytic ichthyosis.

Treatment

Treatment of epidermolytic ichthyosis is difficult. Morbidity is
increased in the neonatal period as a result of prematurity, sepsis, and
fluid and electrolyte imbalance. Bacterial colonization of macerated
scales produces a distinctive bad odor that can be controlled somewhat
by use of an antibacterial cleanser. Intermittent oral antibiotics are
generally necessary. Keratolytic agents are often poorly tolerated. Oral
retinoids may produce significant improvement. Prenatal diagnosis for
affected families is possible by examination of DNA extracts from chorionic villus cells or amniocytes, provided that the specific pathogenic
variant in the affected parent is known.

OTHER NONSYNDROMIC ICHTHYOSES
Erythrokeratoderma Variabilis
Etiology/Pathogenesis

An autosomal dominant disorder, erythrokeratoderma variabilis
(EKV), is caused by pathogenic variants in connexins 31 and 30.3.
Connexins are proteins that form gap junctions between cells that
allow for transport and signaling between neighboring epidermal cells.

Clinical Manifestations

EKV usually manifests in the early months of life, progresses in childhood,
and stabilizes in adolescence. It is characterized by two distinctive manifestations: sharply demarcated, hyperkeratotic plaques (Fig. 699.7A)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 699 u Disorders of Keratinization

4117

and transient figurate erythema (see Fig. 699.7B). The distribution is
generalized but sparse; sites of predilection are the face, buttocks, axillae, and extensor surfaces of the limbs. The palms and soles may be
thickened, but hair, teeth, and nails are normal.

Treatment

There are case reports that topical tazarotene gel 0.1% and oral retinoids are effective for treatment of EKV.

Symmetric Progressive Erythrokeratoderma
Etiology/Pathogenesis

Symmetric progressive erythrokeratoderma is an autosomal dominant
disorder caused by pathogenic variants in the gene encoding loricrin.
Loricrin is a major component of the epidermal cornified cell envelope.

Clinical Manifestations

The disorder manifests in childhood as large, fixed, geographic and
symmetric, fine, scaling, hyperkeratotic, erythematous plaques primarily on the extremities, buttocks, face, ankles, and wrists. The primary
feature distinguishing this disorder from EKV is the lack of variable
erythema seen in the latter condition.

Fig. 699.8 Serpiginous, erythematous, hyperkeratotic lesions of
ichthyosis linearis circumflexa.

Treatment

Symmetric progressive erythrokeratoderma is a very rare disorder, but
reports of response to topical and oral retinoids exist.

SYNDROMIC ICHTHYOSES
Sjögren-­Larsson Syndrome
Etiology/Pathogenesis

The autosomal recessive inborn error of metabolism known as
Sjögren-­Larsson syndrome is an abnormality of fatty alcohol oxidation that results from a deficiency of fatty aldehyde dehydrogenase
(FALDH3A2), a component of the fatty alcohol–nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide oxidoreductase enzyme complex (see Table 699.1).

Clinical Manifestations

The clinical picture of Sjögren-­Larsson syndrome consists of ichthyosis, cognitive impairment, and spasticity. The ichthyosis is generalized
but is accentuated on the flexures and the lower abdomen and consists
of erythroderma, fine scaling, larger platelike scales, and dark hyperkeratosis. The degree of scale varies markedly from patient to patient.
Most individuals have palmoplantar hyperkeratosis. The skin changes
may be identical to the other forms of ichthyosis, and diagnosis is often
delayed until the onset of neurologic symptoms. Pruritus is severe, and
hypohidrosis is common. Glistening dots in the foveal area are a cardinal ophthalmologic sign. About half the patients have primary retinal degeneration. Motor and speech developmental delays are usually
noted before 1 year of age, and spastic diplegia or tetraplegia, epilepsy,
and intellectual disability generally become evident in the first to third
years of life. Some patients may walk with the aid of braces, but most
are confined to wheelchairs. This deficiency can be demonstrated in
cultured skin fibroblasts of affected patients and carriers and, prenatally, in cultured chorionic villus cells and amniocytes from affected
fetuses. Elevation of urinary leukotriene B4 (LTB4) may provide an
easier approach to diagnosis.

Treatment

Treatment is similar to the other forms of ichthyosis (humectants,
emollients, topical or oral retinoids); 5-­lipoxygenase inhibitors have
been used to decrease pruritus.

Netherton Syndrome
Etiology/Pathogenesis

A rare autosomal recessive disorder, Netherton syndrome is caused by
pathogenic variants in the SPINK 5 gene, which encodes a serine protease inhibitor (LEKT1).

Clinical Manifestations

Netherton syndrome is characterized by ichthyosis (usually ichthyosis
linearis circumflexa, but occasionally the lamellar or congenital types

Fig. 699.9 Very short scalp hair and thick scale in Netherton
syndrome.

of ichthyosiform erythroderma), trichorrhexis invaginata and other
hair shaft anomalies, and atopic diathesis. The disorder manifests at
birth or in the first few months of life as generalized erythema and
scaling. The trunk and limbs have diffuse erythema and superimposed
migratory, polycyclic, and serpiginous hyperkeratotic lesions (Fig.
699.8), some with a distinctive double-­edged margin of scale. Lichenification or hyperkeratosis tends to persist in the antecubital and popliteal fossae. The face and scalp may remain erythematous and scaling.
Many hair shaft deformities, most notably trichorrhexis invaginata,
have been described in most patients with Netherton syndrome.
The ichthyosis is present in the first 10 days of life and may be
especially marked around the eyes, mouth, and perineal area. The
erythroderma is often intensified after infection. Infants may suffer
from failure to thrive, recurrent bacterial and candidal infections,
elevated serum immunoglobulin IgE values, and marked hypernatremic dehydration. The most frequent allergic manifestations are
urticaria, angioedema, atopic dermatitis, and asthma. Scalp hair is
sparse and short and fractures easily (Fig. 699.9); eyebrows, eyelashes, and body hair are also abnormal. The characteristic hair
abnormality can be identified with light microscopy; in the newborn, it may best be identified in eyebrow hair. The differential
diagnosis is noted in Table 699.3.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4118 Part XXIX u The Skin
Treatment

Owing to the inflammatory nature of the skin disease, oral antihistamines and topical steroids, as used in the treatment of atopic dermatitis, are helpful for Netherton syndrome.

Refsum Syndrome

See Chapters 106.2 and 653.5.

Etiology/Pathogenesis

There are two types of Refsum syndrome. The classic form is autosomal recessive and caused by pathogenic variants in the PAHX gene
that result in an increase in phytanic acid. The infantile forms of Refsum syndrome are also autosomal recessive and caused by pathogenic
variants in the PEX1, PEX2, or PEX26 genes. These are peroxisomal
abnormalities that lead to an increase in very long-­chain fatty acids,
di-­and tri-­hydroxycholestanoic acid, and pipecolic acid, as well as
phytanic acid.

Fig. 699.10 Limb dysplasia and ichthyosiform eruption in CHILD
(congenital hemidysplasia with ichthyosiform erythroderma and limb
defects) syndrome.

Clinical Manifestations

Refsum syndrome is a multisystem disorder that becomes symptomatic in the second or third decade of life. The ichthyosis may be
generalized, is relatively mild, and resembles ichthyosis vulgaris. The
ichthyosis may also be localized to the palms and soles. Chronic polyneuritis with progressive paralysis and ataxia, retinitis pigmentosa,
anosmia, deafness, bony abnormalities, and electrocardiographic
changes are the most characteristic features. The condition is diagnosed through lipid analysis of the blood or skin, which shows elevated phytanic acid values.
The infantile form begins, as suggested by the name, early in life, and
in addition to the changes seen in the classic form, affected patients
have hepatomegaly, abnormal bile acid profiles, developmental delay,
and cognitive impairment.

Treatment

Phytanic acid is exclusively derived from dietary chlorophyll. Lifelong
dietary avoidance of phytanic acid–containing products leads to clinical improvement in classic Refsum syndrome.

Chondrodysplasia Punctata
See Chapter 106.2.

Etiology/Pathogenesis

Chondrodysplasia punctata (CPD) is a clinically and genetically
heterogeneous condition. X-­linked dominant CPD, also known as
Conradi-­Hünermann syndrome, is the best-­characterized form. There
is also an X-­linked recessive form caused by a pathogenic variant in the
ARSE gene. Rhizomelic CPD type 1 is an autosomal recessive disorder
caused by pathogenic variants in the PEX7 gene, which encodes the
PTS2 receptor. CPD can also be caused by maternal vitamin K deficiency or warfarin teratogenicity.

Clinical Manifestations

These heterogeneous disorders are marked by ichthyosis and bone
changes. Nearly all patients with the X-­linked dominant form and
approximately 25% of those with the recessive type have cutaneous
lesions, ranging from severe, generalized erythema and scaling to
mild hyperkeratosis. Rhizomelic CPD is associated with cataracts,
hypertelorism, optic nerve atrophy, disproportionate shortening of
the proximal extremities, psychomotor retardation, failure to thrive,
and spasticity; most affected patients die in infancy. Patients with the
X-­linked dominant form have asymmetric, variable shortening of the
limbs and a distinctive ichthyosiform eruption at birth. Thick, yellow,
tightly adherent, keratinized plaques are distributed in a whorled pattern over the entire body. The eruption typically resolves in infancy
and may be superseded by a follicular atrophoderma and patchy
alopecia.
Additional features in all variants include cataracts and abnormal
facies with saddle nose and frontal bossing. The pathognomonic defect,
termed CPD, is stippled epiphyses in the cartilaginous skeleton. This

Fig. 699.11 Palmar keratoderma with epidermolytic changes seen on
biopsy.

defect, which is seen in various settings and inherited disorders, often
in association with peroxisomal deficiency and disturbance of cholesterol biosynthesis, disappears by 3-­4 years of age.

OTHER SYNDROMES WITH ICHTHYOSIS

A number of other rare syndromes with ichthyosis as a consistent feature include the following: keratitis with ichthyosis and deafness (KID
syndrome, connexin 26 gene), ichthyosis with defective hair having a
banded pattern under polarized light and a low sulfur content (trichothiodystrophy), multiple sulfatase deficiency, neutral lipid storage disease with ichthyosis (Chanarin-­Dorfman syndrome; CGI58 gene), and
CHILD syndrome (Fig. 699.10; congenital hemidysplasia with ichthyosiform erythroderma and limb defects; NSDHL gene).

Palmoplantar Keratodermas

Excessive hyperkeratosis of the palms and soles may occur as a manifestation of a focal or generalized congenital hereditary skin disorder
or may result from such chronic skin diseases as psoriasis, eczema,
pityriasis rubra pilaris, lupus erythematosus, or postinfectious arthritis
syndrome.

Diffuse Hyperkeratosis of Palms and Soles
(Unna-­Thost, Vorner)

Unna-­Thost and Vorner type PPKs, although clinically inseparable, were thought to be separate entities. They were separated
histologically by the presence (Vorner) or absence (Unna-­Thost)
of epidermolytic hyperkeratosis. They represent the clinical
spectrum of the same disease caused by pathogenic variants in
keratin (KRT1 and KRT9 genes). This autosomal dominant disorder manifests in the first few months of life as erythema that

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 700 u Diseases of the Dermis
gradually progresses to sharply demarcated, hyperkeratotic, scaling plaques over the palms (Fig. 699.11) and soles. The margins
of the plaques often remain red; plaques may extend along the
lateral aspects of the hands and feet and onto the volar wrists
and the heels. Hyperhidrosis is usually present, but hair, teeth, and
nails are usually normal. Striate (DSG1, DSP, KRT1 genes) and
punctate forms of palmar and plantar hyperkeratosis represent distinct entities.

Mal De Meleda (SLURP-­1 Gene)

A rare, progressive autosomal recessive condition, mal de Meleda
is characterized by erythema and thick scales on the palms, fingers,
soles, and flexor aspects of the wrists, knees, and elbows. Hyperhidrosis, nail thickening or koilonychia, and eczema may also occur.

Vohwinkel Palmoplantar Keratoderma (Mutilating
Keratoderma)

Vohwinkel PPK is a progressive autosomal dominant disease consisting of honeycombed hyperkeratosis of palms and soles, sparing the
arches; starfish-­like and linear keratoses on the dorsum of the hands,
fingers, feet, and knees; and ainhum-­like constriction of the digits that
sometimes leads to autoamputation. Varying degrees of alopecia may
be seen. Two forms have been identified. Vohwinkel PPK with ichthyosis is caused by pathogenic variants in the loricrin gene, and Vohwinkel
PPK with deafness by pathogenic variants in connexin 26.

Papillon-­Lefèvre Syndrome (Cathepsin C Gene)

An autosomal recessive erythematous hyperkeratosis of the palms
and soles, Papillon-­Lefèvre syndrome sometimes extends to the dorsal hands and feet, elbows, and knees later in childhood. The PPK
may be either diffuse, striate, or punctuate. This syndrome is characterized by periodontal inflammation, leading to loss of teeth by age
4-­5 years if untreated.

Other Syndromes

Keratoderma of palms and soles also occurs as a feature of some forms
of ichthyosis and ectodermal dysplasia. Richner-­Hanhart syndrome
is an autosomal recessive focal PPK with corneal ulcers, progressive
mental impairment, and a deficiency of tyrosine aminotransferase,
which leads to tyrosinemia. Pachyonychia congenita is transmitted
as an autosomal dominant trait with variable expressivity. The classic
type I form (Jadassohn-­Lewandowski syndrome) is due to pathogenic
variants in the gene for keratin 16. Major features of the syndrome
are onychogryphosis; PPK; follicular hyperkeratosis, especially of the
elbows and knees; and oral leukokeratosis. The nail dystrophy is the
most striking feature and may be present at birth or develop early
in life. The nails are thickened and tubular, projecting upward at the
free edge to form a conical roof over a mass of subungual keratotic
debris. Repeated paronychial inflammation may result in shedding of
the nails. The feature seen most consistently among patients with this
condition is keratoderma of the palms and soles. Additional associated
features include hyperhidrosis of the palms and soles and bullae and
erosions on the palms and soles. Some patients have shown a selective
cell-­mediated defect in recognition and processing of Candida. Surgical removal of the nails and excision of the nail matrix have been helpful in some patients.

Chapter 700

Diseases of the Dermis
Jacquelyn R. Sink and Yvonne E. Chiu
KELOID
Etiology and Pathogenesis

Keloids are usually induced by trauma and commonly follow ear
piercing, burns, scalds, and surgical procedures. The resulting
keloid is larger than the initial area of trauma to the skin. Certain
individuals are predisposed to keloid formation; a familial tendency
(recessive or dominant inheritance) or the presence of foreign material in the wound may have a pathogenic role. Keloids are a rare feature of Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome, Rubinstein-­Taybi syndrome, and
pachydermoperiostosis. Keloids result from an abnormal fibrous
wound-­healing response in which tissue repair and regeneration-­
regulation control mechanisms are lost. Collagen production is 20
times that seen in normal scars, and the type I:III collagen ratio is
abnormally high. In keloids, tissue levels of tumor growth factor-­β
and platelet-­
derived growth factor are elevated; fibroblasts are
more sensitive to their effects, and their degradation rate is
decreased.

Clinical Manifestations

A keloid is a sharply demarcated, benign, dense growth of connective tissue that forms in the dermis after trauma. The lesions are firm,
raised, pink to hyperpigmented, and rubbery; they may be tender or
pruritic. Sites of predilection are the face, earlobes (Fig. 700.1), neck,
shoulders, upper trunk, sternum, and lower legs. Unlike hypertrophic
scars, keloids frequently recur after attempted removal and outgrow
the original boundaries of the wound.

Histology

A keloid consists of whorled and interlaced hyalinized collagen
fibers.

Differential Diagnosis

Keloids should be differentiated from hypertrophic scars, which remain
confined to the site of injury and may involute over time.

Treatment

Treatment for PPK is the same no matter what its cause. In mild
cases, emollient therapy may suffice. Keratolytic agents such as salicylic acid, lactic acid, and urea creams may be required. Oral retinoids are the treatment of choice for severe cases unresponsive to
topical therapy.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

4119

Fig. 700.1 Keloid of earlobe after piercing.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4120 Part XXIX u The Skin
Treatment

Treatment of keloids is difficult. Young keloids may diminish in size
if injected intralesionally at 4-­week intervals with triamcinolone suspension (10-­40 mg/mL). At times, a more concentrated suspension
is required. Large or old keloids may require surgical excision followed by serial intralesional injections of corticosteroid; however,
recurrence rates are high. Earlobe keloids may respond favorably to
surgical excision followed by use of pressure earrings and serial intralesional steroid injections. Silicone scar sheeting may help in some
patients. Other therapeutic modalities that have been used with variable success include laser therapy, radiation therapy, and intralesional
injection of bleomycin, interferon, verapamil, or fluorouracil.

STRIAE CUTIS DISTENSAE (STRETCH MARKS)
Etiology and Pathogenesis

Striae formation is common in adolescence. The most frequent causes
are rapid growth, pregnancy, obesity, Cushing disease, and prolonged use
of systemic or topical corticosteroid therapy. They may also be seen in
patients with Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome. The pathogenesis is unknown,
but alterations in collagen and elastic fibers are thought to play a role.

Clinical Manifestations

Striae appear as linear, depressed, pink bands of atrophic skin that
eventually become silvery, opalescent, and smooth. They occur
most frequently in areas subject to distention, such as the lower back
(Fig. 700.2), buttocks, thighs, breasts, abdomen, and shoulders.

Differential Diagnosis

Striae distensae resemble atrophic scars.

Treatment

Striae tend to spontaneously become less conspicuous as the color
fades with time, and treatment is not necessary.

CORTICOSTEROID-­INDUCED ATROPHY
Etiology and Pathogenesis

Both topical and systemic corticosteroid treatment can result in cutaneous atrophy. This is particularly common when a potent or superpotent
topical corticosteroid is applied under occlusion or to an intertriginous
area for a prolonged period. Keratinocyte growth is decreased, but
epidermal maturation is accelerated, resulting in thinning of the epidermis and stratum corneum. Fibroblast growth and function are also
decreased, leading to dermal changes. The mechanism involves inhibition of synthesis of collagen type I, noncollagenous proteins, and total
protein content of the skin, along with progressive reduction of dermal
proteoglycans and glycosaminoglycans.

Clinical Manifestations

Affected skin is thin, fragile, smooth, and semitransparent, with telangiectasia, prominent veins, and loss of normal skin markings.

Fig. 700.2 Striae on the back of an adolescent.

Histology

On histology, thinning of the epidermis is present. Spaces between dermal collagen and elastic fibers are small, producing a more compact yet
thin dermis.

Treatment

Optimal treatment is prevention by monitoring and educating on the
proper use of topical steroids to avoid side effects.

GRANULOMA ANNULARE
Etiology and Pathogenesis

The cause of granuloma annulare (GA) is unknown. A possible association with diabetes mellitus has been proposed, particularly with the
generalized form of GA; however, this hypothesis is controversial and
has not been confirmed in children.

Clinical Manifestations

This common dermatosis occurs predominantly in healthy children
and young adults. Typical lesions begin as firm, smooth, erythematous papules. They gradually enlarge to form annular plaques with a
papular border and a normal, slightly atrophic or discolored central
area up to several centimeters in size. Lesions may occur anywhere
on the body, but mucous membranes are notably spared. Favored
sites include the dorsum of the hands (Fig. 700.3) and feet. The disseminated papular form is rare in children. Subcutaneous GA tends
to develop on the scalp and limbs, particularly in the pretibial area.
These lesions are firm, usually nontender, skin-­colored nodules.
Perforating GA is characterized by the development of grouped
papules, some with a yellowish, crusted, or scaly center, and occur
because of transepidermal elimination of altered collagen.

Differential Diagnosis

Annular lesions are often mistaken for tinea corporis due to the elevated, advancing border; however, GA characteristically lacks scale.
Papular lesions may simulate rheumatoid nodules, particularly when
grouped on the fingers and elbows.

Histology

The lesions of GA demonstrate granuloma formation on histology with
a central area of necrotic collagen, mucin deposition, and a peripheral palisading infiltrate of lymphocytes, histiocytes, and foreign body
giant cells. The pattern resembles that of necrobiosis lipoidica and
rheumatoid nodules, but subtle histologic differences usually permit
differentiation.

Treatment

The eruption persists for months to years, but spontaneous resolution without residual change is typical; approximately 50% of lesions
clear within 2 years. Application of a potent or superpotent topical
corticosteroid preparation or intralesional injections (5-­10 mg/mL)

Fig. 700.3 Annular lesion with a raised papular border and depressed
center, characteristic of granuloma annulare.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 700 u Diseases of the Dermis
of corticosteroid may hasten involution, but nonintervention is also
appropriate.

NECROBIOSIS LIPOIDICA
Etiology and Pathogenesis

The cause of necrobiosis lipoidica (NL) is unclear, but 50–75% of
patients have diabetes mellitus, though NL occurs in less than 1% of
all diabetic patients. NL has also been noted in patients with obesity,
hypertension, and dyslipidemias. Its presence may signify a higher risk
for diabetic complications such as nephropathy and retinopathy.

Clinical Manifestations

This disorder manifests as erythematous papules that evolve into irregularly shaped, sharply demarcated, erythematous to yellow, sclerotic
plaques with central telangiectasias and a violaceous border. Scaling,
crusting, and ulceration may occur. Lesions develop most commonly
on the anterior tibial surfaces (Fig. 700.4). Slow extension of a given
lesion over the years is usual, but long periods of quiescence or complete healing with scarring may occur.

Histology

Poorly defined areas of necrobiotic collagen are seen on microscopic evaluation, primarily low in the dermis with mucin deposition. Surrounding the necrobiotic, disordered areas of collagen
is a palisading lymphohistiocytic granulomatous infiltrate. Some
lesions are more characteristically granulomatous, with limited
necrobiosis of collagen.

Differential Diagnosis

NL must be differentiated clinically from xanthomas, morphea, GA,
erythema nodosum, and pretibial myxedema.

Treatment

The lesions of NL usually persist despite good control of the diabetes
but may improve minimally after applications of high-­potency topical
steroids or local injection of a corticosteroid. Ulcerated areas should be
managed with meticulous wound care. Pentoxifylline and antiplatelet
therapy with aspirin have also been used.

LICHEN SCLEROSUS
Etiology and Pathogenesis

Lichen sclerosus (LS) is a chronic inflammatory dermatosis whose
cause is largely unknown. Several studies have identified the presence
of autoantibodies against the glycoprotein extracellular matrix protein
1 (ECM-­1).

Clinical Manifestations

Lichen sclerosus (LS) manifests as shiny, ivory-­colored, flat-­topped
papules, often with a violaceous halo. The surface shows prominent
dilated pilosebaceous or sweat duct orifices that may contain yellow

Fig. 700.4 Yellow sclerotic plaque of necrobiosis lipoidica on the
shin.

4121

or brown follicular plugs. The papules coalesce to form irregular
plaques of variable size, and hemorrhagic bullae can be seen in the
margins. In the later stages, atrophy results in a depressed plaque
with a wrinkled surface. This disorder occurs more commonly in
girls than in boys. Sites of predilection in girls are the vulvar (Fig.
700.5), perianal, and perineal skin. Extensive involvement may
produce an atrophic plaque of hourglass configuration; shrinkage
of the labia and stenosis of the introitus may result. Erythema and
purpura are possible. Vaginal discharge precedes vulvar lesions in
approximately 20% of patients. In boys, the prepuce and glans penis
are often involved, usually in association with phimosis (balanitis
xerotica obliterans); most boys with the disorder were not circumcised early in life. Commonly involved extragenital sites include
the upper trunk, neck, axillae, flexor surfaces of wrists, and areas
around the umbilicus and the eyes. Pruritus, pain, and dysuria may
be severe, and constipation due to withholding may occur.

Differential Diagnosis

In children, LS is most frequently confused with focal morphea
(see Chapter 201), with which it may coexist. In the genital area,
it may be mistakenly attributed to sexual abuse, irritant dermatitis,
or vulvovaginitis. The vitiligoid form associated with depigmentation must be differentiated from vitiligo or postinflammatory
hypopigmentation.

Histology

Biopsy is rarely necessary but shows hyperkeratosis with follicular
plugging, hydropic degeneration of basal cells, a bandlike dermal lymphocytic infiltrate, homogenized collagen, and thinned elastic fibers in
the upper dermis.

Treatment

Vulvar LS in childhood usually improves with puberty but does not
always resolve completely, and symptoms can recur throughout life.
Long-­term observation for the development of squamous cell carcinoma is necessary in patients with later disease onset or persistence
beyond puberty. Superpotent topical corticosteroids are the treatment of choice, including for the genital area, providing relief from
pruritus and producing clearing of lesions. Topical tacrolimus and
pimecrolimus have also been used. It is not known how response to
treatment affects long-­term cancer risk.

MORPHEA
Etiology and Pathogenesis

Morphea is an autoimmune sclerosing condition of the dermis and
subcutaneous tissue of unknown etiology.

Clinical Manifestations

Morphea is characterized by solitary, multiple, or linear circumscribed
areas of erythema that evolve into indurated, sclerotic, atrophic plaques,
with or without a lilac border (Fig. 700.6). Affected areas may resolve

Fig. 700.5 Ivory-­colored perivaginal plaque with hemorrhage.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4122 Part XXIX u The Skin
phototherapy, mycophenolate mofetil, and other therapies are also
used. Physical therapy is recommended in linear morphea involving
a joint to maintain mobility. Significant postinflammatory pigment
alteration may persist for years.

SCLEREDEMA (SCLEREDEMA ADULTORUM,
SCLEREDEMA OF BUSCHKE)
Etiology and Pathogenesis

The cause of scleredema is unknown. There are three types. Type 1
(55% of cases) is preceded by a febrile illness, often related to an upper
or lower respiratory infection (most commonly streptococcus). Type 2
(25%) is associated with paraproteinemia, including multiple myeloma.
Type 3 (20%) is seen in diabetes mellitus.
Fig. 700.6 Erythematous, hyperpigmented plaque of early morphea.

Clinical Manifestations

Fifty percent of patients with scleredema are younger than 20 years
old. Onset of type 1 is sudden, with brawny edema of the face
and neck that spreads rapidly to involve the thorax and arms in a
sweater distribution; the abdomen and legs are usually spared. The
face acquires a waxy, masklike appearance. The involved areas feel
indurated and woody, are nonpitting, and are not sharply demarcated from normal skin. The overlying skin is normal in color and
is not atrophic.
Type 2 and type 3 scleredema may occur insidiously. Systemic
involvement, which is uncommon and usually associated with types
2 and 3, is marked by thickening of the tongue, dysarthria, dysphagia, restriction of eye and joint movements, and pleural, pericardial,
and peritoneal effusions. Electrocardiographic changes may also be
observed. Laboratory data are not helpful.

Differential Diagnosis
Fig. 700.7 Linear morphea with involvement over the ankle.

Scleredema must be differentiated from scleroderma (see Chapter
201), morphea, myxedema, trichinosis, dermatomyositis, sclerema
neonatorum, and subcutaneous fat necrosis.

Histology
without sequelae or with subsequent atrophy and/or pigment change.
Morphea is seen more commonly in females. Five types of morphea have
been described: circumscribed, linear, generalized, mixed, and pansclerotic; the most common types in children are circumscribed and linear.
Morphea can affect any area of skin. When confined to the frontal scalp,
forehead, and midface in a linear band, it is referred to as en coup de sabre.
When located on one side of the face, it is termed progressive hemifacial atrophy, also known as Parry-­Romberg syndrome. These forms of
morphea carry a poorer prognosis because of the associated underlying
central nervous system involvement or musculoskeletal atrophy that can
be cosmetically disfiguring. Linear morphea over a joint may lead to limb
undergrowth or restriction of mobility (Fig. 700.7). Pansclerotic morphea
is a rare, severe, disabling variant.

Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis of morphea includes GA, NL, LS, and late-­
stage European Lyme borreliosis (acrodermatitis chronica atrophicans).

Histology

Thickening or sclerosus of the dermis with collagen degeneration is
seen.

Treatment

Morphea tends to persist, with gradual outward expansion for months
to years until spontaneous cessation of the inflammatory phase occurs.
Topical calcipotriene, alone or in combination with high-­potency to
superpotency topical steroids or topical tacrolimus, has been used for
less severe disease. For severe morphea, methotrexate with or without pulsed intravenous or oral glucocorticosteroids may halt progression and help shorten the disease course. Ultraviolet A-­1 (UVA-­1)

Skin biopsy demonstrates an increase in dermal thickness due to
swelling and homogenization of the collagen bundles, which are
separated by large interfibrous spaces. Special stains can identify increased amounts of mucopolysaccharides in the dermis of
patients with scleredema.

Treatment

In type 1 scleredema, the active phase of the disease persists for 2-­8
weeks. Spontaneous and complete resolution usually occurs after 6
months to 2 years. Recurrent attacks are unusual. In types 2 and 3,
the disease is slowly progressive. There is no specific therapy.

LIPOID PROTEINOSIS (URBACH-­WIETHE DISEASE,
HYALINOSIS CUTIS ET MUCOSAE)
Etiology and Pathogenesis

Lipoid proteinosis is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by pathogenic variants in the ECM-­1 gene, which encodes ECM-­1. ECM-­1 has
a functional role in the structural organization of the dermis by binding to perlecan, matrix metalloproteinase 9, and fibulin. Pathogenesis
involves infiltration of hyaline material into the skin, oral cavity, larynx, and internal organs.

Clinical Manifestations

Lipoid proteinosis presents initially in early infancy as hoarseness
due to vocal cord involvement. Skin lesions appear during childhood
and consist of yellowish papules and nodules that may coalesce to
form plaques. The classic sign is a string of beaded papules on the
eyelids. Lesions also occur on the face, forearms, neck, genitals, dorsum of the fingers, and scalp, where they result in patchy alopecia.
Similar deposits are found on the lips, leading to eversion of the lips,
as well as the undersurface of the tongue, fauces, uvula, epiglottis,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 700 u Diseases of the Dermis

4123

and vocal cords. The tongue becomes enlarged and feels firm on palpation. The patient may be unable to protrude the tongue. Pocklike,
atrophic scars may develop on the face. Hypertrophic, hyperkeratotic
nodules and plaques occur at sites of friction, such as the elbows and
knees; the palms may be diffusely thickened. The disease progresses
until early adult life, but the prognosis is good. Symmetric calcification lateral to the sella turcica in the medial temporal region, identifiable roentgenographically as bilateral bean-­shaped opacities, is
pathognomonic but is not always present. Involvement of the larynx
can lead to respiratory compromise, particularly in infancy, necessitating tracheostomy. Associated anomalies include dental abnormalities, epilepsy, and recurrent parotitis because of infiltrates in the
Stensen duct. Virtually any organ can be involved.

Histology

The distinctive histologic pattern in lipoid proteinosis includes dilation
of dermal blood vessels and infiltration of homogeneous eosinophilic
extracellular hyaline material along capillary walls and around sweat
glands. Hyaline material in homogeneous bundles, diffusely arranged
in the upper dermis, produces a thickened dermis. The infiltrates
appear to contain both lipid and mucopolysaccharide substances.

Treatment

There is no specific treatment for lipoid proteinosis.

MACULAR ATROPHY (ANETODERMA)
Etiology and Pathogenesis

Anetoderma is characterized by circumscribed areas of slack skin associated with loss of dermal substance. This disorder may have no associated underlying disease (primary macular atrophy) or may develop
after an inflammatory skin condition. Secondary macular atrophy may
be a result of direct destruction of dermal elastin or elastolysis on an
immunologic basis, especially in the presence of antiphospholipid antibodies, which are related to autoimmune disorders. The elastolysis may
then be a result of release of elastase from inflammatory cells.

Clinical Manifestations

Lesions vary from 0.5 to 1.0 cm in diameter and, if inflammatory, may
initially be erythematous. They subsequently become thin, wrinkled, and
blue-­white or hypopigmented. The lesions often protrude as small outpouchings that, on palpation, may be readily indented into the subcutaneous tissue because of the dermal atrophy. Sites of predilection include the
trunk, thighs, upper arms, and, less commonly, the neck and face. Lesions
remain unchanged for life; new lesions often continue to develop for years.

Histology

All types of macular atrophy show focal loss of elastic tissue on histopathologic examination, a change that may not be recognized unless
special stains are used.

Differential Diagnosis

Lesions of anetoderma occasionally resemble morphea, LS, focal dermal hypoplasia, atrophic scars, or end-­stage lesions of chronic bullous
dermatoses.

Treatment

There is no effective therapy for macular atrophy.

PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
Etiology and Pathogenesis

Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) is a genetic metabolic disease linked
to pathogenic variants in the ABCC6 gene. The primary abnormality
seen in PXE is mineralization of tissue in the skin, Bruch membrane in
the retina, and vessel walls. Cutaneous manifestations of PXE may be
present in generalized arterial calcification of infancy.

Fig. 700.8 Confluent plaque of pebbly skin in pseudoxanthoma elasticum.

Clinical Manifestations

Onset of skin manifestations often occurs during childhood, but the
changes produced by early lesions are subtle and may not be recognized. The characteristic pebbly, “plucked chicken skin” cutaneous
lesions are 1-­to 2-­mm, asymptomatic, yellow papules arranged in a linear or reticulated pattern or in confluent plaques. Preferred sites are the
flexural neck (Fig. 700.8), axillary and inguinal folds, umbilicus, thighs,
and antecubital and popliteal fossae. As the lesions become more pronounced, the skin acquires a velvety texture and droops in lax, inelastic folds. The face is usually spared. Mucous membrane lesions may
involve the lips, buccal cavity, rectum, and vagina. There is involvement
of the connective tissue of the media and intima of blood vessels, Bruch
membrane of the eye, and endocardium or pericardium, which may
result in visual disturbances, angioid streaks in the Bruch membrane,
irregular mottling of the retinal epithelium, intermittent claudication,
cerebral and coronary occlusion, hypertension, and hemorrhage from
the gastrointestinal tract, uterus, or mucosal surfaces. Women with
PXE have an increased risk of miscarriage in the first trimester. Arterial involvement generally manifests in adulthood, but claudication
and angina have occurred in early childhood.

Pathology

Histopathologic examination shows fragmented, swollen, and clumped
elastic fibers in the middle and lower third of the dermis. The fibers
stain positively for calcium. Collagen near the altered elastic fibers is
reduced in amount and is split into small fibers. Aberrant calcification
of the elastic fibers of the internal elastic lamina of arteries in PXE leads
to narrowing of vessel lumina.

Treatment

There is no effective treatment for PXE, although laser therapy, with or
without intravitreal injection of vascular endothelial growth factor antagonists, may help prevent retinal hemorrhage. The use of oral phosphate
binders has shown mixed results in decreasing calcification of elastic fibers.

ELASTOSIS PERFORANS SERPIGINOSA
Etiology and Pathogenesis

Elastosis perforans serpiginosa (EPS) is characterized by the extrusion
of altered elastic fibers through the epidermis. The primary abnormality is probably in the dermal elastin, which provokes a cellular response
that ultimately leads to extrusion of the abnormal elastic tissue.

Clinical Manifestations

This is an unusual skin disorder in which 1-­to 3-­mm, firm, skin-­
colored, keratotic papules tend to cluster in arcuate and annular
patterns on the posterolateral neck and limbs (Fig. 700.9) and occasionally on the face and trunk. Onset usually occurs in childhood or

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4124 Part XXIX u The Skin

Fig. 700.9 Arcuate keratotic papule of elastosis perforans serpiginosa.

Fig. 700.10 Hyperkeratotic papules in reactive perforating collagen-

osis.

adolescence. A papule consists of a circumscribed area of epidermal
hyperplasia that communicates with the underlying dermis by a narrow channel. There is a great increase in the amount and size of elastic
fibers in the upper dermis, particularly in the dermal papillae. Approximately 30% occur in association with osteogenesis imperfecta, Marfan syndrome, PXE, Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome, Rothmund-­Thomson
syndrome, scleroderma, acrogeria, and Down syndrome. EPS has also
occurred in association with penicillamine therapy.

Treatment

Histology

See Chapter 653.6.

Histopathology reveals a hyperplastic epidermis with extrusion of
abnormal elastic fibers and a lymphocytic superficial infiltrate.

Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis of EPS includes tinea corporis, perforating
GA, reactive perforating collagenosis, lichen planus, creeping eruption,
and porokeratosis of Mibelli.

Treatment

Treatment of EPS is ineffective; however, the lesions are asymptomatic
and may disappear spontaneously.

REACTIVE PERFORATING COLLAGENOSIS
Etiology and Pathogenesis

The primary process in reactive perforating collagenosis represents
transepidermal elimination of altered collagen. A familial autosomal
recessive form has been described.

Clinical Manifestations

Reactive perforating collagenosis usually manifests in early childhood as small papules on the dorsal areas of the hands and forearms, elbows, knees, and, sometimes, the face and trunk. Over a
period of several weeks, the papules enlarge to 5-­10 mm, become
umbilicated, and develop keratotic plugs centrally (Fig. 700.10).
Individual lesions resolve spontaneously in 2-­4 months, leaving
hypopigmented macules or scars. Lesions may recur in crops, linearly as a part of the Koebner phenomenon, or in response to cold
temperatures or superficial trauma such as abrasions, insect bites,
and acne lesions.

Histology

Collagen in the papillary dermis is engulfed within a cup-­shaped perforation in the epidermis. The central crater contains pyknotic inflammatory cells and keratinous debris.

Differential Diagnosis

EPS and Kyrle disease may mimic reactive perforating collagenosis.

Reactive perforating collagenosis resolves spontaneously in 6-­8 weeks.
Narrow-­band ultraviolet B (UVB) light may help with pruritus and
hasten resolution.

XANTHOMAS
See Chapter 105.

FABRY DISEASE
MUCOPOLYSACCHARIDOSES

See Chapter 109.
Several of the mucopolysaccharidoses are characterized by thickened, rough, inelastic skin, particularly on the extremities, and generalized hypertrichosis but are nonspecific features. Extensive and
persistent dermal melanocytosis has been described in children with
Hurler and Hunter syndromes. Telangiectasias on the face, forearms, trunk, and legs have been observed in Scheie and Morquio
syndromes. In some patients with Hunter syndrome, ivory-­colored,
distinctive, firm dermal papules and nodules with corrugated surface texture are grouped into symmetric plaques on the upper trunk
(Fig. 700.11), arms, and thighs. Onset of these unusual lesions occurs
in the first decade of life, and spontaneous disappearance has been
noted.

MASTOCYTOSIS
Etiology and Pathogenesis

Mastocytosis encompasses a clinical spectrum of disorders that
range from solitary cutaneous nodules to diffuse infiltration of skin
associated with involvement of internal organs (Table 700.1). All
of the disorders are characterized by aggregates of mast cells in the
dermis. There are four types of mastocytosis: mastocytomas (three
or fewer lesions), urticaria pigmentosa (more than three lesions,
also known as maculopapular cutaneous mastocytosis), diffuse
cutaneous mastocytosis, and telangiectasia macularis eruptiva perstans (TMEP). Increased expression of stem cell factor (also called
kit ligand or mast cell growth factor) stimulates the proliferation of
mast cells and increases the production of melanin by melanocytes.
Some forms of mastocytosis are associated with activating pathogenic variants (most commonly the D816V variant) in the KIT gene.
The local and systemic manifestations of the disease are at least
partly a result of the release of histamine and heparin from mast
cell granules; although heparin is present in significant amounts in
mast cells, coagulation disturbances occur only rarely. The vasodilator prostaglandin D2 or its metabolite appears to exacerbate the
flushing response. Serum tryptase values may be elevated, but not
consistently.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 700 u Diseases of the Dermis

Fig. 700.11 Ivory-­colored papules on the upper back in Hunter syndrome.

Table 700.1  Mastocytosis Classification
CUTANEOUS MASTOCYTOSIS
Urticaria pigmentosa/maculopapular cutaneous mastocytosis
Diffuse cutaneous mastocytosis
Solitary mastocytoma
SYSTEMIC MASTOCYTOSIS
Indolent mastocytosis
Smoldering mastocytosis
Aggressive mastocytosis
Systemic mastocytosis with associated hematologic non–mast cell
lineage (AHN) disease
Mast cell leukemia
MAST CELL SARCOMA
Modified from Valent P, Akin C, Metcalfe D. Mastocytosis: 2016 Updated WHO
classification and novel emerging treatment concepts. Blood. 2017;129:1420–1427,
Table 2.

4125

stroking of a lesion can usually be elicited; dermographism of intervening normal skin is also common. Affected children can have intense
pruritus. Systemic signs of histamine release, such as anaphylaxis-­like
episodes, hypotension, syncope, headache, episodic flushing, tachycardia, wheezing, colic, and diarrhea, are uncommon and occur most
frequently in the more severe types of mastocytosis. Flushing is by far
the most common symptom.
The second type of urticaria pigmentosa may begin in childhood
but typically develops in adulthood. This type does not resolve, and
new lesions continue to develop throughout life. Patients with this type
of mastocytosis may develop systemic involvement.
Systemic mastocytosis is marked by an abnormal increase in the
number of mast cells in numerous organ systems and is uncommon
in children. Bone lesions are often silent (but may be painful) and
are detectable radiologically as osteoporotic or osteosclerotic areas,
principally in the axial skeleton. Gastrointestinal tract involvement
may lead to abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, steatorrhea, and bloating. Mucosal infiltrates may be detectable by barium
studies or by small bowel biopsy. Peptic ulcers also occur. Hepatosplenomegaly due to mast cell infiltrates and fibrosis has been
described, as has mast cell proliferation in lymph nodes, kidneys,
periadrenal fat, and bone marrow. Abnormalities in the peripheral
blood, such as anemia, leukocytosis, and eosinophilia, are noted in
approximately 30% of patients. Mast cell leukemia may occur.
Diffuse cutaneous mastocytosis is characterized by diffuse
involvement of the skin rather than discrete hyperpigmented lesions.
Affected patients are usually normal at birth and demonstrate features
of the disorder after the first few months of life. Rarely, the condition may present with intense generalized pruritus in the absence of
visible skin changes. The skin usually appears thickened, pink to yellow in color, doughy, or with a peau d’orange texture. Surface changes
are accentuated in flexural areas. Recurrent bullae (see Fig. 700.12),
intractable pruritus, and flushing attacks are common, as is systemic
involvement.
Telangiectasia macularis eruptiva perstans (TMEP) is a variant of
mastocytosis that consists of telangiectatic, hyperpigmented macules
usually localized to the trunk. These lesions do not urticate when stroked.
This form of the disease is seen primarily in adolescents and adults.

Differential Diagnosis
Clinical Manifestations

Mastocytomas are usually 1-­5 cm in diameter. Lesions may be present
at birth or may arise in early infancy at any site. The lesions may manifest as recurrent, evanescent wheals or bullae; in time, an infiltrated,
pink, yellow, or tan, rubbery plaque develops at the site of whealing or
blistering (Fig. 700.12). The surface acquires a pebbly, orange peel–like
texture, and hyperpigmentation may become prominent. Mechanical
irritation of the lesion may lead to urtication (Darier sign) within a few
minutes due to local histamine release; rarely, systemic signs of histamine release become apparent.
Urticaria pigmentosa is the most common form of mastocytosis in
children. In the first type of urticaria pigmentosa, the classic infantile
type, lesions may be present at birth but more often erupt in crops in
the first several months to 2 years of age. New lesions seldom arise after
age 3-­4 years. In some cases, early bullous or urticarial lesions fade,
only to recur at the same site, ultimately becoming fixed and hyperpigmented. In others, the initial lesions are hyperpigmented. Vesiculation
usually abates by 2 years of age. Individual lesions range in size from
a few millimeters to several centimeters and may be macular, papular, or nodular. They range in color from yellow-­tan to red-­brown and
often have ill-­defined borders (see Fig. 700.12). Larger nodular lesions,
like solitary mastocytomas, may have a characteristic peau d’orange
(orange peel–like) texture. Lesions of urticaria pigmentosa may be
sparse or numerous and are often symmetrically distributed. Palms,
soles, and face are usually spared, as are the mucous membranes. The
rapid appearance of erythema and wheals in response to vigorous

The differential diagnosis of solitary mastocytomas includes recurrent
bullous impetigo, herpes simplex, congenital melanocytic nevi, and
juvenile xanthogranuloma.
Urticaria pigmentosa can be confused with drug eruptions, postinflammatory pigmentary change, juvenile xanthogranuloma, pigmented
nevi, ephelides, xanthomas, chronic urticaria, insect bites, and bullous
impetigo. Diffuse cutaneous mastocytoma may be confused with epidermolytic hyperkeratosis. TMEP must be differentiated from other
causes of telangiectasia.
The systemic manifestations of mastocytosis may mimic pheochromocytoma, carcinoid syndrome, vasoactive intestinal peptide–
secreting tumors, vasculitis, autoinflammatory diseases, hyper-­
IgE
syndrome, somatization disorder, autonomic dysfunction, angioedema, chronic urticaria, and anaphylaxis.

Prognosis

Spontaneous involution usually occurs in patients with solitary mastocytomas and classic infantile urticaria pigmentosa. The incidence of
systemic manifestations in these patients is very low. The mean duration of urticaria pigmentosa is around 10 years. A larger number of
lesions early in life may lead to later resolution.

Treatment

Solitary mastocytomas usually do not require treatment. Lesions that
blister may be treated with topical steroids after each blistering episode.
In urticaria pigmentosa, flushing can be precipitated by excessively
hot baths, vigorous rubbing of the skin, and certain drugs, such as

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4126 Part XXIX u The Skin
A

H

B

C

I

D

J

K

E

L

F

M

G

N

Fig. 700.12 Clinical features and histologic findings in childhood mastocytosis. Diagnosis of mastocytosis in children is often obvious, and skin
biopsy is rarely performed. The histologic diagnosis of cutaneous mastocytosis must consider the increased number and proportion of mast cells
compared to other inflammatory cells. Mast cells can be rounded, cuboidal, fusiform, or histiocyte-­like. Eosinophils may be observed in all mastocytosis subtypes. The epidermis may be hyperpigmented in urticaria pigmentosa (UP) and diffuse cutaneous mastocytosis (DCM), whereas it is normal
in mastocytoma. A-­E, Types of urticaria pigmentosa. A, Maculopapular UP. B, Plaque-­type UP. C, Extensive UP with plaques and macules. D, Skin
biopsy: increased number and proportion of mast cells around the vessels or scattered into the dermis, dilatation of the capillaries of the superficial
dermis. E, c-­Kit staining. F-­J, Mastocytoma. F, Mastocytoma localized on the hand. G, Mastocytoma localized on the forearm. H, I, Skin biopsy:
abundant and diffuse infiltration of mast cells throughout the dermis. Mast cells are always recognizable, with a large, pink, and granular cytoplasm
and a round, dense, central nucleus. J, c-­Kit staining. K-­N, DCM. K, Diffuse infiltration of skin. L, Extensive bullous lesions associated with infiltration
on the back. M, Skin biopsy: diffuse dermal infiltration of mast cells associated with some fibrosis and dilated capillaries. N, c-­Kit staining. (From Méni
C, Bruneau J, Georgin-­Lavialle S, et al. Paediatric mastocytosis: a systematic review of 1747 cases. Br J Dermatol. 2015;172:642–651, Fig. 1, p. 643.)

Table 700.2  Pharmacologic Agents and Physical Stimuli
that May Exacerbate Mast Cell Mediator
Release in Patients with Mastocytosis
Venoms (bee stings, jellyfish stings, snake bites)
Complement-­derived anaphylatoxins
Biologic peptides (substance P, somatostatin, vasoactive intestinal
polypeptide)
Polymers (dextran)
Physical stimuli (heat, cold, exertion, friction, trauma, vibration, sunlight)
Acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin), ibuprofen, and related nonsteroidal
analgesics*
Alcohol
General anesthetics (D-­tubocurarine, scopolamine, decamethonium,
gallamine, pancuronium)
Polymyxin B
Local anesthetics (lidocaine, tetracaine procaine, methylparaben
preservative)
Sympathomimetics
Opiates (codeine, morphine)*
Radiographic dyes (iodine-­containing)
Other drugs (papaverine, dipyridamole, trimethaphan, amphotericin
B, quinine, thiamine, dextromethorphan, lactam, antibiotics,
vancomycin)
Stress (sleep deprivation, anxiety, pain)
*Appears to be a problem in <10% of patients.
Modified from Carter MC, Metcalfe DD. Paediatric mastocytosis. Arch Dis Child.
2002;86:315–319, Table 4.

codeine, aspirin, morphine, atropine, ketorolac, alcohol, tubocurarine, iodine-­containing radiographic dyes, and polymyxin B (Table
700.2). Avoidance of these triggering factors is advisable; it is notable
that general anesthesia may be safely performed with appropriate
precautions.
For patients who are symptomatic, oral antihistamines may be palliative. H1 receptor antagonists are the initial drugs of choice for systemic signs of histamine release. If H1 antagonists are unsuccessful, H2
receptor antagonists may be helpful in controlling pruritus or gastric

hypersecretion. Topical steroids are of benefit in controlling skin urtication
and blistering. Oral mast cell–stabilizing agents, such as cromolyn sodium
or ketotifen, may also be effective for diarrhea or abdominal cramping and
with systemic symptoms such as headache or muscle pain. Midostaurin,
an inhibitor of receptor tyrosine kinase KIT, may be effective in patients
with systemic mastocytosis associated with hematologic malignancy. A
premeasured epinephrine pen kit may be considered for those individuals
at higher risk for anaphylaxis such as systemic disease, extensive cutaneous
disease, high baseline tryptase levels, and known allergies.
For patients with diffuse cutaneous mastocytosis, treatment is similar to urticaria pigmentosa. Phototherapy with narrow-­band UV (UVB
or UVA-­1) or psoralen with UVA treatment may be useful.
Lesions of TMEP may be cautiously treated with vascular pulsed dye
lasers.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

700.1 Mast Cell Activation Syndrome
James J. Nocton
Mast cell activation (MCA) occurs in several defined conditions,
including primary mast cell disorders, allergic reactions, systemic
inflammatory diseases, and drug reactions, and results in the release
of multiple proinflammatory mediators, including tryptase, histamine,
prostaglandins, and leukotrienes. The effects of these mediators lead to
the clinical symptoms of MCA, which may range from mild to severe
and may involve multiple organ systems, including the cutaneous, gastrointestinal, respiratory, and cardiovascular systems (Table 700.3). The
term mast cell activation syndrome (MCAS) has been used to describe a
condition associated with symptoms, signs, and laboratory abnormalities that are consistent with the effects of mast cell mediators; it is recurrent, usually severe, and involves multiple organ systems and responds
to treatment with medications that are known to inhibit mast cells or
secreted mast cell mediators. Consensus criteria for the diagnosis and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 700 u Diseases of the Dermis
Table 700.3  Common Symptoms in Patients with Mast
Cell Mediator Disorders
Cardiovascular: chest pain, hypotension, hypotensive syncope,
tachycardia
Dermatologic: angioedema, dermatographism, flushing, pruritus,
urticaria pigmentosa
Gastrointestinal: abdominal cramping/pain, bloating, diarrhea,
esophagitis, nausea, vomiting
Musculoskeletal: bone/muscle pain, degenerative disc disease,
osteoporosis/osteopenia
Naso-­ocular: nasal congestion, pruritus, tearing
Neurologic: headache, memory and concentration difficulties (brain
fog), paresthesia, peripheral neuropathy
Respiratory: hoarseness, sore throat, stridor, throat swelling,
wheezing
Systemic: anaphylaxis, fatigue
From Theoharides TC, Tsilioni I, Ren H. Recent advances in our understanding of mast
cell activation – or should it be mast cell mediator disorders? Expert Rev Clin Immunol.
2019;15(6):639–656, Table 1.

Table 700.4  Consensus Criteria for the Diagnosis of Mast
Cell Activation Syndrome (MCAS)*
Criterion A: Typical clinical signs of severe, recurrent (episodic)
systemic MCA are present (often in the form of anaphylaxis)
(definition of systemic: involving at least two organ systems)
Criterion B: Involvement of MC is documented by biochemical
studies: preferred marker: increase in serum tryptase level from the
individual’s baseline to plus 20% + 2 ng/mL†
Criterion C: Response of symptoms to therapy with MC-­stabilizing
agents, drugs directed against MC mediator production or drugs
blocking mediator release or effects of MC-­derived mediators‡

4127

Table 700.5  Facial Flushing Etiologies
FLUSHING WITH FOOD
• Alcohol
• Monosodium glutamate (MSG)
• Sulfites
• Scrombroidosis
• Auriculotemporal syndrome (Frey syndrome gustatory flushing)
• Postherpetic gustatory flushing
• Nitrates
• Capsaicin
• Tyramine-­containing foods
ENDOCRINE
• Carcinoid
• Pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma
• Medullary thyroid carcinoma
• Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (VIP)
• Cushing syndrome
• Perimenopause
• Thyrotoxicosis
OTHER
• Mastocytosis
• Urticaria pigmentosa
• Mast cell activation syndrome
• Harlequin syndrome
• Congenital Horner syndrome
• Idiopathic anaphylaxis
• Panic attacks
• Blushing/anxiety
• Spinal cord injury/autonomic dysregulation
• Niacin supplements

*All three MCAS criteria (A + B + C) must be fulfilled to call a condition MCAS.
†Other MC-­derived markers of MCA (histamine and histamine metabolites, PGD
2

metabolites, and heparin) have also been proposed but are less specific compared
to tryptase.
‡Example: histamine receptor blockers.
From Valent P, Akin C, Bonadonna P, et al. Proposed diagnostic algorithm for patients
with suspected mast cell activation syndrome (MCAS). J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract.
2019;7(4):1125–1133, Table I, p. 1126.

classification of MCAS have been developed (Table 700.4). Under this
classification, MCAS is designated primary when it is associated with
a defined mast cell disorder such as systemic or cutaneous mastocytosis; it is termed secondary when it is recognized in the context of an
allergen or another disease known to be associated with MCA; and it
is designated idiopathic when neither a primary mast cell disorder nor
another associated disease is present.
Patients fulfilling the consensus criteria for MCAS must have
recurrent clinical manifestations consistent with MCA. Cutaneous
symptoms have included urticaria, angioedema, itching, and frequent skin flushing (Table 700.5). Gastrointestinal symptoms such
as abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea are common.
Tachycardia, sometimes with hypotension and syncope, may be
frequent, and some patients have wheezing episodes and rhinitis.
Nonspecific and constitutional symptoms have also been described,
including headache, fatigue, chronic pain, paresthesias, anxiety,
and depression. These nonspecific symptoms most likely represent
comorbidities.
Patients diagnosed with MCAS have biochemical evidence indicating mast cell mediator release. Laboratory abnormalities that might
indicate MCA include elevated serum tryptase and increases in 24-­
hour urinary histamine metabolites (N-­methylhistamine), the prostaglandin D2 metabolite 2,3-­dinor-­11-­β-­PGF2-­α, or the leukotriene
metabolite LTE4. The current consensus criteria for the diagnosis of
MCAS includes an increase in serum tryptase as the preferred measurement documenting mast cell mediator release (see Table 700.4).

Additional biochemical markers have been proposed but remain either
of unknown or questionable reliability as markers of MCA.
MCAS has been classified into three groups: primary, secondary,
and idiopathic. Primary MCAS refers to patients with clonal proliferation of mast cells resulting from pathogenic variants in the KIT gene
and is usually associated with systemic or cutaneous mastocytosis. A
small percentage of those with primary MCAS have clonal proliferation of mast cells but may not completely fulfill the criteria to diagnose systemic or cutaneous mastocytosis. Secondary MCAS refers to
patients with either an IgE-­dependent allergy, a non–IgE-­mediated
hypersensitivity disorder, or another inflammatory disease associated with MCA. Idiopathic MCAS refers to patients who do not have
clonal mast cells and who do not have an underlying disorder but
who nonetheless fulfill the consensus criteria for MCAS with characteristic clinical symptoms and signs, specific abnormal laboratory
test results, and a response to treatment that inhibits mast cells or the
effect of mast cell mediators.
The differential diagnosis of MCAS is broad, reflecting the protean symptoms and signs that have been associated with the syndrome. Cardiovascular conditions may be considered in those with
syncope; thyroid disease, adrenal insufficiency, infectious diseases,
intoxications, chronic pain syndromes, somatization secondary to
anxiety or depression, hypereosinophilic syndromes, hereditary
angioedema, and dysautonomias are also considerations in patients
with symptoms that appear to be potentially related to MCA. There
is also an overlap with idiopathic anaphylaxis and MCAS (see Chapter 190 and Fig. 190.4).
When episodes of cutaneous flushing are the primary symptom and
sign, the differential diagnosis is likewise broad. Flushing refers to transient episodes of erythema, most commonly on the face, accompanied
by a sensation of warmth. Wet flushing is associated with increased
sweating and is typical of autonomic nervous system activation,
whereas dry flushing occurs without sweating. Wet flushing is more
likely caused by panic attacks, pain syndromes, dysautonomia, medications, or toxins. Dry flushing is associated with a more extensive list of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4128 Part XXIX u The Skin

Patient with flushing, itching, intestinal, and neurologic
symptoms following reactions to contrast media, exercise,
foods, insect stings, latex, medications, stress, and
temperature extremes

• Basal tryptase ≥20 ng/mL and/or
• Event-related tryptase increase
by 20% of baseline + 2 ng/mL

Basal serum tryptase normal or slightly elevated (11.5-20 ng/mL)*
± diagnostic increase in event-related tryptase

MCMD with elevated
tryptase
History of:
1. Anaphylaxis to Hymenoptera stings
2. Hypotensive anaphylaxis with or
without angioedema or urticaria

Skin lesions present (up)

Skin biopsy
Flow cytometry of peripheral blood cells
for CD117, CD25, CD2

Bone marrow biopsy

+

SM check for D816V KIT pathogenic variant†

–

Cutaneous mastocytosis

Serum measurements:
• lL-6, IL-31, CCL2, CXCL8
Urine measurements:
(24 hr refrigerated)
• Methyl histamine, MIA
• PGD2
• 11- Prostaglandin F2
• LCT4

MCMD
without
elevated
tryptase or MC
proliferation

MCMD with elevated tryptase and MC proliferation§

Fig. 700.13 Diagnostic algorithm for mast cell disorders. Diagrammatic representation of a proposed diagnostic rubric for mast cell mediator disor-

ders with emphasis on clonal and nonclonal subtypes and the presence or absence of elevated serum tryptase. MC, Mast cells; MCMD, mast cell mediator disorder; SM, systemic mastocytosis. *This range varies among different laboratories. †KIT pathogenic variants should be investigated. §A patient
with elevated basal tryptase should also have BM biopsy; most of these patients have SM. (From Theoharides TC, Tsilioni I, Ren H. Recent advances in
our understanding of mast cell activation – or should it be mast cell mediator disorders? Expert Rev Clin Immunol. 2019;15[6]:639–656, Fig. 1.)

possible diagnoses, including MCAS, thyroid disease, foods and other
ingestions, some interferonopathies and channelopathies, and tumors
such as pheochromocytoma, neuroendocrine tumors, and medullary
carcinoma of the thyroid.
When evaluating a patient with symptoms consistent with MCA, if
the symptoms are severe, episodic, and respond to mast cell–directed
therapy, then the likelihood of MCAS is high. In this setting, further
evaluation with serum tryptase measurements should be performed.
If the patient fulfills all three diagnostic criteria for MCAS (see Table
700.4), a potential underlying cause should then be sought. This
investigation might include genetic analysis of the KIT gene in those
suspected of having clonal disease such as cutaneous or systemic mastocytosis, a search for potential allergens, or further evaluation for an
underlying chronic inflammatory disease (Fig. 700.13). The MCAS can

then be classified as primary, secondary, or idiopathic and appropriate
management initiated.
The management of MCAS includes medications that interfere with
the effects of mast cell mediators, such as the antihistamines cetirizine,
loratadine, and fexofenadine; the antileukotrienes montelukast and
zafirlukast; and medications that interfere with degranulation such as
the mast cell stabilizer cromolyn. Recently, the tyrosine kinase inhibitor midostaurin has also demonstrated efficacy by inhibiting histamine
release and increasing apoptosis of mast cells. Management of any
identified associated disease is paramount. Prognosis is favorable for
most individuals with MCAS but is also dependent on potential associated disease and comorbidities.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 701 u Diseases of Subcutaneous Tissue

Chapter 701

Diseases of Subcutaneous
Tissue
Jacquelyn R. Sink and Yvonne E. Chiu
Diseases involving the subcutis are usually characterized by necrosis
and/or inflammation; they may occur either as a primary event or
as a secondary response to various stimuli or disease processes. The
principal diagnostic criteria relate to the appearance and distribution
of the lesions, associated symptoms, results of laboratory studies, histopathology, and natural history and exogenous provocative factors of
these conditions.

CORTICOSTEROID-­INDUCED ATROPHY

Intradermal or subcutaneous injection of a corticosteroid can produce
deep atrophy accompanied by surface pigmentary changes and telangiectasia (Fig. 701.1). These changes occur approximately 2-­8 weeks after
injection and may last for months.

RAYNAUD PHENOMENON

An exaggerated vascular response to cold temperatures or emotional
stress, Raynaud phenomenon is characterized by sudden-­
onset,
sharply demarcated, transient color changes of the skin of the digits
(see Chapter 201). This condition can occur as a primary condition or
may be associated with an underlying disorder, such as systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE) or systemic sclerosis. It is thought to be caused by
abnormal vasoconstriction of the digital blood vessels.

701.1 Panniculitis and Erythema Nodosum
Jacquelyn R. Sink and Yvonne E. Chiu
Inflammation of the fibrofatty subcutaneous tissue may primarily involve the fat lobule (lobular panniculitis) or the fibrous septum
that compartmentalizes the fatty lobules (septal panniculitis). Histopathologic evaluation is usually necessary to confirm the diagnosis. Lobular panniculitis that spares the subcutaneous vasculature
includes infectious panniculitis, traumatic panniculitis (including cold
and post-­steroid panniculitis), connective tissue disease panniculitis,
pancreatic panniculitis, α1 antitrypsin deficiency, subcutaneous fat
necrosis (SCFN) of the newborn, sclerema neonatorum, subcutaneous
sarcoidosis, and factitial panniculitis. Lobular panniculitis associated

4129

with vasculitis occurs in erythema induratum and occasionally as a feature of Crohn’s disease (see Chapter 382.2). Septal panniculitis, sparing the vasculature, may be seen in erythema nodosum (Table 701.1
and Fig. 701.2), necrobiosis lipoidica, progressive systemic sclerosis
(see Chapter 201), and subcutaneous granuloma annulare (see Chapter
700). Septal panniculitis that includes inflammation of the vessels is
found primarily in leukocytoclastic vasculitis and polyarteritis nodosa
(see Chapter 210).

ERYTHEMA NODOSUM
Etiology and Pathogenesis

No underlying cause is found in 30–50% of pediatric cases of erythema
nodosum; Table 701.1 lists numerous potential etiologies. The most
common etiology in children is group A β-­hemolytic streptococcal
infection. Other causes include Yersinia enterocolitica gastroenteritis,
medications (cephalosporins, penicillins, macrolides), and inflammatory disorders (inflammatory bowel disease); sarcoidosis should be
considered in young adults.

Clinical Manifestations

Erythema nodosum is a nodular erythematous hypersensitivity reaction that typically appears as multiple lesions on the lower legs (favoring the pretibial area) and less often in other areas, including the
extensor surfaces of the arms and thighs. The lesions vary in size from
1 to 6 cm and are symmetric and oval, with the longer axis parallel to
the extremity. Lesions initially appear bright or dull red but progress
to a brown or purple; they are painful and usually do not ulcerate (see
Fig. 701.2). Initial lesions may resolve in 1-­2 weeks, but new lesions
may continue to appear for 2-­6 weeks. Repeat episodes may occur over
weeks to months. Before or immediately at the onset of lesions, there
may be systemic manifestations, including fever, malaise, arthralgias
(50–90%), and rheumatoid factor–negative arthritis.

Histology

A septal panniculitis occurs acutely with thickening of the septa and an
inflammatory cell infiltrate composed of neutrophils. Monocytes and
histiocytes predominate in chronic erythema nodosum.

Treatment

Treatment is directed at the underlying cause. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents (ibuprofen, naproxen, salicylates) may be prescribed
for symptomatic relief, along with bed rest and leg elevation. Supersaturated solution of potassium iodide (oral), colchicine, and intralesional corticosteroids can be considered as alternative treatments for
persistent symptoms. Oral steroids have been employed for the treatment of severe, persistent, or recurrent lesions. The idiopathic form

Table 701.1  Etiology of Erythema Nodosum
VIRUSES
Epstein-­Barr, hepatitis B, mumps
FUNGI
Coccidioidomycosis, histoplasmosis, blastomycosis, sporotrichosis,
Trichophyton mentagrophytes
BACTERIA AND OTHER INFECTIOUS AGENTS
Group A streptococcus,* tuberculosis,* Yersinia, Shigella, Escherichia
coli, cat-­scratch disease, leprosy, leptospirosis, tularemia,
mycoplasma, Whipple disease, lymphogranuloma venereum,
psittacosis, brucellosis, meningococcosis, neisserial infection,
syphilis

Fig. 701.1 Localized fat atrophy with overlying erythema after steroid
injection.

OTHER
Sarcoidosis, inflammatory bowel disease,* estrogen-­containing oral
contraceptives,* systemic lupus erythematosus, Behçet syndrome,
severe acne, celiac disease, Hodgkin disease, lymphoma,
sulfonamides, bromides, echinacea, Sweet syndrome, pregnancy,
idiopathic*
*Common.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4130 Part XXIX u The Skin

Fig. 701.3 Deep nodule of lupus profundus with overlying hyperkeratotic lesion of discoid lupus erythematosus.

forms of cutaneous lupus or as an isolated condition. The mean age of
onset in reported pediatric cases is 9.8 years.

Clinical Manifestations

Fig. 701.2 Tender red nodules with indistinct borders in a teenage
girl with erythema nodosum. (From Weston WL, Lane AT, Morelli J.
Color Textbook of Pediatric Dermatology, 3rd ed. St. Louis: Mosby;
2002, p. 212.)

is a self-­limited disorder. Protracted or recurrent cases may warrant
further workup, including antistreptolysin O/deoxyribonuclease ASO/
(DNase) B titer, complete blood count (CBC), throat culture, QuantiFERON-­TB gold assay but not a tuberculosis (TB) skin test, chest radiograph, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and C-­reactive protein.

POST-­STEROID PANNICULITIS
Etiology and Pathogenesis

The mechanism of the inflammatory reaction in the fat in post-­steroid
panniculitis is unknown.

Clinical Manifestations

Most cases of post-­steroid panniculitis have been reported in children.
The disorder occurs in children who have received high-­dose corticosteroids, particularly after rapid discontinuation. Within 1-­2 weeks
after discontinuation of the drug, multiple subcutaneous nodules usually appear on the cheeks, although other areas may be involved. Nodules range in size from 0.5 to 4.0 cm, are erythematous or skin-­colored,
and may be pruritic or painful.

Histology

A lobular panniculitis is seen with a mixed infiltrate of lymphocytes,
histiocytes, and neutrophils. Scattered, swollen adipocytes with eosinophilic, needle-­shaped crystals are also seen. The epidermis, dermis,
and fibrous septa of the fat are normal. Vasculitis is not seen.

Treatment

Treatment of post-­
steroid panniculitis is unnecessary because the
lesions remit spontaneously over a period of months without scarring.

LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS PROFUNDUS (LUPUS
ERYTHEMATOSUS PANNICULITIS)
Etiology and Pathogenesis

The pathophysiology of lupus erythematosus profundus is largely
unknown. This variant of chronic cutaneous lupus erythematosus is
rare in childhood. Only 2–5% of patients with lupus erythematosus
profundus have associated SLE. It can occur in association with other

Lupus erythematosus profundus manifests as one to several firm, tender, well-­defined, purple plaques or nodules 1-­3 cm in diameter. Most
pediatric cases involve the head/neck and proximal extremities. This
condition may precede or follow the development of other cutaneous
lesions and/or SLE. The overlying skin is usually normal but may be
erythematous, atrophic, poikilodermatous, ulcerated, or hyperkeratotic (Fig. 701.3). On healing, a shallow depression generally remains
or, rarely, soft pink areas of anetoderma result.

Histology

The histopathologic changes in lupus erythematosus profundus are distinctive and may allow the clinician to make the diagnosis in the absence of
other cutaneous features of lupus erythematosus. The panniculitis is characterized by a mostly nodular, dense infiltrate of lymphocytes and plasma
cells. Necrosis of the fat lobule is characteristic. A dense perivascular and
periappendiceal lymphocytic infiltrate is seen in the dermis. Lichenoid
changes may be identified at the epidermal-­dermal junction. Histopathologic differentiation from subcutaneous panniculitis–like T-­cell lymphoma may be difficult and requires T-­cell rearrangement studies.

Treatment

Nodules tend to be persistent and frequently ulcerate. Long-­term
follow-­up to evaluate for systemic disease is warranted; approximately
5–10% of patients with lupus erythematosus profundus will have SLE.
There is no consensus on the utility of laboratory testing. Antinuclear
antibody is positive in only a small subset of patients. A few case
reports show slight neutropenia, leukopenia, and mildly elevated liver
function tests. Hydroxychloroquine (2-­5 mg/kg/day) is the treatment
of choice for lupus erythematosus profundus. Systemic corticosteroids
may be helpful, but topical corticosteroids are typically ineffective.
Intralesional corticosteroids may worsen the lipoatrophy and lead to
ulceration. Immunosuppressive agents are indicated only for the treatment of other severe manifestations of SLE. Avoidance of sun exposure
and trauma is also important.

α1-­ANTITRYPSIN DEFICIENCY
Etiology and Pathogenesis

Individuals with α1-­antitrypsin deficiency have severe homozygous
deficiency (ZZ genotype) or, rarely, a partial deficiency of the protease
inhibitor α1-­antitrypsin, which inhibits trypsin activity and the activity of elastase, serine proteases, collagenase, factor VIII, and kallikrein
(see Chapter 442). Panniculitis is rare and usually occurs with severe
α1-­antitrypsin deficiency.

Clinical Manifestations

Cellulitis-­like areas or one or more warm, tender, red nodules occur
on the trunk or proximal extremities. Nodules tend to ulcerate

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 701 u Diseases of Subcutaneous Tissue

4131

spontaneously and discharge an oily yellow fluid. Panniculitis may be
associated with other manifestations of the disease, such as panacinar
emphysema, noninfectious hepatitis, cirrhosis, persistent cutaneous
vasculitis, cold contact urticaria, and acquired angioedema. Diagnosis can be substantiated by a decreased level of serum α1-­antitrypsin
activity.

Histology

Extensive septal and lobular neutrophilic infiltrate with necrosis of the
fat is observed.

Treatment

Panniculitis associated with α1-­antitrypsin deficiency typically resolves
over several weeks after treatment with intravenous exogenous enzyme
replacement therapy.

PANCREATIC PANNICULITIS
Etiology and Pathogenesis

The pathogenesis of pancreatic panniculitis appears to be multifactorial, involving liberation of the lipolytic enzymes lipase, trypsin, and
amylase into the circulation, which leads to adipocyte membrane
damage and intracellular lipolysis. There is no correlation, however,
between the occurrence of panniculitis and the serum concentration
of pancreatic enzymes.

Clinical Manifestations

Pancreatic panniculitis manifests most commonly on the pretibial
regions, thighs, or buttocks as tender, erythematous nodules that may
be fluctuant and occasionally discharge an oily brown or yellowish liquid. It appears most often in males with alcoholism but may also occur
in patients with pancreatitis because of cholelithiasis or abdominal
trauma, rupture of pancreatic pseudocysts, pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, or pancreatic acinar cell carcinoma. Associated features
may include polyarthritis (pancreatitis-­panniculitis-­polyarthritis
syndrome). In almost 65% of patients, abdominal signs are absent or
mild, making the diagnosis difficult.

Histology

Characteristic histopathologic changes include lobular panniculitis
with necrosis of fat cells and ghost cells with thick, shadowy walls and
no nuclei.

Treatment

The primary pancreatic disorder must be treated. The arthritis may be
chronic and responds poorly to treatment with nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs and oral corticosteroids.

SUBCUTANEOUS FAT NECROSIS
Etiology and Pathogenesis

SCFN in infants may be a result of ischemic injury from various perinatal complications, such as maternal preeclampsia, birth trauma,
asphyxia, meconium aspiration, and prolonged hypothermia. Whole-­
body cooling for neonatal hypoxemic-­
ischemic encephalopathy is
increasingly associated with SCFN. Susceptibility is attributed to differences in composition between the subcutaneous tissue of young infants
and that of older infants, children, and adults. Neonatal fat solidifies at
a relatively high temperature because of its relatively greater concentration of high-­melting-­point saturated fatty acids, such as palmitic and
stearic acids.

Clinical Manifestations

This benign, self-­
limited inflammatory disorder of adipose tissue
occurs primarily in the first few days to weeks of life in apparently
healthy, full-­term or postterm infants. Some lesions may be present
at birth. Typical lesions are asymptomatic, indurated, erythematous
to violaceous, sharply demarcated plaques or nodules located primarily on the cheeks, buttocks, back, thighs, or upper arms (Fig. 701.4).
Lesions may be focal or extensive and are generally asymptomatic,
although they may be tender during the acute phase. Uncomplicated

Fig. 701.4 Red-­purple nodular infiltration of the skin of the chest
caused by subcutaneous fat necrosis.

lesions involute spontaneously within weeks to months, usually without scarring or atrophy. Calcium deposition may occasionally occur
within areas of fat necrosis, which may sometimes result in rupture
and drainage of liquid material. These areas may heal with atrophy.
A potentially serious complication of SCFN is hypercalcemia. It
typically manifests before 2 months of age, but can present up to 6
months of age, with lethargy, poor feeding, vomiting, failure to thrive,
irritability, seizures, shortening of the QT interval on electrocardiography, and/or renal failure. The origin of the hypercalcemia is
unknown, but an accepted hypothesis is that macrophages produce
1,25-­dihydroxyvitamin D3 which, in turn, increases calcium uptake.
Infants with SCFN should be monitored for several months after
lesion resolution for delayed-­onset hypercalcemia.

Histology

Histopathologic changes in SCFN are diagnostic, consisting of necrosis of fat; a granulomatous cellular infiltrate composed of lymphocytes,
histiocytes, multinucleated giant cells, and fibroblasts; and radially
arranged clefts of crystalline triglyceride within fat cells and multinucleated giant cells. Calcium deposits are commonly found in areas
of fat necrosis.

Differential Diagnosis

SCFN can be confused with sclerema neonatorum, panniculitis, cellulitis, and hematoma.

Treatment

Because the lesions are self-­limited, therapy is not required for uncomplicated cases of SCFN. Needle aspiration of fluctuant lesions may prevent rupture and subsequent scarring but is rarely needed. Treatment
of hypercalcemia is aimed at enhancing renal calcium excretion with
hydration and furosemide (1-­2 mg/kg/dose) and at limiting dietary
intake of calcium and vitamin D. Reduction of intestinal calcium
absorption and alteration of vitamin D metabolism may be accomplished by administering corticosteroids (0.5-­1.0 mg/kg/day). Bisphosphonates have been used in severe cases.

SCLEREMA NEONATORUM
Etiology and Pathogenesis

Although the cause of sclerema neonatorum remains unknown, multiple theories have been proposed. The hardening of the subcutaneous
fat may occur as a response to a decrease in body temperature because
of circulatory shock, a defect in lipolytic enzymes or in lipid transport,
association with an underlying severe disease, or a special form of
edema affecting the connective tissue supporting the adipocytes.

Clinical Manifestations

This uncommon panniculitis manifests abruptly in preterm, gravely ill
infants as diffuse, yellowish white, woody indurations of the skin. It
begins on the legs and buttocks and then quickly progresses to other
areas, sparing the palms and soles. Affected skin becomes stony in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4132 Part XXIX u The Skin
consistency, cold, and nonpitting. The face assumes a masklike expression, and joint mobility may be compromised because of inflexibility
of the skin.

may be associated with numbness, tingling, itching, burning, or pain.
Blister formation and ulceration are rare (see Chapter 90).

Histology

Histopathologic examination reveals marked dermal edema and a
perivascular and periappendiceal, predominantly T-­cell lymphocytic
infiltrate in the papillary and reticular dermis.

Histopathologic changes in sclerema neonatorum consist of increased
size of fat cells and width of the fibrous connective tissue septa. In contrast to SCFN, fat necrosis, inflammation, giant cells, and calcium crystals are generally absent.

Treatment

Sclerema neonatorum is almost always associated with serious illness,
such as sepsis, congenital heart disease, multiple congenital anomalies,
or hypothermia. The appearance of sclerema in a sick infant should be
regarded as an ominous prognostic sign. There is no specific therapy
for the condition. The outcome depends on the response of the underlying disorder to treatment.

COLD PANNICULITIS
Etiology and Pathogenesis

The pathogenic mechanism of cold panniculitis may be likened to that
of SCFN, involving a greater propensity of fat to solidify in infants than
in older children and adults because of the higher percentage of saturated fatty acids in the subcutaneous fat of infants. Lesions occur in
infants after prolonged cold exposure, especially on the cheeks, or after
prolonged application of a cold object such as an ice cube, ice bags,
cooling blankets, or popsicles to any area of the skin.

Clinical Manifestations

Ill-­defined, erythematous to bluish, painful, indurated plaques or nodules arise within hours to a few days in areas exposed to cold (face,
arms, legs); the lesions persist for 2-­3 weeks and heal without residua.

Histology

Histopathologic examination reveals an infiltrate of lymphoid and histiocytic cells around blood vessels at the dermal-­subdermal junction
and in the fat lobules; by the third day, some of the fat cells in the subcutis may have ruptured and coalesced into cystic structures.

Differential Diagnosis

Cold panniculitis may be confused with facial cellulitis caused by Haemophilus influenzae type b. As opposed to buccal cellulitis, the area may
be cold to the touch, and the patient is afebrile and appears well. Familial cold autoinflammatory syndrome manifests with urticaria on
exposure to cold environments; associated features include conjunctivitis, myalgias, fatigue, and elevated inflammatory markers. Cold urticaria, in contrast, occurs on direct contact with cold objects, resulting
in urticaria at the site, which can be reproduced with the ice cube test.

Histology

Differential Diagnosis

Raynaud phenomenon is a more acute condition than chilblains, with
characteristic color changes and no chronic lesions. Frostbite due to
extreme cold exposure is painful and involves freezing of the tissue,
with resultant tissue necrosis.

Treatment

Most cases of chilblains resolve spontaneously, but the condition can last
up to 2-­3 weeks. Prevention is the treatment of choice. Nifedipine (0.25-­
0.5 mg/kg 3 times a day, maximum 10 mg/dose) may be used in severe
cases. Unusual or persistent cases of perniosis in children may warrant
further workup, including antinuclear antibody titer, cryoglobulins,
antiphospholipid antibodies, CBC with differential, and cold agglutinins.

FACTITIAL PANNICULITIS
Etiology and Pathogenesis

Factitial panniculitis results from subcutaneous injection of a foreign
substance by the patient or a proxy. The most common substances are
organic materials such as milk and feces; drugs, such as the opiates and
pentazocine; oily materials, such as mineral oil and paraffin; and the
synthetic polymer povidone.

Clinical Manifestations

Indurated plaques, ulcers, or nodules that liquefy and drain may be
noted clinically in factitial panniculitis.

Histology

The histopathology is variable, depending on the injected substance,
but may include the presence of birefringent crystals, oil cysts surrounded by fibrosis and inflammation, and an acute inflammatory
reaction with fat necrosis. Vessels are characteristically spared.

Treatment

Treatment of factitial panniculitis must address the primary reason for
the performance of this self-­destructive act. Munchausen syndrome by
proxy should be considered in young children (see Chapter 17.2).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

701.2 Lipodystrophy

Treatment

Treatment is unnecessary because cold panniculitis resolves spontaneously. Recurrence of the lesions is common, emphasizing the importance of parental education.

CHILBLAINS (PERNIO)
Etiology and Pathogenesis

Vasospasm of arterioles from damp cold exposure with resultant
hypoxemia and localized perivascular mononuclear inflammation
appears to be responsible for chilblains (see Chapter 90). The disease is
most commonly idiopathic but may be associated with cryoglobulins,
antiphospholipid antibodies, anorexia nervosa, or a thin body habitus.
There are reports of chilblain-­like rash occurring during the COVID­19 pandemic.

Clinical Manifestations

The condition is characterized by initial blanching followed by localized, symmetric, erythematous to violaceous, edematous plaques and
nodules in areas exposed to cold, typically acral sites (distal hands and
feet, ears, face). Lesions develop 12-­24 hours after cold exposure and

Leah Lalor
Lipodystrophies are conditions that share a common finding of reduction in subcutaneous fat, often with accompanying lipohypertrophy in
other areas. They may be inherited or acquired. Several lipodystrophy
syndromes have been described, which are extremely rare disorders
of deficient body fat associated with many metabolic complications.
Lipoatrophy is selective loss of fat (whereas lipodystrophy is redistribution of fat) and is associated with medications, HIV infection, trauma
or pressure, autoimmune disorders, and after inflammation of fat.
Lipodystrophies are defined by etiology (congenital or acquired)
and distribution of fat loss (generalized or partial). This results in four
main types of lipodystrophy: congenital generalized lipodystrophy,
familial partial lipodystrophy, acquired generalized lipodystrophy, and
acquired partial lipodystrophy.

GENERALIZED LIPODYSTROPHY

Generalized lipodystrophy may be congenital or acquired and is characterized by loss of fat affecting the whole body.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 701 u Diseases of Subcutaneous Tissue
Congenital generalized lipodystrophy (CGL): This is an autosomal
recessive disorder characterized by nearly complete lack of subcutaneous fat starting at birth or in infancy with prominent musculature,
phlebomegaly, acanthosis nigricans, hepatomegaly, umbilical prominence, and voracious appetite in childhood. There are several known
genetic causes, each with unique clinical features. Metabolic complications are frequent and may be severe.
Acquired generalized lipodystrophy (AGL): This typically presents
before adolescence with progressive fat loss of the whole body, including palms and soles, and is more common in females (3:1 female:male).
There may be fat accumulation in the face, neck, and/or axillae. There
are frequent and often severe metabolic complications, and this is associated with autoimmune disease.

PARTIAL LIPODYSTROPHY

Partial lipodystrophy is when part of the body has loss of fat with frequent excess fat accumulation elsewhere in the body. It may be inherited or acquired.
Familial partial lipodystrophy (FPLD): This is a group of autosomal dominant disorders in which fat loss affects the limbs, buttocks,
and hips with excess fat accumulation in other areas dependent on
particular subtype. Fat distribution is often normal in childhood with
development of progressive loss of fat around puberty. There is often
associated muscular hypertrophy and metabolic complications in
adulthood, particularly cardiac.
Acquired partial lipodystrophy (APL): As in AGL, this is more
common in females (4:1 female:male) and begins in childhood with
progressive loss of fat in a cranial-­to-­caudal distribution. Fat accumulation may appear in the hips, buttocks, and legs. Metabolic complications are uncommon, but it is associated with autoimmune diseases, in
particular, membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis.

Diagnosis

Diagnosis of lipodystrophy is based on history, physical examination,
body composition, and metabolic status, and confirmatory genetic testing may be helpful in suspected familial cases, but formal diagnostic
criteria have not been established. Lipodystrophy should be suspected
in patients with regional or generalized lack of adipose tissue outside
the normal range and in children with failure to thrive. Additional
physical features include prominent muscles and veins; severe acanthosis nigricans; eruptive xanthomas; and Cushingoid, acromegaloid,
or progeroid appearance. Familial forms can be suspected when there
is a clear familial pattern.
Differential diagnosis includes other conditions that present with
severe weight loss, including malnutrition, eating disorders, uncontrolled diabetes mellitus, thyrotoxicosis, adrenocortical deficiency,
cancer cachexia, HIV-­associated wasting, and chronic infections.

Screening for Comorbidities

Metabolic comorbidities are common in many forms of lipodystrophy,
and all patients should be screened for dyslipidemia, diabetes, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, and cardiovascular and reproductive dysfunction. Those with APL are at lower risk for metabolic issues.
Dyslipidemia: Triglycerides should be measured at least annually
and with new-­onset abdominal pain or appearance of cutaneous xanthomas. Fasting lipid panel should be measured at diagnosis and yearly
after age 10 years.
Diabetes mellitus: Screening should be formed annually following
the guidelines of the American Diabetes Association, which includes
fasting plasma glucose, oral glucose tolerance test, or glycosylated
hemoglobin.
Liver disease: Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) should be measured yearly with liver ultrasound
performed at diagnosis and then clinically as indicated based on symptoms or laboratory abnormalities. Liver biopsy should be performed as
indicated clinically.
Reproductive dysfunction: Early adrenarche, true precocious
puberty, or central hypogonadism may occur in children with generalized lipodystrophy, and oligo/amenorrhea, decreased fertility, and

4133

polycystic ovary syndrome are common in women with lipodystrophy.
Measurement of gonadal steroids and gonadotropins, and pelvis ultrasonography should be performed as clinically indicated with pubertal
staging performed annually for children.
Cardiac disease: Hypertension is common in lipodystrophy syndromes, even in children. Blood pressure should be measured at least
yearly. ECG and echocardiogram should be done yearly in CGL and
progeroid disorders and at diagnosis and as clinically indicated in
FPLD and AGL.
Kidney disease: Protenuria is common. Urine protein should be
measured yearly using 24-­hour collection or spot urine protein-­to-­
creatinine ratio. Kidney biopsy should be done as indicated clinically.
Malignancy: Lymphomas occur in AGL. Appropriate screening has
not been established but could include yearly skin and lymph node
exam. Generalized lipodystrophy has been reported as a paraneoplastic
phenomenon in pilocytic astrocytoma in some children who recovered
body fat after treatment. Some progeroid syndromes are associated
with increased malignancy risk.

Treatment of Lipodystrophy

There is no cure for lipodystrophy, and no treatment that can regrow
lost adipose tissue; however, there are some ways to prevent or improve
the associated comorbidities. Diet is the cornerstone of therapy for the
metabolic complications of lipodystrophies, and a dietician should
be consulted for children with these diagnoses. Medium-­chain triglyceride oil formulas can provide energy and reduce triglycerides in
infants. Most patients with lipodystrophy should be encouraged to be
physically active, though some should have a cardiac evaluation before
engaging in an intense exercise regimen.
Metreleptin is recombinant human methionyl leptin and is the only
approved medication for lipodystrophy. It is a first-­line treatment for
metabolic and endocrine abnormalities in generalized lipodystrophy and may be used for prevention of these complications in children. Treatment for specific metabolic complications can be reviewed
elsewhere.
Consideration should be given to referral to plastic surgeons and/or
cosmetic dermatologists for patients with distress related to their body
appearance. Mental health professionals may also be helpful.

HIV/ART-­ASSOCIATED LIPODYSTROPHY

This is the most common form of nonlocalized lipodystrophy and is linked
to protease inhibitors and nucleoside analogue reverse transcriptase
inhibitors. It may affect up to 40% of patients within 1-­2 years of antiretroviral therapy (ART) initiation. Typical manifestations include lipoatrophy
of peripheral sites (face, limbs, heel pads, buttocks), central lipohypertrophy (particularly dorsocervical, supraclavicular, breast, intraabdominal,
and visceral), and metabolic abnormalities (insulin resistance, type 2 diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, hypertension, lactic acidosis). These changes
are progressive and largely irreversible, can be disfiguring and stigmatizing, and may result in a lack of adherence to treatment.

LOCALIZED LIPOATROPHY

Localized lipoatrophy can be idiopathic or secondary to subcutaneous
medication injections, pressure, and panniculitis. Unlike generalized
or partial lipodystrophy, localized lipoatrophy involves a small part
of the body and has no accompanying metabolic derangements. Idiopathic and pressure-­induced lipoatrophy manifest as annular atrophy
at the ankles; a bandlike semicircular depression 2-­4 cm in diameter on
the thighs, abdomen, and/or upper groin; or a centrifugally spreading,
depressed, bluish plaque with an erythematous margin. Medication-­
induced lipoatrophy is most common with insulin and injected corticosteroids, though others have been reported. Insulin lipoatrophy
usually occurs approximately 6 months to 2 years after the initiation
of relatively high doses of insulin. A dimple or well-­circumscribed
depression at or surrounding the site of injection is typically seen.
Lesions may be prevented by frequent rotation of injection sites or a
switch to insulin pump.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4134 Part XXIX u The Skin

Chapter 702

Disorders of the Sweat
Glands
Kari L. Martin
Eccrine glands are found over nearly the entire skin surface and provide the primary means, through evaporation of the water in sweat, of
cooling the body. These glands, which have no anatomic relationship
to hair follicles, secrete a relatively large amount of odorless aqueous
sweat. In contrast, apocrine sweat glands are limited in distribution to
the axillae, anogenital skin, mammary glands, ceruminous glands of
the ear, Moll glands in the eyelid, and selected areas of the face and
scalp. Each apocrine gland duct enters the pilosebaceous follicle at the
level of the infundibulum and secretes a small amount of a complex,
viscous fluid that, on alteration by microorganisms, produces a distinctive body odor. Some disorders of these two types of sweat glands are
similar pathogenetically, whereas others are unique to a given gland.

ANHIDROSIS

Neuropathic anhidrosis results from a disturbance in the neural pathway from the control center in the brain to the peripheral efferent nerve
fibers that activate sweating. Disorders in this category, which are characterized by generalized anhidrosis, include congenital insensitivity
to pain with anhidrosis (CIPA), tumors of the hypothalamus, and
damage to the floor of the third ventricle. Pontine or medullary lesions
may produce anhidrosis of the ipsilateral face or neck and ipsilateral or
contralateral anhidrosis of the rest of the body. Peripheral or segmental
neuropathies, caused by leprosy, amyloidosis, diabetes mellitus, alcoholic neuritis, or syringomyelia, may be associated with anhidrosis of
the innervated skin. Various autonomic disorders are also associated
with altered eccrine sweat gland function.
At the level of the sweat gland, anticholinergics (drugs such as atropine and scopolamine) may paralyze the sweat glands. Acute intoxication with barbiturates or diazepam has produced necrosis of sweat
glands, resulting in anhidrosis with or without erythema and bullae.
Eccrine glands are largely absent throughout the skin or are present in
a localized area among patients with hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (HED) or localized congenital absence of sweat glands, respectively. Infiltrative or destructive disorders that may produce atrophy of
sweat glands by pressure or scarring include scleroderma, acrodermatitis chronica atrophicans, radiodermatitis, burns, Sjögren syndrome,
multiple myeloma, and lymphoma. Obstruction of sweat glands may
occur in miliaria and in a number of inflammatory and hyperkeratotic
disorders, such as the ichthyoses, psoriasis, lichen planus, pemphigus,
porokeratosis, atopic dermatitis, and seborrheic dermatitis. Occlusion
of the sweat pore may also occur with the topical agents aluminum and
zirconium salts, formaldehyde, or glutaraldehyde.
Diverse disorders that are associated with anhidrosis by unknown
mechanisms include dehydration, uremia, cirrhosis, endocrine disorders such as Addison disease, diabetes mellitus, diabetes insipidus, and
hyperthyroidism, toxic overdose with lead, arsenic, thallium, fluorine,
or morphine, and inherited conditions such as autonomic neuropathies, Fabry disease, Franceschetti-­Jadassohn syndrome, which combines features of incontinentia pigmenti and HED, CIPA, and familial
anhidrosis with neurolabyrinthitis.
Anhidrosis may be complete, but in many cases, what appears clinically to be anhidrosis is actually hypohidrosis caused by anhidrosis of
many, but not all, eccrine glands. Compensatory, localized hyperhidrosis of the remaining functional sweat glands may occur, particularly in
diabetes mellitus and miliaria. The primary complication of anhidrosis
is hyperthermia, seen primarily in anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia or

in otherwise normal preterm or full-­term neonates who have immature eccrine glands.

HYPERHIDROSIS
Etiology and Pathogenesis

Hyperhidrosis is excessive sweating beyond what is physiologically
necessary for temperature control and occurs in 3% of the population,
with about half having axillary hyperhidrosis. The numerous disorders that can be associated with increased production of eccrine sweat
may also be classified into those with neural mechanisms involving
an abnormality in the pathway from the neural regulatory centers to
the sweat gland and those that are nonneurally mediated and occur by
direct effects on the sweat glands (Table 702.1).

Clinical Manifestations

The average age at onset of hyperhidrosis is 14-­25 years. The excess
sweating may be continuous or may occur in response to emotional
stimuli. In severe cases, sweat may be seen to drip constantly from the
hands.

Treatment

Excessive sweating of the palms and soles (volar hyperhidrosis) and
axillary sweating may respond to 20% aluminum chloride in anhydrous ethanol applied under occlusion for several hours, iontophoresis, injection with botulinum toxin, therapy with oral anticholinergics
and antimuscarinic drugs (oxybutynin), or in severe, refractory cases,
cervicothoracic or lumbar sympathectomy. Reports of successful treatment of hyperhidrosis with ultrasound and microwave technology are
available, but studies are faulted with small sample size and/or lack of
controls.

MILIARIA
Etiology and Pathogenesis

Miliaria results from retention of sweat in occluded eccrine sweat
ducts. The eruption is most often induced by hot, humid weather, but it
may also be caused by high fever. Infants who are dressed too warmly
may demonstrate this eruption indoors, even during the winter.

Clinical Manifestations

In miliaria crystallina, asymptomatic, noninflammatory, pinpoint, clear
vesicles may suddenly erupt in profusion over large areas of the body
surface, leaving brawny desquamation on healing (Fig. 702.1). This
type of miliaria occurs most frequently in newborn infants because of
the relative immaturity and delayed patency of the sweat duct and the
tendency for infants to be nursed in relatively warm, humid conditions.
It may also occur in older patients with hyperpyrexia or hypernatremia.
Miliaria rubra is a less superficial eruption characterized by erythematous, minute papulovesicles that may impart a prickling sensation. The lesions are usually localized to sites of occlusion or to flexural
areas, such as the neck, groin, and axillae, where friction may have a
role in their pathogenesis. Involved skin may become macerated and
eroded. However, lesions of miliaria rubra are extrafollicular.
Repeated attacks of miliaria rubra may lead to miliaria profunda,
which is caused by rupture of the sweat duct deeper in the skin, at
the level of the dermal-­epidermal junction. Severe, extensive miliaria
rubra or miliaria profunda may result in disturbance of heat regulation.
Lesions of miliaria rubra may become infected, particularly in malnourished or debilitated infants, leading to development of periporitis
staphylogenes, which involves extension of the process from the sweat
duct into the sweat gland.

Histology

Histologically, miliaria crystallina reveals an intracorneal or subcorneal vesicle in communication with the sweat duct, whereas in miliaria
rubra, one sees focal areas of spongiosis and spongiotic vesicle formation in close proximity to sweat ducts that generally contain a keratinous plug.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 702 u Disorders of the Sweat Glands 4135
Table 702.1  Causes of Hyperhidrosis
CORTICAL
Emotional
Familial dysautonomia
Congenital ichthyosiform
erythroderma
Epidermolysis bullosa
Nail-­patella syndrome
Jadassohn-­Lewandowsky
syndrome
Pachyonychia congenita
Palmoplantar keratoderma
Stroke
HYPOTHALAMIC
Drugs
Alcohol
Antipyretics
Cocaine
Emetics
Insulin
Opiates (including
withdrawal)
Ciprofloxacin
Exercise
Infection
Defervescence
Chronic illness
Metabolic
Carcinoid syndrome
Debility
Diabetes mellitus
Hyperpituitarism
Hyperthyroidism
Hypoglycemia
Obesity
Pheochromocytoma
Porphyria
Pregnancy
Rickets
Infantile scurvy

Cardiovascular
Heart failure
Shock
Vasomotor
Cold injury
Raynaud phenomenon
Rheumatoid arthritis
Neurologic
Abscess
Familial dysautonomia
Postencephalitic
Tumor
Absence of corpus callosum
Miscellaneous
Chédiak-­Higashi syndrome
Compensatory
Lymphoma
Phenylketonuria
Vitiligo
Frey syndrome
MEDULLARY
Physiologic gustatory sweating
Encephalitis
Granulosis rubra nasi
Syringomyelia
Thoracic sympathetic trunk
injury
SPINAL
Cord transection
Syringomyelia
CHANGES IN BLOOD FLOW
Maffucci syndrome
Arteriovenous fistula
Klippel-­Trénaunay syndrome
Glomus tumor
Blue rubber-­bleb nevus
syndrome

Differential Diagnosis

The clarity of the fluid, superficiality of the vesicles, and absence of
inflammation permit differentiation of miliaria crystalline from other
blistering disorders. Miliaria rubra may be confused with or superimposed on other diaper area eruptions, including candidiasis and
folliculitis.

Treatment

All forms of miliaria respond dramatically to cooling of the patient by
regulation of environmental temperatures and by removal of excessive
clothing; administration of antipyretics is also beneficial to patients
with fever. Topical agents are usually ineffective and may exacerbate
the eruption.

BROMHIDROSIS

Bromhidrosis, characterized by excessive odor, may result from
alteration of either apocrine or eccrine sweat. Apocrine bromhidrosis
develops after puberty as a result of the formation of short-­chain fatty
acids and ammonia by the action of anaerobic diphtheroids on axillary apocrine sweat. Eccrine bromhidrosis is caused by microbiologic
degradation of stratum corneum that has become softened by excessive eccrine sweat. The soles of the feet and the intertriginous areas
are the primary affected sites. Hyperhidrosis, warm weather, obesity,
intertrigo, and diabetes mellitus are predisposing factors. Treatments
that may be helpful include cleansing with germicidal soaps, topical clindamycin or erythromycin, or topical application of aluminum
or zirconium. In addition, more invasive surgical and laser treatments have been used. Treatment of any associated hyperhidrosis is
mandatory.

Fig. 702.1 Superficial clear vesicles of miliaria crystallina.

HIDRADENITIS SUPPURATIVA
Etiology and Pathogenesis

Hidradenitis suppurativa (HS) is a disease of the apocrine gland–
bearing areas of the skin. The pathogenesis of hidradenitis suppurativa
is controversial. It is believed that it is a primary inflammatory disorder
of the hair follicle and not solely an alteration of apocrine glands. It
is considered a part of the follicular occlusion tetrad, along with acne
conglobata, dissecting cellulitis of the scalp, and pilonidal sinus. The
natural history of the disease involves progressive dilation below the
follicular obstruction, leading to rupture of the duct, inflammation,
sinus tract formation, and destructive scarring. It has been associated
with Sjögren syndrome, inflammatory bowel disease, obesity, smoking, diabetes mellitus, and thyroid disease. It is also known to occur
in other family members and may be associated with loss-­of-­function
pathogenic variants in multiple genes in some patients (Fig. 702.2). HS
has been one manifestation of autoinflammatory syndromes, including pyoderma gangrenosum-­acne-­HS (PASH) (PSTPIP1 promoter),
pyoderma gangrenosum-­acne-­pyogenic arthritis-­HS (PAPASH)
(PSTPIP1), and psoriatic arthritis-­pyoderma gangrenosum-­acne-­HS
(PsAPASH).

Clinical Manifestations

HS is a chronic, inflammatory, suppurative disorder of the follicular
units in the axillae, anogenital area, and, occasionally, the scalp, posterior aspect of the ears, inframammary folds (female), and periumbilical area (Fig. 702.3). Onset of clinical manifestations is sometimes
preceded by pruritus or discomfort and usually occurs during puberty
or early adulthood. Solitary or multiple painful erythematous nodules, deep abscesses, and contracted scars are sharply confined to areas
of skin containing apocrine glands. When the disease is severe and
chronic, sinus tracts, ulcers, and thick, linear fibrotic bands develop.
HS tends to persist for many years, punctuated by relapses and partial
remissions. Complications include cellulitis, ulceration, and burrowing abscesses that may perforate adjacent structures, forming fistulas
to the urethra, bladder, rectum, or peritoneum. Episodic inflammatory arthritis develops in some patients. Obesity and smoking may
worsen or trigger symptoms. Patients with HS have an increased risk
of adverse cardiovascular outcomes and a long-­term risk of squamous
cell carcinoma.
The autoinflammatory associated disorders present with fever, joint
pain, cutaneous lesions (severe painful acne), and elevated inflammatory markers (ESR, CRP).

Differential Diagnosis

Early lesions of HS are often mistaken for infected epidermal cysts,
furuncles, scrofuloderma, actinomycosis, cat-­scratch disease, granuloma inguinale, or lymphogranuloma venereum. However, sharp
localization to areas of the body that bear apocrine glands should
suggest hidradenitis. When involvement is limited to the anogenital region, the condition may be difficult to distinguish from Crohn’s
disease.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4136 Part XXIX u The Skin
Treatment

Conservative management includes cessation of smoking, weight
loss, and avoidance of irritation of the affected area. Warm compresses and topical antiseptic or antibacterial soaps may also be
Hidradenitis suppurativa
Pathogenic variants (+)

Causative genes
NCSTN, PSENEN, PSEN1,
POFUT1, POGLUT1, KRT17,
KRT6A, FGFR2, GJB2

Keratinization
Follicular occlusion
Cyst formation

MEFV, NOD2, LPIN2, NLRP3,
NLRP12, PSMB8, MVK,
IL1RN, PSTPIP1, (NCSTN?)

Autoinflammation

Keratinization precedes
inflammation

Inflammation precedes
keratinization

Keratinization

Autoinflammation

FOX-­FORDYCE DISEASE
Etiology and Pathogenesis

Follicular occlusion
Cyst formation

The cause of Fox-­Fordyce disease is unknown, but it is related to blockage of apocrine sweat glands.

AIKD

Clinical Manifestations

(in the narrow sense)

AIKD
(in the broad sense)

Fig. 702.2 Hidradenitis suppurativa and autoinflammatory keratiniza-

tion disease (AIKD). Genes responsible for hidradenitis suppurativa can
be divided into two groups. One includes NCSTN, PSENEN, PSEN1,
POFUT1, POGLUT1, KRT17, KRT6A, FGFR2, and GJB2, whose pathogenic variants result in autoinflammation preceded by keratinization.
This hidradenitis suppurativa subtype can be regarded as an autoinflammatory keratinization disease in the broad sense. The other group
includes MEFV, NOD2, LPIN2, NLRP3, NLRP12, PSMB8, MVK, IL1RN,
PSTPIP1, and possibly NCSTN, whose pathogenic variants lead to
keratinization preceded by autoinflammation. This hidradenitis suppurativa subtype can be regarded as an autoinflammatory keratinization
disease in the narrow sense. (From Nomura T. Hidradenitis suppurativa
as a potential subtype of autoinflammatory keratinization disease. Front
Immunol. 2020;11:847, Fig. 1.).

A

helpful. For mild, early disease, topical clindamycin 1% may be
helpful. For more severe disease, therapy may be initiated with doxycycline (100 mg bid) or minocycline (100 mg bid) in adolescents
and young adults. Some patients require intermittent or long-­term
antibiotic treatment. Combination therapy with clindamycin and
rifampin is helpful in some patients. Oral retinoids for 5-­6 months
may also be effective, although disease may recur. Oral contraceptive agents, which contain a high estrogen:progesterone ratio and
low androgenicity of the progesterone, are another alternative along
with spironolactone. Laser hair ablation has proven helpful in some
studies as well. Systemic immunosuppressants (infliximab, adalimumab, cyclosporine, anakinra) and medications targeted at glucose
metabolism and metabolic syndrome (metformin) have been helpful in patients resistant to more traditional measures. Adalimumab,
a tumor necrosis factor-­alpha (TNF-­α) inhibitor, is the only FDA-­
approved medication for the treatment of moderate-­to-­severe HS.
Surgical measures, including deroofing procedures and full excision, may be a helpful adjuvant to medical therapy, especially in
recalcitrant cases.

This disease is most common in females and manifests during puberty
to the third decade of life as pruritus primarily in the axillae, although
the areolae, pubic, and perineal regions can also be affected. Pruritus
is exacerbated by emotional stress and stimuli that induce apocrine
sweating. Dome-­shaped, skin-­colored to slightly hyperpigmented, follicular papules develop in the pruritic areas.

Treatment

Fox-­Fordyce disease is difficult to treat. Oral contraceptive pills
and topical treatments, including corticosteroids, antibiotics, or
retinoids, may help some patients. Systemic isotretinoin and ablative lasers have shown varying efficacy. Mechanical destruction and
removal of apocrine glands have been used in recalcitrant cases.
Partial response has been seen in one study using botulinum toxin
type A.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

B

Fig. 702.3 Hidradenitis suppurativa. A, This young man had recurrent inflammatory papules and nodulocystic lesions in the axillae and groin for 5

years. Although lesions initially improved with oral antibiotics, he subsequently developed draining sinus tracts. B, This young woman had multiple
indurated sinus tracts, nodules, and ulcers with purulent and necrotic drainage in her axillae. (From Rachidi S, Bender AM, Cohen BA. Disorders of
the hail and nails. In: Cohen BA, ed. Pediatric Dermatology, 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022, Fig. 8.42.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 703 u Disorders of Hair 4137

Chapter 703

Disorders of Hair
Kari L. Martin

Acquired localized hair loss is the most common type of hair loss in
childhood. Three conditions—traumatic alopecia, alopecia areata, and
tinea capitis—are predominantly seen (Tables 703.4 and 703.5).

TRAUMATIC ALOPECIA (TRACTION ALOPECIA,
HAIR PULLING, TRICHOTILLOMANIA)
Traction Alopecia

Disorders of hair in infants and children may be a result of intrinsic
disturbances of hair growth, underlying biochemical or metabolic
defects, inflammatory dermatoses, or structural anomalies of the hair
shaft. Excessive and abnormal hair growth is referred to as hypertrichosis or hirsutism. Hypertrichosis is excessive hair growth at inappropriate locations; hirsutism is an androgen-­dependent male pattern
of hair growth in women (see Chapter 589). Hypotrichosis is deficient
hair growth. Hair loss, partial or complete, is called alopecia. Alopecia
may be classified as nonscarring or scarring; the latter type is rare in
children and, if present, is most often caused by prolonged or untreated
inflammatory conditions such as pyoderma and tinea capitis.

Traction alopecia is common and is seen in almost 20% of school-­aged
females with coily or kinky hair. It is caused by trauma to the hair follicles from tight braids or ponytails, headbands, rubber bands, curlers,
weaves, or rollers (Fig. 703.1). There is a greater risk of traction alopecia if hair trauma is combined with chemically relaxed hair. Broken
hairs and inflammatory follicular papules in circumscribed patches
at the scalp margins are characteristic and may be accompanied by
regional lymphadenopathy. Children and parents must be encouraged
to avoid devices that cause trauma to the hair and, if necessary, to alter
the hairstyle. Otherwise scarring of hair follicles may occur. Treatment
with topical phenylephrine, an α1-­adrenergic receptor agonist, facilitates contraction of arrector pili smooth muscle and shows promise in
decreasing hair loss and increasing the force needed for epilation.

HYPERTRICHOSIS

Hair Pulling

Hypertrichosis is rare in children and may be localized or generalized
and permanent or transient. Tables 703.1 and 703.2 list some of the
many causes of hypertrichosis.

HYPOTRICHOSIS AND ALOPECIA

Table 703.3 lists some of the disorders associated with hypotrichosis
and alopecia. True alopecia is rarely congenital; it is more often related
to an inflammatory dermatosis, mechanical factors, drug ingestion,
infection, endocrinopathy, nutritional disturbance, or disturbance of
the hair cycle. Any inflammatory condition of the scalp, such as atopic
dermatitis or seborrheic dermatitis, if severe enough, may result in partial alopecia. Unless the hair follicle has been permanently damaged,
hair growth returns to normal if the underlying condition is treated
successfully.
Hair loss in childhood should be divided into the following four categories: congenital diffuse, congenital localized, acquired diffuse, and
acquired localized.

Table 703.1  Causes of Hypertrichosis and Associated
Conditions
INTRINSIC FACTORS
Racial and familial forms such as hairy ears, hairy elbows,
intraphalangeal hair, or generalized hirsutism
EXTRINSIC FACTORS
Local trauma
Malnutrition
Anorexia nervosa
Long-­standing inflammatory dermatoses
Drugs: Diazoxide, phenytoin, corticosteroids, Cortisporin,
cyclosporine, androgens, anabolic agents, hexachlorobenzene,
minoxidil, psoralens, penicillamine, streptomycin, danazol,
omeprazole, valproic acid
HAMARTOMAS OR NEVI
Congenital pigmented nevocytic nevus, hair follicle nevus, Becker
nevus, congenital smooth muscle hamartoma, fawn-­tail nevus
associated with diastematomyelia
ENDOCRINE DISORDERS
Virilizing ovarian tumors, Cushing syndrome, acromegaly,
hyperthyroidism, hypothyroidism, congenital adrenal
hyperplasia, adrenal tumors, gonadal dysgenesis, male
pseudohermaphroditism, nonendocrine hormone–secreting
tumors, polycystic ovary syndrome, pigmentary hypertrichosis with
non-­autoimmune diabetes mellitus (SLC29A3)
CONGENITAL AND GENETIC DISORDERS (SEE TABLE 703.2)

Hair pulling in childhood is usually an acute reactional process related
to emotional stress, or it may be a habit (especially in young children). It may also be seen in trichotillomania (obsessive-­compulsive
disorder) and as part of more severe psychiatric disorders, usually in
adolescents.
Table 703.2  Congenital Syndromes Associated with
Generalized Hypertrichosis
Acromegaloid facial appearance syndrome (affected genes: PGM1,
GLO1, IGHG3, HP)
Barber-­Say syndrome (KMT2A)
Cantú syndrome (hypertrichosis with osteochondrodysplasia)
(ABCC9, KCNJ8)
Coffin-­Siris syndrome (BAF complex genes)
Cornelia de Lange (Brachmann-­de Lange) syndrome (NIPBL, SMC1A,
SMC3, RAD21, HDAC8)
Craniofacial dysostosis
Eye disorders
• With amaurosis congenital, cone-­rod type
• With congenital lamellar cataracts and mental retardation
• With pigmentary retinopathy
Gorlin-­Chaudhry-­Moss (oculo-­facio-­cardio-­dental) syndrome (BCOR)
Gingival hyperplasia
• Congenital generalized hypertrichosis with gingival hyperplasia
• Zimmerman-­Laband syndrome
Hemimaxillofacial dysplasia
Lipodystrophies
• Berardinelli-­Seip syndrome (BSCL)
• Donohue syndrome (leprechaunism) (INSR)
Mitochondrial encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, and strokelike
episodes (MELAS) syndrome
Mucopolysaccharidoses
• Hunter syndrome
• Hurler syndrome
• Sanfilippo syndrome
Porphyrias
• Erythropoietic porphyria (Gunther disease)
• Familial porphyria cutanea tarda
• Hepatoerythropoietic porphyria
Rubinstein-­Taybi syndrome (CREBBP, EP300)
Schinzel-­Giedion syndrome (SETBP1 [MAJ359])
Stiff skin syndrome
Toxin exposure
• Fetal alcohol syndrome
• Fetal hydantoin syndrome
Weidemann-­Steiner syndrome (KMT2A)
Winchester (Torg-­Winchester) syndrome (MMP2)
From Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 6th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022, Box 7.8, p. 191.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4138 Part XXIX u The Skin
Trichotillomania

Etiology and Pathogenesis. The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual

of Mental Disorders, 5th edition (DSM-­5) classifies trichotillomania in
the category of obsessive-­compulsive and related disorders. The diagnostic criteria for trichotillomania include visible hair loss attributable
to pulling; mounting tension preceding or during hair pulling; gratification or release of tension after hair pulling; and absence of hair pulling attributable to hallucinations, delusions, or an inflammatory skin
condition.
Clinical Manifestations. Compulsive pulling, twisting, and breaking of hair produces irregular areas of incomplete hair loss, most
often on the crown and in the occipital and parietal areas of the scalp.
Occasionally eyebrows, eyelashes, and body hair are traumatized.
Trichotillomania often begins during periods of inactivity (going
to bed, watching TV) and is frequently unobserved by the parents.
Some plaques of alopecia may have a linear outline. The hairs remaining within the areas of loss are of various lengths (Fig. 703.2) and are
typically blunt-­tipped because of breakage. The scalp usually appears
normal, although hemorrhage, crusting (Fig. 703.3), and chronic folliculitis may also occur. Long-­term repeated trauma may result in
Table 703.3  Disorders Associated with Alopecia and
Hypotrichosis
Congenital total alopecia: Atrichia with papules, Moynahan alopecia
syndrome
Congenital localized alopecia: Aplasia cutis, triangular alopecia,
sebaceous nevus
Hereditary hypotrichosis: Marie-­Unna syndrome, hypotrichosis with
juvenile macular dystrophy, hypotrichosis (Mari type), ichthyosis
with hypotrichosis, cartilage-­hair hypoplasia, Hallermann-­Streiff
syndrome, trichorhinophalangeal syndrome, ectodermal dysplasia,
“pure” hair and nail and other ectodermal dysplasias
Diffuse alopecia of endocrine origin: Hypopituitarism,
hypothyroidism, hypoparathyroidism, hyperthyroidism
Alopecia of nutritional origin: Marasmus, kwashiorkor, iron
deficiency, zinc deficiency (acrodermatitis enteropathica), gluten-­
sensitive enteropathy, essential fatty acid deficiency, biotinidase
deficiency
Disturbances of the hair cycle: Telogen effluvium
Toxic alopecia: Anagen effluvium
Autoimmune alopecia: Alopecia areata
Traumatic alopecia: Traction alopecia, trichotillomania
Cicatricial alopecia: Lupus erythematosus, lichen planopilaris,
pseudopelade, morphea (en coup de sabre) dermatomyositis,
infection (kerion, favus, tuberculosis, syphilis, folliculitis,
leishmaniasis, herpes zoster, varicella), acne keloidalis, follicular
mucinosis, sarcoidosis
Hair shaft abnormalities: Monilethrix, pili annulati, pili torti,
trichorrhexis invaginata, trichorrhexis nodosa, woolly hair
syndrome, Menkes disease, trichothiodystrophy, trichodento-­
osseous syndrome, uncombable hair syndrome (spun-­glass hair, pili
trianguli et canaliculi)

irreversible damage and permanent alopecia. Trichophagy, resulting in
trichobezoars, may complicate this disorder.
Differential Diagnosis. Acute reactional hair pulling, tinea capitis,
and alopecia areata must be considered in the differential diagnosis of
trichotillomania (see Tables 703.4 and 703.5).
Treatment. Trichotillomania is closely related to obsessive-­
compulsive disorder and may be an expression of it for some children.
When trichotillomania occurs secondary to obsessive-­
compulsive
disorder, clomipramine 50-­150 mg/day or a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) such as fluoxetine may be helpful, particularly
when combined with behavioral interventions (see Chapter 37). N-­
Acetylcysteine may also be helpful.

ALOPECIA AREATA
Etiology and Pathogenesis

Alopecia areata is a T-­cell–driven autoimmune disorder producing
nonscarring alopecia. The cause is unknown. It is hypothesized that
in genetically susceptible individuals, loss of immune privilege of the
hair follicle allows for T-­cell inflammation against anagen hairs and
follicles, leading to stoppage of hair growth.

Clinical Manifestations

Alopecia areata is characterized by rapid and complete loss of hair in
round or oval patches on the scalp (Fig. 703.4), eyebrows, eyelashes,
and on other body sites. In alopecia totalis, all the scalp hair is lost (Fig.
703.5); alopecia universalis involves all body and scalp hair. The lifetime incidence of alopecia areata is 0.1–0.2% of the population. More
than half of affected patients are younger than 20 years of age.
The skin within the plaques of hair loss appears normal. Alopecia
areata is associated with atopy and with nail changes such as pits (Fig.
703.6), longitudinal striations, and leukonychia. Autoimmune diseases
such as Hashimoto thyroiditis, Addison disease, pernicious anemia,
ulcerative colitis, myasthenia gravis, collagen vascular diseases, and
vitiligo may also be seen. An increased incidence of alopecia areata has
been reported in patients with Down syndrome (5–10%).

Differential Diagnosis

Tinea capitis, seborrheic dermatitis, trichotillomania, traumatic alopecia, and lupus erythematosus should be considered in the differential
diagnosis of alopecia areata (see Tables 703.4 and 703.5).

Treatment

The course is unpredictable, but spontaneous resolution in 6-­
12
months is usual, particularly when relatively small, stable patches of
alopecia are present. Recurrences are common. Onset at a young age,
extensive or prolonged hair loss, and numerous episodes are usually
poor prognostic signs. Alopecia universalis, alopecia totalis, and alopecia ophiasis (Fig. 703.7)—a type of alopecia areata in which hair loss
is circumferential—are also less likely to resolve. Therapy is difficult
to evaluate because the course is erratic and unpredictable. The use
of highly potent or superpotent topical corticosteroids is effective in

Table 703.4  Helpful Historical Clues in the Diagnosis of Hair Disorders
HISTORICAL CONSIDERATIONS

TELOGEN EFFLUVIUM

TRICHOTILLOMANIA

TINEA CAPITIS

ALOPECIA AREATA

Are the spots itchy?

Negative

Negative

Positive

Usually negative

Do the spots come and
go?

Negative

Sometimes positive

Negative

Sometimes positive

Is the hair falling out in
clumps?

Positive

Negative

Negative

Usually negative

Are there any anxiety
disorders or obsessive-­
compulsive tendencies?

Negative

Positive

Negative

Negative

From Lio PA. What’s missing from this picture? An approach to alopecia in children. Arch Dis Child Educ Pract Ed. 2007;92:193–198.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 703 u Disorders of Hair 4139
Table 703.5  Helpful Physical Examination Clues in the Diagnosis of Hair Disorders
PHYSICAL FINDINGS

TELOGEN EFFLUVIUM

TRICHOTILLOMANIA

TINEA CAPITIS

ALOPECIA AREATA

Scarring?

Negative

Negative

Usually negative

Negative

Exclamation-­point hairs?

Negative

Negative

Negative

Positive

Irregular pattern with
mixed length and stubbly
hairs?

Negative

Positive

Negative

Negative

Scaling, pustules, or
kerion?

Negative

Negative

Positive

Negative

Positive hair-­pull test
result?

Positive

Negative

Negative

Usually negative

Nail pitting or grooves?

Negative

Negative

Negative

Positive

From Lio PA. What’s missing from this picture? An approach to alopecia in children. Arch Dis Child Educ Pract Ed. 2007;92:193–198.

Fig. 703.1 Traction alopecia.

Fig. 703.4 Circular patch of alopecia areata with normal-­appearing
scalp.

Fig. 703.2 Hair pulling. Hairs are broken off at various lengths.

Fig. 703.3 Hemorrhage and crusting secondary to hair pulling.

Fig. 703.5 Alopecia totalis: total loss of scalp hair.

Fig. 703.6 Multiple nail pits in alopecia areata.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4140 Part XXIX u The Skin
Table 703.6  Possible Etiology of Anagen Effluvin
CANCER THERAPY
Chemotherapy
Radiation therapy
TOXIC METAL (SEE CHAPTER 760)
Lead (see Chapter 761)
Mercury
Arsenic (rat, insect poison)
Thallium (rat poison)
Bismuth

Fig. 703.7 Ophiasis pattern of alopecia areata.
some patients. Intradermal injections of steroid (triamcinolone 5 mg/
mL) every 4-­6 weeks may also stimulate hair growth locally, but this
mode of treatment is impractical in young children or in patients with
extensive hair loss. Systemic corticosteroid therapy (prednisone 1 mg/
kg/day) is associated with good results; the permanence of cure is questionable, however, and the side effects of chronic oral corticosteroids
are a serious deterrent. Some patients may maintain hair growth by
switching to a more appropriate long-­term immunosuppressant such
as methotrexate. Additional therapies that are sometimes effective
include short-­contact anthralin, topical minoxidil, and contact sensitization with squaric acid dibutylester or diphenylcyclopropenone. Janus
kinase inhibitors, both oral and topical, may also be used. In general,
parents and patients can be reassured that spontaneous remission of
alopecia areata usually occurs. New hair growth may initially be of
finer caliber and lighter color, but replacement by normal terminal hair
can be expected.

ACQUIRED DIFFUSE HAIR LOSS
Telogen Effluvium

Telogen effluvium manifests as sudden loss of large amounts of hair,
often with brushing, combing, and washing of hair. Diffuse loss of scalp
hair occurs from premature conversion of growing, or anagen, hairs,
which normally constitute 80–90% of hairs, to resting, or telogen, hairs.
Hair loss is noted 6 weeks to 3 months after the precipitating cause,
which may include childbirth; a febrile episode; surgery; acute blood
loss, including blood donation; sudden severe weight loss; discontinuation of high-­dose corticosteroids or oral contraceptives; hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism; and psychiatric stress. Telogen effluvium also
accounts for the loss of hair by infants in the first few months of life;
friction from bed sheets, particularly in infants with pruritic, atopic
skin, may exacerbate the problem. There is no inflammatory reaction;
the hair follicles remain intact, and telogen bulbs can be demonstrated
microscopically on shed hairs. Because >50% of the scalp hair is rarely
involved, alopecia is usually not severe. Parents should be reassured
that normal hair growth will return within approximately 3-­6 months.

Toxic Alopecia (Anagen Effluvium)

Anagen effluvium is an acute, severe, diffuse inhibition of growth of
anagen follicles, resulting in the loss of >80–90% of scalp hair. Hairs
become dystrophic, and the hair shaft breaks at the narrowed segment.
Loss is diffuse, rapid (1-­3 weeks after treatment), and temporary, as
regrowth occurs after the offending agent is discontinued. Causes of
anagen effluvium include radiation; cancer chemotherapeutic agents
such as antimetabolites, alkylating agents, and mitotic inhibitors; thallium; thiouracil; heparin; the coumarins; boric acid; and hypervitaminosis A (see Table 703.6).

CONGENITAL DIFFUSE HAIR LOSS

Congenital diffuse hair loss is defined as congenitally thin hair diffusely
related to either hypoplasia of hair follicles or to structural defects in
hair shafts.

TOXIC CHEMICALS
Boric acid (pesticide, cleaning agent)
Warfarin
Colchicine

Structural Defects of Hair

Structural defects of the hair shaft may be congenital, reflect known
biochemical aberrations, or be related to damaging grooming practices. All the defects can be demonstrated by microscopic examination
of affected hairs, particularly with scanning and transmission electron
microscopy, although many can even be seen by simple trichography
done in the office.

Trichorrhexis Nodosa

Congenital trichorrhexis nodosa is an autosomal dominant condition. The hair is dry, brittle, and lusterless, with irregularly spaced,
grayish white nodes on the hair shaft. Microscopically, the nodes
have the appearance of two interlocking brushes (Fig. 703.8A). The
defect results from a fracture of the hair shaft at the nodal points
caused by disruption of the cells in the hair cortex. Trichorrhexis
nodosa has also been observed in some infants with Menkes syndrome, trichothiodystrophy, citrullinemia, and argininosuccinic
aciduria.

Acquired Trichorrhexis Nodosa

Acquired trichorrhexis nodosa, the most common cause of hair
breakage, occurs in two forms. Proximal defects are found most frequently in children with coily or kinky hair, whose complaint is not of
alopecia but of failure of the hair to grow. The hair is short, and longitudinal splits, knots, and whitish nodules can be demonstrated in hair
mounts. Easy breakage is demonstrated by gentle traction on the hair
shafts. A history of other affected family members may be obtained.
The problem may be caused by a combination of genetic predisposition and the cumulative mechanical trauma of rough combing and
brushing, hair-­straightening procedures, and “permanents.” Patients
must be cautioned to avoid damaging grooming techniques. A soft,
natural-­bristle brush and a wide-­toothed comb should be used. The
condition is self-­limited, with resolution in 2-­4 years, if patients
avoid damaging practices. Distal trichorrhexis nodosa is seen more
frequently in children with loose curly or straight hair types. The
distal portion of the hair shaft is thinned, ragged, and faded; white
specks, sometimes mistaken for nits, may be noted along the shaft.
Hair mounts reveal the paintbrush defect and the sites of excessive
fragility and breakage. Localized areas of the moustache or beard may
also be affected. Avoidance of traumatic grooming, regular trimming
of affected ends, and the use of cream rinses to lessen tangling ameliorate this condition.

Pili Torti

Patients with pili torti present with spangled, brittle, coarse hair of
different lengths over the entire scalp. There is a structural defect in
which the hair shaft is grooved and flattened at irregular intervals
and is twisted on its axis to various degrees. Minor twists that occur
in normal hair should not be misconstrued as pili torti. Curvature of
the hair follicle apparently leads to the flattening and rotation of the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 703 u Disorders of Hair 4141

A

B

C

Fig. 703.8 A, Microscopic hair fracture in trichorrhexis nodosa. B, Beading of hair in monilethrix. C, Cuplike abnormality of hair in Netherton
syndrome.

hair shaft. The genetic defect in isolated pili torti is unknown, and
both autosomal dominant and recessive forms have been described.
Syndromes in which the hair shaft abnormalities of pili torti are
seen in association with other cutaneous and systemic abnormalities include Menkes kinky hair syndrome, Björnstad syndrome (pili
torti with deafness; BCS1L gene), and multiple ectodermal dysplasia
syndromes.

Menkes Kinky Hair Syndrome (Trichopoliodystrophy)

Males with Menkes kinky hair syndrome, an X-­linked recessive trait,
are born to an unaffected mother after a normal pregnancy. Neonatal
problems include hypothermia, hypotonia, poor feeding, seizures, and
failure to thrive. Hair is normal to sparse at birth but is replaced by
short, fine, brittle, light-­colored hair that may have features of trichorrhexis nodosa, pili torti, or monilethrix. The skin is hypopigmented and
thin, cheeks typically appear plump, and the nasal bridge is depressed.
Progressive psychomotor retardation is noted in early infancy. Pathogenic variants in the ATP7A gene, encoding a copper-­transporting adenosine triphosphatase protein, cause Menkes kinky hair syndrome. It
is a result of maldistribution of the copper in the body. Copper uptake
across the brush border of the small intestine is increased, but copper
transport from these cells into the plasma is defective, resulting in low
total body copper stores. Parenteral administration of copper-­histidine
is helpful if begun in the first 2 months of life.

Monilethrix

The hair shaft defect known as monilethrix is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait with variable age of onset, severity, and course.
Pathogenic variants in the hair keratins KRT81 (hHb1), KRT83
(hHb3), and KRT86 (hHb6) have been identified in autosomal dominant cases, and pathogenic variants in desmoglein 4 are found in
autosomal recessive cases. The hair appears dry, lusterless, and brittle,
and it fractures spontaneously or with mild trauma. Eyebrows, lashes,
body and pubic hair, and scalp hair may be affected. Monilethrix
may be present at birth, but the hair is usually normal at birth and is
replaced in the first few months of life by abnormal hairs; the condition is sometimes first apparent in childhood. Follicular papules may
appear on the nape of the neck and the occiput and, occasionally,
over the entire scalp. Short, fragile beaded hairs that emerge from
the horny follicular plugs give a distinctive appearance. Keratosis
pilaris and koilonychia of fingernails and toenails may also be present. Microscopically, a distinctive, regular beading pattern of the hair
shaft is evident, characterized by elliptic nodes that are separated by
narrower internodes (see Fig. 703.8B). Not all hairs have nodes, and
both normal and beaded hairs may break. Patients should be advised
to handle the hair gently to minimize breakage. Treatment is generally ineffective, although oral retinoids and topical minoxidil have
produced some improvement.

Trichothiodystrophy

Hair in trichothiodystrophy is sparse, short, brittle, and uneven; the
scalp hair, eyebrows, or eyelashes may be affected. Microscopically, the
hair is flattened, folded, and variable in diameter; it has longitudinal

grooving and nodal swellings that resemble those seen in trichorrhexis
nodosa. Under a polarizing microscope, distinctive alternating dark
and light bands are seen. The abnormal hair has a cystine content that
is <50% of normal because of a major reduction in and altered composition of constituent high-­sulfur matrix proteins. Trichothiodystrophy
is caused by pathogenic variants in DNA repair/transcription genes
(XPD, XPB, TTDN1, and TTDA) and may occur as an isolated finding or in association with various syndrome complexes that include
intellectual impairment, short stature, ichthyosis, nail dystrophy, dental caries, cataracts, decreased fertility, neurologic abnormalities, bony
abnormalities, and immunodeficiency. Some patients are photosensitive and have impaired DNA repair mechanisms, similar to that seen
in groups B and D xeroderma pigmentosum; the incidence of skin cancers, however, is not increased. Patients with trichothiodystrophy tend
to resemble one another, with a receding chin, protruding ears, raspy
voice, and sociable, outgoing personality. Trichoschisis, a fracture perpendicular to the hair shaft, is characteristic of the many syndromes
that are associated with trichothiodystrophy. Perpendicular breakage
of the hair shaft has also been described in association with other hair
abnormalities, particularly monilethrix.

Trichorrhexis Invaginata (Bamboo Hair)

Short, sparse, fragile hair without apparent growth is characteristic of
trichorrhexis invaginata, which is found primarily in association with
Netherton syndrome (see Chapter 699). It has also been reported in
other ichthyosiform dermatoses. The distal portion of the hair is invaginated into the cuplike proximal portion, forming a fragile nodal swelling (see Fig. 703.8C).

Pili Annulati

Alternating light and dark bands of the hair shaft characterize pili
annulati. When viewed under the light microscope, the region of the
hair shaft that appeared bright in reflected light instead appears dark
in the transmitted light as a result of focal aggregates of abnormal air-­
filled cavities within the shaft. The hair is not fragile. The defect may
be autosomal dominant or sporadic in inheritance and usually begins
after age 2. Pseudopili annulati is a variant of normal blond hair; an
optical effect caused by the refraction and reflection of light from the
partially twisted and flattened shaft creates the impression of banding.

Woolly Hair Disease

Woolly hair diseases manifest at birth as peculiarly tight, curly, abnormal hair in a person who is not Black. Autosomal dominant and
recessive (PKRY5 gene) types have been described along with the genodermatoses Naxos disease and Carvajal syndrome, which are associated with cardiomyopathy. Woolly hair nevus, a sporadic form, involves
only a circumscribed portion of the scalp hair. The affected hair is fine,
tightly curled, and light-­colored, and it grows poorly. Microscopically,
an affected hair is oval and shows twisting of 180 degrees on its axis.

Uncombable Hair Syndrome (Spun-­Glass Hair)

The hair of patients with uncombable hair syndrome appears disorderly, is often silvery blond (Fig. 703.9), and may break because of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4142 Part XXIX u The Skin
Table 704.1  White Nail or Nail Bed Changes

Fig. 703.9 Complicated combing. Blond, frizzy, and glistening hair in
uncombable hair syndrome. (From Drivenes JL, Betz RC, Bygum A. A
girl with unruly locks: molecular genetics makes a diagnosis of uncombable hair syndrome. Lancet. 2022;399:1079.)

repeated, futile efforts to control it. Eyebrows and eyelashes are normal.
A longitudinal depression along the hair shaft is a constant feature, and
most hair follicles and shafts are triangular (pili trianguli et canaliculi).
The shape of the hair varies along its length, however, preventing the
hairs from lying flat.
The disorder is associated with pathogenic variants in PAD13,
TCHH, and TGM3 genes. Most patients have no other findings, but
in some there may be associated brachydactyly, ectodermal dysplasia,
cataracts, and oligodontia.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

DISEASE

CLINICAL APPEARANCE

Anemia

Diffuse white

Arsenic

Mees lines: transverse white lines

Cirrhosis

Terry nails: most of nail, zone
of pink at distal end (see Fig.
704.6)

Congenital leukonychia
(autosomal dominant; variety of
patterns)

Syndrome of leukonychia,
knuckle pads, deafness;
isolated finding; partial white

Darier disease

Longitudinal white streaks

Half-­and-­half nail

Proximal white, distal pink
azotemia

High fevers (some diseases)

Transverse white lines

Hypoalbuminemia

Muehrcke lines: stationary paired
transverse bands

Hypocalcemia

Variable white

Malnutrition

Diffuse white

Pellagra

Diffuse milky white

Punctate leukonychia

Common white spots

Tinea and yeast

Variable patterns

Thallium toxicity (rat poison)

Variable white

Trauma

Repeated manicure: transverse
striations

Zinc deficiency

Diffuse white

From Habif TP, ed. Clinical Dermatology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2004:887.

Table 704.2  Congenital Diseases with Nail Defects

Chapter 704

Large nails

Pachyonychia congenita, Rubinstein-­Taybi
syndrome, hemihypertrophy

Disorders of the Nails

Smallness or absence
of nails

Ectodermal dysplasias, nail-­patella,
dyskeratosis congenita, focal dermal
hypoplasia, cartilage-­hair hypoplasia,
COIF, Ellis–van Creveld, Larsen,
epidermolysis bullosa, incontinentia
pigmenti, Rothmund-­Thomson,
Turner, Coffin-­Siris, popliteal web,
trisomies (8, 13, 18), Apert, Gorlin-­
Pindborg, long arm 21 deletion,
otopalatodigital, elfin facies, anonychia,
Noonan, acrodermatitis enteropathica,
teratogens (alcohol, warfarin, hydantoin)

Other

Congenital malalignment of the great
toenails, familial dystrophic shedding of
the nails

Kari L. Martin
Nail abnormalities in children may be manifestations of generalized
skin disease, skin disease localized to the periungual region, systemic
disease, drugs, trauma, or localized bacterial and fungal infections
(Table 704.1). Nail anomalies are also common in certain congenital
disorders (Table 704.2).

ABNORMALITIES IN NAIL SHAPE OR SIZE

Anonychia is absence of the nail plate, usually a result of a congenital
disorder or trauma. It may be an isolated finding or may be associated
with malformations of the digits. Koilonychia is flattening and concavity of the nail plate with loss of normal contour, producing a spoon-­
shaped nail (Fig. 704.1). Koilonychia occurs as an autosomal dominant
trait or in association with iron-­deficiency anemia, Plummer-­Vinson
syndrome, hemochromatosis, various genodermatoses, and occupational trauma. The nail plate is relatively thin for the first year or two
of life and, consequently, may be spoon-­shaped in otherwise normal
children.
Congenital nail dysplasia, an autosomal dominant disorder, manifests at birth as longitudinal streaks and thinning of the nail plate.
There is platyonychia and koilonychia, which may overgrow the lateral
folds and involve all nails of the toes and fingers.

COIF, Congenital onychodysplasia of index fingers.

Nail-­patella syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder in which
the nails are 30–50% of their normal size and often have triangular or
pyramidal lunulae. The thumbnails are always involved, although in
some cases only the ulnar half of the nail may be affected or may be
missing. Nail involvement is symmetric, and the nails from the index
finger to the little finger are progressively less damaged. The patella is
also smaller than usual or absent, and this anomaly may lead to knee
instability. Iliac horns, bony spines arising from the posterior aspect of
the iliac bones; overextension of joints; skin laxity; ocular anomalies;

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 704 u Disorders of the Nails

4143

Table 704.3  Clubbing in Children*
HISTORY

SYMPTOM

DISEASE

ACQUIRED
Generalized

Pulmonary

Cystic fibrosis
Bronchiectasis
Tuberculosis, aspergillosis
Asthma complicated by lung
infections
Sarcoidosis
Pulmonary fibrosis
Tumors

Cardiovascular

Cyanotic congenital heart
disease
Subacute bacterial
endocarditis
Myxomas

Gastrointestinal

Inflammatory bowel disease
Gardner’s syndrome
Parasitosis
Cirrhosis
Chronic active hepatitis

Endocrine

Diamond’s syndrome
(myxedema, exophthalmos
and clubbing)
Hypervitaminosis A
Malnutrition

Fig. 704.1 Spoon nails (koilonychia). Most cases are a variant of normal. (From Habif TP, ed. Clinical Dermatology, 4th ed. Philadelphia:
Mosby; 2004:885.)

Limited to one or
more digits

Aortic/subclavian artery
aneurysm
Brachial plexus injury
Trauma
Maffucci’s syndrome
Gout
Sarcoidosis
Severe herpetic whitlow

Hereditary

Pachydermoperiostosis
Familial, isolated
Apert’s syndrome
Pfeiffer’s syndrome
Rubinstein-­Taybi syndrome

Pseudoclubbing*

Fig. 704.2 Finger clubbing. The distal phalanges are enlarged to a

rounded bulbous shape. The nail enlarges and becomes curved, hard,
and thickened. (From Habif TP, ed. Clinical Dermatology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2004:885.)

and nephropathy, the most serious feature, may also be present. Nail-­
patella syndrome is caused by pathogenic variants in the transcription
factor LMX1B gene.
For a discussion of pachyonychia congenita, see Chapter 699.
Habit tic deformity consists of a depression down the center of the
nail with numerous horizontal ridges extending across the nail from it.
One or both thumbs are usually involved as a result of chronic rubbing
and picking at the nail with an adjacent finger. Treatment aims at cessation of trauma to the nail via massaging with bland ointments, physical
barriers, or cyanoacrylate adhesive.
Clubbing of the nails is characterized by swelling of each distal digit,
an increase in the angle between the nail plate and the proximal nail
fold (Lovibond angle) to >180 degrees, and a spongy feeling when one
pushes down and away from the interphalangeal joint because of an
increase in fibrovascular tissue between the matrix and the phalanx
(Fig. 704.2). The pathogenesis is not known. Nail clubbing is seen in
association with diseases of numerous organ systems, including pulmonary, cardiovascular (cyanotic heart disease), gastrointestinal
(celiac disease, inflammatory bowel disease), and hepatic (chronic
hepatitis) systems, and in healthy individuals as an idiopathic or familial finding (Table 704.3).

*Broad distal phalanges with normally shaped nails.
Modified from Baran R, Dawber RPR. Diseases of the Nails and Their Management.
Oxford: Blackwell Science; 1984:29.

CHANGES IN NAIL COLOR

Leukonychia is a white opacity of the nail plate that may involve the
entire plate or may be punctate or striate (see Table 704.1). The nail
plate itself remains smooth and undamaged. Leukonychia can be
traumatic or associated with infections such as leprosy and tuberculosis, dermatoses such as lichen planus and Darier disease, malignancies such as Hodgkin disease, anemia, and arsenic poisoning (Mees
lines). Leukonychia of all nail surfaces is an uncommon hereditary
autosomal dominant trait that may be associated with congenital epidermal cysts and renal calculi. Paired parallel white bands that do not
change position with growth of the nail, fade with pressure, and thus
reflect a change in the nail bed are associated with hypoalbuminemia
and are called Muehrcke lines. When the proximal portion of the nail
is white and the distal 20–50% of the nail is red, pink, or brown, the
condition is called half-­and-­half nails or Lindsay nails; this is seen
most commonly in patients with renal disease but may occur as a
normal variant. White nails of cirrhosis, or Terry nails (Fig. 704.3),
are characterized by a white ground-­glass appearance of the entire or
the proximal end of the nail and a normal pink distal 1-­2 mm of the
nail; this finding can also be associated with congestive heart failure
and adult-­onset diabetes and can be normal in children less than 4
years old.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4144 Part XXIX u The Skin

Fig. 704.3 Terry nails. The nail bed is white with only a narrow zone of

pink at the distal end. (From Habif TP, ed. Clinical Dermatology, 4th ed.
Philadelphia: Mosby; 2004:885.)

Fig. 704.5 Splinter hemorrhage of the distal nail bed due to trauma.
(From Hordinsky M, Sawaya ME, Scher RK. Atlas of Hair and Nails. London: Churchill Livingstone; 1999.)

Table 704.4  Disorders Associated with Subungual
Hemorrhage

Fig. 704.4 Green/black discoloration at the edge of the nails secondary to Pseudomonas infection.

Black pigmentation of an entire nail plate or linear bands of pigmentation (melanonychia striata) is most common in individuals
with Fitzpatrick type IV-­VI skin. Most often, the pigment is melanin,
which is produced by melanocytes of a junctional nevus in the nail
matrix and nail bed and is of no consequence. Extension or alteration
in the pigment should be evaluated by biopsy because of the possibility
of malignant change.
Bluish black to greenish nails may be caused by Pseudomonas
infection (Fig. 704.4), particularly in association with onycholysis or
chronic paronychia. The coloration is caused by subungual debris and
pyocyanin pigment from the bacterial organisms.
Yellow nail syndrome manifests as thickened, excessively curved,
slow-­growing yellow nails without lunulae. All nails are affected in
most cases. Associated systemic diseases include bronchiectasis, recurrent bronchitis, chylothorax, and focal edema of the limbs and face.
Deficient lymphatic drainage, caused by hypoplastic lymphatic vessels,
is believed to lead to the manifestations of this syndrome.
Splinter hemorrhages most often result from minor trauma but
may also be associated with subacute bacterial endocarditis, vasculitis,
Langerhans cell histiocytosis, severe rheumatoid arthritis, peptic ulcer
disease, hypertension, chronic glomerulonephritis, cirrhosis, scurvy,
trichinosis, malignant neoplasms, and psoriasis (Fig. 704.5 and Table
704.4).

NAIL SEPARATION

Onycholysis indicates separation of the nail plate from the distal nail
bed. Common causes are trauma, long-­term exposure to moisture,
hyperhidrosis, cosmetics, psoriasis, fungal infection (distal onycholysis), atopic or contact dermatitis, porphyria, drugs (bleomycin, vincristine, retinoid agents, indomethacin, chlorpromazine [Thorazine]), and
drug-­induced phototoxicity from tetracyclines (Fig. 704.6) or chloramphenicol (Table 704.5).

SPLINTER-­SHAPED

HEMATOMAS

Normal variant

+

−

Blood dyscrasias

+

+

Collagen diseases (lupus
erythematosus)

+

+

Trichinosis

+

−

Trauma

+

+

Child abuse

+

+

Cryoglobulinemia

+

−

Drug eruptions

+

−

Dialysis

+

−

Endocarditis (SBE)

+

−

Emboli

+

+

Langerhans cells
histiocytosis

+

−

Arterial lines or punctures

+

−

Sarcoidosis

+

−

Sepsis

+

−

Thyroid disease

+

−

Vasculitis

+

−

Phototoxicity
(tetracyclines)

+

−

From Silverman R, Baran R. Nail and appendageal abnormalities. In: Schachner LA,
Hansen RC, eds. Pediatric Dermatology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2011, Table 12.9,
p. 813.

Beau lines are transverse grooves in the nail plate (Fig. 704.7) that
represent a temporary disruption of formation of the nail plate. The
lines first appear a few weeks after the event that caused the disruption
in nail growth. A single transverse ridge appears at the proximal nail
fold in most 4-­to 6-­week-­old infants and works its way distally as the
nail grows; this line may reflect metabolic changes after delivery. At

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 704 u Disorders of the Nails

Fig. 704.6 Distal onycholysis secondary to oral tetracycline usage
and ultraviolet light exposure.

4145

Fig. 704.7 Beau lines. Longitudinal disruption of the nail.

Table 704.5  Underlying Causes of Onycholysis
CHEMICAL IRRITANTS
Cosmetics, especially with formaldehyde
Depilatories
Detergents
Nail polish removers
Organic solvents
INFLAMMATORY DISORDERS
Alopecia areata
Atopic dermatitis
Contact dermatitis
Lichen planus
Psoriasis
INFECTIOUS DISORDERS
Bacterial paronychia
Candidiasis
Herpes simplex (whitlow)
Onychomycosis
Verrucae
MEDICATIONS
Anticonvulsants (valproic acid)
Chemotherapeutic agents (especially taxanes)
Griseofulvin
Retinoids (isotretinoin)
Tetracyclines (photoonycholysis)
Thiazides (photoonycholysis)
SYSTEMIC DISORDERS
Iron-­deficiency anemia
Rheumatic disease
Thyroid disease (hyperthyroidism or hypothyroidism)
Kawasaki disease
MIS-C

Fig. 704.8 Onychomadesis. Proximal nail bed separation.
leukonychia, longitudinal ridging, thinning of the entire nail plate, and
pterygium formation, which is abnormal adherence of the cuticle to the
nail plate or, if the plate is destroyed focally, to the nail bed. Postinfectious reactive arthritis syndromes may include painless erythematous
induration of the base of the nail fold; subungual parakeratotic scaling;
and thickening, opacification, or ridging of the nail plate. Dermatitis that
involves the nail folds may produce dystrophy, roughening, and coarse
pitting of the nails. Nail changes are more common in atopic dermatitis
than in other forms of dermatitis that affect the hands. Darier disease is
characterized by red or white streaks that extend longitudinally and cross
the lunula. Where the streak meets the distal end of the nail, a V-­shaped
notch may be present. Total leukonychia may also occur. Transverse rows
of fine pits are characteristic of alopecia areata. In severe cases, the entire
nail surface may be rough. Patients with acrodermatitis enteropathica
may have transverse grooves (Beau lines) and nail dystrophy as a result
of periungual dermatitis.

TRACHYONYCHIA (20-­NAIL DYSTROPHY)

other ages, Beau lines are usually indicative of periodic trauma or episodic shutdown of the nail matrix secondary to a systemic disease such
as hand-­foot-­and-­mouth disease, measles, mumps, pneumonia, or zinc
deficiency. Onychomadesis is an exaggeration of Beau lines leading to
proximal separation of the nail bed (Fig. 704.8).

Trachyonychia is characterized by longitudinal ridging, pitting, fragility,
thinning, distal notching, and opalescent discoloration of all the nails (Fig.
704.9). Patients can have no associated skin or systemic diseases and no
other ectodermal defects. Its occasional association with alopecia areata has
led some authorities to suggest that trachyonychia may reflect an abnormal
immunologic response to the nail matrix, whereas histopathologic studies
have suggested that it may be a manifestation of lichen planus, psoriasis,
or spongiotic (eczematous) inflammation of the nail matrix. The disorder must be differentiated from fungal infections, psoriasis, nail changes
of alopecia areata, and nail dystrophy secondary to eczema. Eczema and
fungal infections rarely produce changes in all the nails simultaneously.
The disorder is self-­limited, can be treated with potent topical steroids or
topical retinoids, and eventually remits by adulthood.

NAIL CHANGES ASSOCIATED WITH SKIN DISEASE

NAIL INFECTION

TRAUMA
Compulsive subungual cleaning
Sportsman toe
MIS-C, multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children.
From Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 6th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022, Box 7.9, p. 201.

Nail changes may be particularly associated with various other diseases.
Nail changes of psoriasis most characteristically include pitting, onycholysis, yellow-­brown discoloration, and thickening. Nail changes in lichen
planus include violaceous papules in the proximal nail fold and nail bed,

Fungal infection (onychomycosis) of the nails has been classified into four
types. White superficial onychomycosis manifests as diffuse or speckled
white discoloration of the surface of the toenails. It is caused primarily by
Trichophyton mentagrophytes, which invades the nail plate. The organism

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4146 Part XXIX u The Skin
Table 704.6  Differential Diagnosis of Onychomycosis

Fig. 704.9 Dystrophy of all nails in trachyonychia.

Fig. 704.10 Discoloration, hyperkeratosis, and crumbling of nail secondary to dermatophyte infection.

may be scraped off the nail plate with a blade, but treatment is best accomplished by the addition of a topical azole antifungal agent. Distal subungual onychomycosis, the most common type, involves foci of onycholysis
under the distal nail plate or along the lateral nail groove, followed by
development of hyperkeratosis and yellow-­brown discoloration. The process extends proximally, resulting in nail plate thickening, crumbling (Fig.
704.10), and separation from the nail bed. Trichophyton rubrum and, occasionally, T. mentagrophytes infect the toenails; fingernail disease is almost
exclusively caused by T. rubrum, which may be associated with superficial
scaling of the plantar surface of the feet and often of one hand. The dermatophytes are found most readily at the most proximal area of the nail bed
or adjacent ventral portion of the involved nail plates. Topical therapies
such as ciclopirox 8% lacquer, amorolfine 5% lacquer, or bifonazole-­urea
1%/40% ointment may be effective for solitary nail infection. Topical efinaconazole 10% and topical tavaborole 5% solution may also be effective;
laser treatment is an expensive but safe alternative to oral therapy. Because
of its long half-­life in the nail, oral itraconazole may be effective when
given as pulse therapy (1 week of each month for 3-­4 months). Dosage
is weight-­dependent. Oral daily terbinafine is also quite effective. Either
agent is superior to griseofulvin, fluconazole, or ketoconazole. The risks,
the most concerning of which is hepatic toxicity, and costs of oral therapy
are minimized with the use of pulsed dosing.
Proximal white subungual onychomycosis occurs when the organism,
generally T. rubrum, enters the nail through the proximal nail fold, producing yellow-­white discoloration of portions of the undersurface of the
nail plate. The surface of the nail is unaffected. This occurs almost exclusively in immunocompromised patients and is a well-­recognized manifestation of AIDS. Treatment includes oral terbinafine or itraconazole.
Candidal onychomycosis involves the entire nail plate in patients with
chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis. It is also commonly seen in patients
with AIDS. The organism, generally Candida albicans, enters distally or

Psoriasis
• As in onychomycosis: onycholysis, subungual hyperkeratosis,
splinter hemorrhages, leukonychia, dystrophy
• Pitting
• Oil drop sign (a translucent yellow-­red discoloration seen in the
nail bed)
• Other cutaneous features of psoriasis, family history of psoriasis
Lichen planus
• Cutaneous disease at other sites
• Thin nail plate and ridging
• Dorsal pterygium—scarring at proximal aspect of nail
Trauma
• Nail plate can appear abnormal
• Nail bed should be normal
• Distal onycholysis with repeated trauma
• Single nail affected, shape of nail changed, homogenous
alteration of nail color
Eczema
• Irregular buckled nails with ridging
• Cutaneous signs of eczema
Yellow nail syndrome
• Nail plate is discolored green-­yellow
• Nails are hard with elevated longitudinal curvature
• Nails may be shed, painful
• Associations with bronchiectasis, lymphedema, and chronic
sinusitis
Lamellar onychoschizia (lamellar splitting)
• History of repeated soaking in water
• Usually distal portion of nail
• Periungual squamous cell carcinoma/Bowens disease
• Single nail, warty changes of nail fold; ooze from edge of nail
Malignant melanoma
• Black discoloration of nail plate or nail bed
• Pigment can extend onto nail fold
• Can get associated bleeding
Myxoid (mucous) cyst
• Cyst at base of nail, groove in nail extending length of nail
Alopecia areata
• Pits, longitudinal ridging, brittleness
• Hair loss
From Eisman S, Sinclair R. Fungal nail infection: diagnosis and management. BMJ.
2014;348:g1800.

along the lateral nail folds; rapidly involves the entire thickness of the nail
plate; and produces thickening, crumbling, and deformity of the plate.
Topical azole antifungal agents may be sufficient for treatment of candidal onychomycosis in an immunocompetent host, but oral antifungal
agents are necessary for treatment of patients with immune deficiencies.
Table 704.6 outlines the differential diagnosis of onychomycosis.

PARONYCHIAL INFLAMMATION

Paronychial inflammation may be acute or chronic and generally involves
one or two nail folds on the fingers. Acute paronychia manifests as erythema, warmth, edema, and tenderness of the proximal nail fold, most
commonly as a result of pathogenic staphylococci, streptococci, or Candida (Fig. 704.11). Warm soaks and oral agents are generally effective;
incision and drainage may occasionally be necessary. Development of
chronic paronychia follows prolonged immersion in water (Fig. 704.12),
such as occurs in finger or thumb sucking; exposure to irritating solutions; nail fold trauma; or diseases including Raynaud phenomenon, collagen vascular diseases, and diabetes. Swelling of the proximal nail fold
is followed by separation of the nail fold from the underlying nail plate
and suppuration. Foreign material, embedded in the dermis of the nail
fold, becomes a nidus for inflammation and secondary infection with
Candida species and mixed bacterial flora. A combination of attention to
predisposing factors, meticulous drying of the hands, and long-­term topical antifungal agents and potent topical corticosteroids may be required
for successful treatment of chronic paronychia.
Ingrown nail occurs when the lateral edge of the nail, including spicules that have separated from the nail plate, penetrates the soft tissue of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 705 u Disorders of the Mucous Membranes 4147
prominent; and (3) improper cutting of the nail in a curvilinear manner rather than straight across. Management includes proper fitting of
shoes; allowing the nail to grow out beyond the free edge before cutting
it straight across; warm water soaks; oral antibiotics if cellulitis affects
the lateral nail fold; and, in severe, recurrent cases, application of silver nitrate to granulation tissue, nail avulsion, or excision of the lateral
aspect of the nail followed by matricectomy.

PARONYCHIAL TUMORS

Tumors in the paronychial area include pyogenic granulomas, mucous
cysts, subungual exostoses, and junctional nevi. Periungual fibromas
that appear in late childhood should suggest a diagnosis of tuberous
sclerosis.
Fig. 704.11 Acute paronychia secondary to Staphylococcus aureus.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 705

Disorders of the Mucous
Membranes
Leah Lalor

Fig. 704.12 Chronic paronychia with erythema and lateral nail fold
separation.

The mucous membranes may be involved in developmental disorders, genodermatoses, infections, acute and chronic skin diseases, and
benign or malignant tumors. This chapter includes some of the more
common and more distinctive conditions of the mucous membranes,
but is not exhaustive (see also Chapter 695 for erythema multiforme,
Stevens-­Johnson syndrome, and reactive infectious mucocutaneous
eruption [RIME]).

ANGULAR CHEILITIS

Fig. 704.13 Clinical features of an 8-­yr-­old boy upon initial presentation to a dermatology clinic. Findings included yellowish-­brown discoloration, hyperkeratosis, transverse ridging, and lateral deviation of
the bilateral great toenails. (From Pollack K, Zlotoff B, Wilson B. Hyperkeratosis and discoloration of the toenails in an 8-­year-­old. J Pediatr.
2017;189:233.)

the lateral nail fold. Erythema, edema, and pain, most often involving
the lateral great toes, are noted acutely; recurrent episodes may lead
to formation of granulation tissue. Predisposing factors include (1)
congenital malalignment (especially of the great toes) (Fig.704.13); (2)
compression of the side of the toe from poorly fitting shoes, particularly if the great toes are abnormally long and the lateral nail folds are

Angular cheilitis (perlèche) is characterized by inflammation and
fissuring at the corners of the mouth, often with associated erosion,
maceration, and crusting (Fig. 705.1). Chapping or moisture collection
at the angles of the mouth predispose children to developing angular
cheilitis. Children who are chronic lip lickers or who have excessive
salivation or drooling related to neurologic deficits, orthodontic appliances, or mouth breathing are at increased risk. Atopic dermatitis or
contact dermatitis related to toothpaste, chewing gum, mouthwash,
or cosmetics are also common causes. Nutritional deficiencies are a
less frequent etiology. Protection can be provided by frequent application of a bland ointment such as petrolatum. Candidiasis should be
treated with an appropriate antifungal agent, and contact dermatitis
of the perioral skin should be treated with a low-­potency topical corticosteroid ointment preparation and frequent use of petrolatum or a
similar emollient along with avoidance of the offending agent. Correction of the underlying predisposing factors (if possible) will prevent
recurrence.

APHTHOUS STOMATITIS (CANKER SORES)

Aphthous stomatitis consists of solitary or multiple painful ulcerations
occurring on the labial (Fig. 705.2), buccal, lingual, sublingual, palatal,
or gingival mucosa (see Chapter 361). Lesions may manifest initially as
erythematous, indurated papules that erode rapidly to form sharply circumscribed, necrotic ulcers with a gray fibrinous exudate and an erythematous halo. Minor aphthous ulcers are 2-­10 mm in diameter and
heal spontaneously in 7-­10 days. Major aphthous ulcers are >10 mm
in diameter, take from 10 to 30 days to heal, and may heal with scarring. A third type of aphthous ulceration is herpetiform in appearance,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4148 Part XXIX u The Skin

Fig. 705.3 Mucocele on lower lip.

Fig. 705.1 Angular cheilitis.

buccal mucosa. They are a common clinical finding and represent a
normal anatomic variant of sebaceous glands. They can present in
either sex from infancy to adulthood and may become more prominent during puberty due to the influence of androgens. No therapy is
required.

EPSTEIN PEARLS (GINGIVAL CYSTS OF THE
NEWBORN)

Epstein pearls are white, keratin-­containing cysts on the palatal or
alveolar mucosa of approximately 60–85% of neonates. They are
epidermal inclusion cysts that form when the soft and hard palates
fuse and are analogous to facial milia. They cause no symptoms and
are generally shed within a few weeks; no therapy is necessary.

Fig. 705.2 Aphthous ulceration on lower lip.

manifesting as a few to numerous grouped 1-­to 2-­mm lesions, which
tend to coalesce into plaques and heal over 7-­10 days. Approximately
30% of patients with recurrent lesions have a family history of the disorder (see Chapter 361 for the differential diagnosis).
The etiology of aphthous stomatitis is multifactorial; the condition probably represents an oral manifestation of a number of
conditions, including viral infection, inflammatory bowel disease,
cyclic neutropenia, and others. Altered local regulation of the cell-­
mediated immune system, after activation and accumulation of
cytotoxic T cells, may contribute to the localized mucosal breakdown. It is a common misconception that aphthous stomatitis is a
manifestation of herpes simplex virus infection. Recurrent herpes
infections remain localized to the lips and rarely cross the mucocutaneous junction; involvement of the oral mucosa occurs only in
primary infections.
Treatment of aphthous stomatitis is supportive. The majority of
mild cases do not require therapy. Relief of pain, particularly before
eating, may be achieved with the use of a topical anesthetic such as
viscous lidocaine or an oral rinse with a combined solution of elixir
of diphenhydramine, viscous lidocaine, and an oral antacid. Caution
must be taken to avoid hot food and drink after topical anesthetic
use. A superpotent topical corticosteroid in a mucosa-­adhering agent
may help to reduce inflammation, and topical tetracycline mouthwash may also hasten healing. In severe, debilitating cases, systemic
therapy with corticosteroids, colchicine, dapsone, or thalidomide
may be helpful.

FORDYCE SPOTS

Fordyce spots (Fordyce granules) are clusters of asymptomatic, 1-­to
3-­mm, yellow-­white macules and papules on the vermilion lips and

MUCOCELE

Mucus retention cysts are painless, fluctuant, tense, 2-­to 10-­mm, bluish papules on the lips (Fig. 705.3), tongue, palate, or buccal mucosa.
Traumatic severance of the duct of a minor salivary gland leads to
submucosal retention of mucus secretion. Lesions on the floor of the
mouth are known as ranulas when the sublingual or submandibular
salivary gland ducts are involved. Fluctuations in size are typical, and
the lesions may disappear temporarily after traumatic rupture. Recurrence is prevented by surgical excision of the mucus deposit and associated salivary gland(s).

FISSURED TONGUE

Fissured tongue (scrotal tongue, or lingua plicata) is a common
benign developmental anomaly of the tongue. The dorsal tongue has
many folds with deep grooves and a pebbled appearance. Fissured
tongue can be seen in individuals with Melkersson-­Rosenthal syndrome and Down syndrome, and it is often seen in association with
geographic tongue. Food particles and debris may become trapped
in the fissures, resulting in irritation, inflammation, and halitosis.
Careful cleansing with a mouth rinse and soft-­bristled toothbrush is
recommended.

GEOGRAPHIC TONGUE (BENIGN MIGRATORY
GLOSSITIS)

Geographic tongue consists of single or multiple sharply demarcated,
irregular, smooth, red patches surrounded by an elevated yellowish-­
white serpiginous border on the dorsum of the tongue. Onset is rapid,
and the pattern may change over hours to days. The smooth patches
correspond to atrophic filiform papillae, and the elevated margins represent hypertrophic papillae (Fig. 705.4). The etiology of this condition remains unclear, though it is associated with some inflammatory
disorders of the skin like psoriasis. Lesions are typically asymptomatic,
but some patients may experience a burning sensation or sensitivity to spicy, hot, or cold foods. No therapy other than reassurance is
necessary.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 705 u Disorders of the Mucous Membranes 4149

Fig. 705.4 Geographic tongue.

is most prevalent in Africa but also occurs in Asia and Latin America. Sporadic cases associated with immunodeficiency have been
reported in developed countries. It manifests as a painful, red,
indurated papule on the alveolar margin, followed by ulceration
and mutilating gangrenous destruction of tissue in the oronasal
region. The process may also involve the scalp, neck, shoulders,
perineum, and vulva. Noma neonatorum manifests in the first
month of life as gangrenous lesions of the lips, nose, mouth, and
anal regions. Affected infants are usually small for gestational age,
malnourished, premature, and frequently ill (particularly with
Pseudomonas aeruginosa sepsis). Care consists of nutritional support, conservative debridement of necrotic soft tissues, empirical
broad-­spectrum antibiotics such as penicillin and metronidazole,
and, in the case of noma neonatorum, antipseudomonal antibiotics
(see Chapter 62).

PTEN HAMARTOMA SYNDROME (COWDEN
SYNDROME)
BLACK HAIRY TONGUE

Black hairy tongue is a dark coating on the dorsum of the tongue
caused by hyperplasia and elongation of the filiform papillae; overgrowth of chromogenic bacteria and fungi and entrapped pigmented
residues that adsorb to microbial plaque and desquamating keratin
may contribute to the dark coloration. Changes often begin posteriorly and extend anteriorly on the dorsum of the tongue. The
condition is most common in adults but may also manifest during
adolescence. Poor oral hygiene, lack of oral feeding, treatment with
systemic antibiotics such as tetracycline (which promote the growth
of Candida spp.), and smoking are predisposing factors. Improved
oral hygiene and brushing with a soft-­bristled toothbrush may be all
that is necessary for treatment.

ORAL HAIRY LEUKOPLAKIA

Oral hairy leukoplakia occurs in approximately 25% of patients
with AIDS but is rare in the pediatric population. It manifests as
corrugated and shaggy white plaques on the lateral margins of the
tongue, which cannot be removed by rubbing. The lesions occasionally may spread to the ventral tongue surface, floor of the mouth,
tonsillar pillars, and pharynx. The condition is caused by Epstein-­
Barr virus, which is present in the upper layer of the affected epithelium. The plaques have no malignant potential. The disorder occurs
predominantly in HIV-­infected patients but may also be found in
individuals who are immunosuppressed for other reasons, such as
organ transplantation, leukemia, chemotherapy, and long-­term use
of inhaled steroids. The condition is generally asymptomatic and
does not require therapy.

ACUTE NECROTIZING ULCERATIVE GINGIVITIS
(VINCENT STOMATITIS, FUSOSPIROCHETAL
GINGIVITIS, TRENCH MOUTH)

Acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis manifests as painful, punched-­
out ulceration, necrosis, and bleeding of the interdental papillae. A
grayish-­white pseudomembrane may cover the ulcerations. Lesions
may spread to involve the buccal mucosa, lips, tongue, tonsils, and
pharynx and may be associated with dental pain, a bad taste, low-­grade
fever, and lymphadenopathy. It occurs most commonly in the second
or third decade, particularly in the context of poor dental hygiene, poor
nutrition, smoking, and stress.

NOMA

Noma is a severe form of fusospirillary gangrenous stomatitis that
occurs primarily in malnourished, impoverished children 2-­5 years
of age who have had a preceding illness such as measles, scarlet
fever, tuberculosis, malignancy, or immunodeficiency. The disease

PTEN hamartoma syndrome is an autosomal dominant condition
caused by loss-­of-­function pathogenic variants in the PTEN tumor-­
suppressor gene. Mucocutaneous lesions typically appear in the
second or third decade. Oral papillomas are 1-­to 3-­mm, smooth,
pink or whitish papules on the palatal, gingival, buccal, and labial
mucosae and may coalesce into a cobblestone appearance. Numerous flesh-­colored papules also develop on the face, particularly
around the mouth, nose, and ears. These papules are most commonly trichilemmomas, a benign neoplasm of the hair follicle.
Associated findings may include acral keratoses, thyroid adenoma,
goiter, gastrointestinal polyps, fibrocystic breast nodules, and carcinoma of the breast or thyroid.

Herpes Simplex Virus Infection

Herpes simplex virus (HSV) types 1 and 2 commonly cause primary
and recurrent infection, resulting in grouped vesicles on oral, nasal,
and genital mucosae.

Erythema Multiforme

Erythema multiforme (EM) is an uncommon disorder of mucocutaneous blistering typically on the labial mucosa and acral skin as a reaction
to HSV infection. Please see Chapter 695.1 for more detail.

Stevens-­Johnson Syndrome

Stevens-­Johnson syndrome (SJS) is an uncommon disorder of skin
sloughing that occurs primarily after exposure to a medication. It can
have extensive mucosal involvement in addition to skin. Please see
Chapter 695.3 for more detail.

Reactive Infectious Mucocutaneous Eruption
(Formerly Mycoplasma-­Induced Rash and Mucositis)

This condition is on the spectrum of SJS and toxic epidermal necrolysis
(TEN), but tends to be triggered by various infections and has more
mucosal involvement than cutaneous. Please see Chapter 695.2 for
more detail.

Lichen Sclerosus

Lichen sclerosus is a rare disorder of genital mucosa typically seen
in young girls and elderly women. It manifests as pink and white
atrophic genital mucosa that can be associated with pain, dysuria, constipation, and bleeding. Please see Chapter 586 for more
details.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4150 Part XXIX u The Skin

Chapter 706

Cutaneous Bacterial
Infections
706.1 Impetigo
Stephen R. Humphrey

ETIOLOGY/PATHOGENESIS

Impetigo is the most common skin infection in children throughout
the world. Invasive Staphylococcus aureus has a global incidence of
approximately 20-­50 cases/100,000 population per year. There are two
classic forms of impetigo: nonbullous and bullous.
S. aureus is the predominant organism of nonbullous impetigo
in the United States (see Chapter 227); group A β-­hemolytic streptococci (GABHS) are implicated in the development of some lesions (see
Chapter 229). The staphylococcal types that cause nonbullous impetigo
are variable but are not generally from phage group 2, the group that is
associated with scalded skin and toxic shock syndromes. Staphylococci
generally spread from the nose to normal skin and then infect the skin.
In contrast, the skin becomes colonized with GABHS an average of
10 days before development of impetigo. The skin serves as the source
for acquisition of GABHS and is the probable primary source for the
spread of impetigo. Lesions of nonbullous impetigo that grow staphylococci in culture cannot be distinguished clinically from those that
grow pure cultures of GABHS.
Bullous impetigo is always caused by S. aureus strains that produce
exfoliative toxins. The staphylococcal exfoliative toxins (ETA, ETB,
ETD) blister the superficial epidermis by hydrolyzing human desmoglein 1, resulting in a subcorneal vesicle. This is also the target antigen
of the autoantibodies in pemphigus foliaceus.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Nonbullous Impetigo

Nonbullous impetigo accounts for more than 70% of cases. Lesions
typically begin on the skin of the face or on extremities that have been
traumatized. The most common lesions that precede nonbullous impetigo are insect bites, abrasions, lacerations, chickenpox, scabies pediculosis, and burns. A tiny vesicle or pustule forms initially and rapidly
develops into a honey-­colored crusted plaque that is generally <2 cm
in diameter (Fig. 706.1). The infection may be spread to other parts of
the body by the fingers, clothing, and towels. Lesions are associated
with little to no pain or surrounding erythema, and constitutional
symptoms are generally absent. Pruritus occurs occasionally, regional

adenopathy is found in up to 90% of cases, and leukocytosis is present
in approximately 50%.

Bullous Impetigo

Bullous impetigo is mainly an infection of infants and young children.
Flaccid, transparent bullae develop most commonly on skin of the
face, buttocks, trunk, perineum, and extremities. Neonatal bullous
impetigo can begin in the diaper area. Rupture of a bulla occurs easily,
leaving a narrow rim of scale at the edge of a shallow, moist erosion.
Surrounding erythema and regional adenopathy are generally absent.
Unlike those of nonbullous impetigo, lesions of bullous impetigo are a
manifestation of localized staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome and
develop on intact skin.

Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis of nonbullous impetigo includes viruses
(herpes simplex, varicella-­
zoster), fungi (tinea corporis, kerion),
arthropod bites, and parasitic infestations (scabies, pediculosis capitis),
all of which may become impetiginized.
The differential diagnosis of bullous impetigo in neonates includes
epidermolysis bullosa, bullous mastocytosis, herpetic infection, and
early staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome. In older children, allergic
contact dermatitis, burns, erythema multiforme, linear immunoglobulin A dermatosis, pemphigus, and bullous pemphigoid must be considered, particularly if the lesions do not respond to therapy.

COMPLICATIONS

Potential but very rare complications of either nonbullous or bullous
impetigo include bacteremia with subsequent osteomyelitis, septic
arthritis, pneumonia, and septicemia. Positive blood culture results are
very rare in otherwise healthy children with localized lesions. Cellulitis
has been reported in up to 10% of patients with nonbullous impetigo
and rarely follows the bullous form. Lymphangitis, suppurative lymphadenitis, guttate psoriasis, and scarlet fever occasionally follow streptococcal disease. There is no correlation between the number of lesions
and clinical involvement of the lymphatics or development of cellulitis
in association with streptococcal impetigo.
Infection with nephritogenic strains of GABHS may result in acute
poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis (see Chapter 559.4). The clinical character of impetigo lesions does not predict the development of
poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis. Children 3-­7 years of age are
most commonly affected. The latent period from onset of impetigo to
development of poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis averages 18-­21
days, which is longer than the 10-­day latency period after pharyngitis.
Poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis occurs epidemically after either
pharyngeal or skin infection. Impetigo-­associated epidemics have been
caused by M groups 2, 49, 53, 55, 56, 57, and 60. Strains of GABHS that
are associated with endemic impetigo in the United States have little or
no nephritogenic potential. Acute rheumatic fever does not occur as a
result of impetigo.

TREATMENT

Fig. 706.1 Multiple crusted and oozing lesions of impetigo.

The decision on how to treat impetigo depends on the number of
lesions and their locations. Topical therapy with mupirocin 2% and
retapamulin 1% 2-­3 times a day for 10-­14 days is acceptable for localized disease caused by S. aureus, though there are resistant strains to
these topical antibiotics.
Systemic therapy with oral antibiotics should be prescribed for
patients with streptococcal or widespread involvement of staphylococcal
infections; when lesions are near the mouth, where topical medication
may be licked off; or in cases with evidence of deep involvement, including cellulitis, furunculosis, abscess formation, or suppurative lymphadenitis. Cephalexin 25-­50 mg/kg/day in three to four divided doses
for 7 days is an excellent choice for initial therapy. A culture should be
performed, as the emergence of methicillin-­resistant S. aureus (MRSA)
typically requires a different antibiotic choice based on antibiotic susceptibility patterns. If MRSA is suspected, clindamycin, doxycycline, or
sulfamethoxazole-­trimethoprim is indicated. No evidence suggests that
a 10-­day course of therapy is superior to a 7-­day course; twice-­daily

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 706 u Cutaneous Bacterial Infections

4151

sulfamethoxazole trimethoprim for 3 days has been comparable to once
daily for 5 days. Benzathine benzylpenicillin IM has been used when
compliance with multiple-­dose and -­day oral antibiotics may be poor.

SETTING OR EXPOSURE

CAUSES OF CELLULITIS

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Cat or dog bites

Pasteurella species, Capnocytophaga
canimorsus

Penetrating trauma

Staphylococcus aureus

Freshwater immersion

Aeromonas hydrophila

Saltwater immersion

Vibrio species

Freshwater, saltwater fish

Streptococcus iniae

Swine, poultry, fish

Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae

Periorbital or facial cellulitis

Haemophilus influenzae,
Streptococcus pneumoniae

Neutropenia

Pseudomonas aeruginosa, other
gram-­negative bacilli

Human immunodeficiency
virus infection

Helicobacter cinaedi

Acute varicella

Streptococcus pyogenes

Immunosuppression

Cryptococcus neoformans

706.2 Subcutaneous Tissue Infections
Stephen R. Humphrey
The principal determinations for soft tissue infection are whether it
is nonnecrotizing or necrotizing and purulent or nonpurulent. Nonnecrotizing, nonpurulent lesions respond to antibiotic therapy alone,
whereas necrotizing or purulent (abscess) lesions require prompt surgical removal of all devitalized tissue in addition to antimicrobial therapy. Necrotizing soft tissue infections are life-­threatening conditions
that are characterized by rapidly advancing local tissue destruction and
systemic toxicity, including shock. Tissue necrosis distinguishes soft
tissue infections from cellulitis. In cellulitis, an inflammatory infectious process involves subcutaneous tissue but does not destroy it. Necrotizing soft tissue infections may initially manifest with a paucity of
early cutaneous signs relative to the rapidity and degree of destruction
of the subcutaneous tissues.

CELLULITIS
Etiology

Cellulitis is characterized by infection and inflammation of loose connective tissue, with limited involvement of the dermis and relative
sparing of the epidermis. A break in the skin from previous trauma,
insect bite, surgery, or an underlying skin lesion predisposes to cellulitis. Cellulitis is also more common in individuals with lymphatic stasis,
diabetes mellitus, or immunosuppression.
S. aureus and Streptococcus pyogenes (group A streptococcus) are the
most common etiologic agents. In patients who are immunocompromised or have diabetes mellitus, other bacterial or fungal agents may be
involved, notably Pseudomonas aeruginosa; Aeromonas hydrophila and,
occasionally, other Enterobacteriaceae; Legionella spp.; the Mucorales,
particularly Rhizopus spp., Mucor spp., and Absidia spp.; and Cryptococcus neoformans. Children with relapsed nephrotic syndrome may
experience cellulitis caused by Escherichia coli. In children 3 months
to 5 years of age, Haemophilus influenzae type b was once an important cause of facial cellulitis, but its incidence has declined significantly
since the institution of immunization against this organism.
Environmental risk factors include exposure to fish, shellfish, and
meats (Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae); salt water, or brackish inland
waterways (Vibrio vulnificus); penetrating trauma (mixed pathogens
including Clostridium perfringens); and human or animal bites (see
Chapter 765) (Table 706.1).

Clinical Manifestations

Cellulitis manifests clinically as a localized area of edema, warmth,
erythema, and tenderness. The lateral margins tend to be indistinct
because the process is deep in the skin, primarily involving the subcutaneous tissues in addition to the dermis. Application of pressure may
produce pitting. Although distinction cannot be made with certainty
in any particular patient, cellulitis due to S. aureus tends to be more
localized and may suppurate, whereas infections caused by S. pyogenes
(group A streptococci) tend to spread more rapidly and may be associated with lymphangitis. Regional adenopathy and constitutional signs
and symptoms such as fever, chills, and malaise are common. Complications of cellulitis are uncommon but include subcutaneous abscess,
bacteremia, osteomyelitis, septic arthritis, thrombophlebitis, endocarditis, and necrotizing fasciitis. Lymphangitis or glomerulonephritis can
also follow infection with S. pyogenes.

Diagnosis

Cellulitis in a neonate should prompt assessment for invasive bacterial infection, including blood culture; lumbar puncture is also usually

Table 706.1  Special Considerations for Causes of Cellulitis

From Long SS, Prober CG, Fischer M. Principles and Practice of Pediatric Infectious
Diseases, 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018: Table 68.3, p. 444.

performed, though its necessity for mild cases of cellulitis is controversial in this age-­group. In older children, cultures of blood or cutaneous
aspirates, biopsies, or swabs are not routinely recommended. However,
blood cultures should be considered if the patient is younger than 1 year
of age, if signs of systemic toxicity are present, if an adequate examination cannot be carried out, or if an immunocompromising condition
(e.g., malignancy, neutropenia, or neutrophil functional defects) is
present. Aspirates from the site of inflammation, skin biopsy, and blood
cultures allow identification of the causal organism in approximately
25% of cases of cellulitis. Yield of the causative organism is approximately 30% when the site of origin of the cellulitis is apparent, such
as an abrasion or ulcer. An aspirate taken from the point of maximum
inflammation yields the causal organism more often than a leading-­
edge aspirate. Lack of success in isolating an organism stems primarily
from the low number of organisms present within the lesion. Ultrasonography can be performed if an associated subcutaneous abscess
is suspected and may be helpful in cases where there is uncertainty if
there a drainable fluid collection is present.
The differential diagnosis includes an exuberant immune-­allergic
reaction to insect bites, particularly mosquito bites (Skeeter syndromes) (see Chapter 187). Skeeter syndrome is characterized by
swelling disproportionate to erythema; there is pruritus but usually no
tenderness. In addition, cold panniculitis may appear as an erythematous, but usually nontender, swelling after exposure to cold, such as
sledding or eating a cold Popsicle (see Chapter 701.1).

Treatment

Empirical antibiotic therapy for cellulitis and the initial route of administration should be guided by the age and immune status of the patient,
history of the illness, and location and severity of the cellulitis.
Neonates should receive an intravenous antibiotic with a β-­
lactamase–stable antistaphylococcal antibiotic such as nafcillin,
cefazolin, or vancomycin, and an aminoglycoside such as gentamicin
or a third-­generation cephalosporin such as cefotaxime.
In infants and children older than 2 months with mild to moderate infections, particularly if fever, lymphadenopathy, and other constitutional signs are absent, treatment of cellulitis may be initiated
orally on an outpatient basis with a penicillinase-­resistant penicillin
such as dicloxacillin or a first-­generation cephalosporin such as cephalexin or, if MRSA is suspected, with clindamycin. Some recommend
trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole, although it does not provide ideal

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4152 Part XXIX u The Skin
coverage against S. pyogenes, a potential cause of cellulitis without
abscess.
Intravenous antibiotics may be necessary if improvement is not
noted or the disease progresses significantly in the first 24-­48 hours
of therapy. Infants and children older than 2 months with signs of systemic infection, including fever, lymphadenopathy, or constitutional
signs, also require hospitalization and treatment with intravenous antibiotics effective against S. pyogenes and S. aureus, such as clindamycin
or a first-­generation cephalosporin (cefazolin). If the child is severely
ill or toxic appearing, consideration should be given to the addition of
clindamycin or vancomycin if these antibiotics were not started initially. Other agents for complicated skin and skin structure infections
caused by MRSA or S. pyogenes have been approved by the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) in adults, including dalbavancin (IV
given once weekly), ceftaroline (IV), telavancin (IV), linezolid (oral or
IV), tedizolid (oral or IV), and oritavancin (IV). Dalbavancin also provides activity against vancomycin-­resistant enterococci.
In unimmunized patients, antibiotic treatment may include a
third-­generation cephalosporin (cefepime, ceftriaxone, or, if available,
cefotaxime) or a β-­lactam/β-­lactamase inhibitor combination (e.g.,
ampicillin-­sulbactam), which provides coverage for H. influenzae type
b and Streptococcus pneumoniae.
Once the erythema, warmth, edema, and fever have decreased significantly, a 5-­to 7-­day total course of treatment may be completed
on an outpatient basis, though treatment should be extended if the
infection has not substantially improved with this period. Elevation of
an affected limb, particularly early in the course of therapy, may help
reduce swelling and pain. If present, a subcutaneous abscess should be
drained.

NECROTIZING FASCIITIS
Etiology

Necrotizing fasciitis is a subcutaneous tissue infection that involves the
deep layer of superficial fascia but may spare adjacent epidermis, deep
fascia, and muscle.
Relatively few organisms possess sufficient virulence to cause necrotizing fasciitis when acting alone. Most (55–75%) cases of necrotizing
fasciitis are polymicrobial (synergistic or type 1 necrotizing fasciitis),
with an average of four different organisms isolated. The organisms
most commonly isolated in polymicrobial necrotizing fasciitis are S.
aureus, streptococcal species, Klebsiella species, E. coli, and anaerobic
bacteria.
The rest of the cases (type 2) and the most fulminant infections,
associated with toxic shock syndrome and a high case-­fatality rate, are
usually caused by S. pyogenes (group A streptococcus) (see Chapter
229). Streptococcal necrotizing fasciitis may occur in the absence of
toxic shock-­like syndrome and is potentially fatal and associated with
substantial morbidity. Necrotizing fasciitis can occasionally be caused
by S. aureus; C. perfringens; Clostridium septicum; P. aeruginosa; Vibrio
spp., particularly V. vulnificus; and fungi of the order Mucorales, particularly Rhizopus spp., Mucor spp., and Absidia spp. Necrotizing fasciitis has also been reported on rare occasions to result from nongroup
A streptococci such as group B, C, F, or G streptococci; S. pneumoniae;
or H. influenzae type b.
Infections caused by any organism or combination of organisms
cannot be distinguished clinically from one another, although development of crepitus signals the presence of gas-­forming organisms: Clostridium spp. or gram-­negative bacilli such as E. coli, Klebsiella, Proteus,
or Aeromonas.

Clinical Manifestations

Necrotizing fasciitis may occur anywhere on the body but most often on
the extremities or areas of trauma. The incidence of necrotizing fasciitis
is highest in hosts with systemic or local tissue immunocompromise,
such as those with diabetes mellitus, neoplasia, or peripheral vascular
disease, and those who have recently undergone surgery, who use IV
drugs, or who are undergoing immunosuppressive treatment, particularly with corticosteroids. The infection can also occur in healthy individuals after minor puncture wounds, abrasions, or lacerations; blunt

trauma; surgical procedures, particularly of the abdomen, gastrointestinal or genitourinary tracts, or the perineum; or hypodermic needle
injection.
There is a resurgence of fulminant necrotizing soft tissue infections
caused by S. pyogenes, which may occur in previously healthy individuals. Streptococcal necrotizing fasciitis is classically located on an
extremity. There may be a history of recent trauma to or operation in
the area. Necrotizing fasciitis due to S. pyogenes may also occur after
superinfection of varicella lesions. Children with this disease have
tended to display onset, recrudescence, or persistence of high fever
and signs of toxicity after the third or fourth day of varicella. Common
predisposing conditions in neonates are omphalitis and balanitis after
circumcision.
Necrotizing fasciitis begins with acute onset of local, and at times
tense, edema with erythema, tenderness, and heat. Fever is usually
present, and pain, tenderness, and constitutional signs are disproportionate to cutaneous signs, especially with involvement of fascia and
muscle. Tachycardia is out of proportion to the fever. Lymphangitis
and lymphadenitis may or may not be present. The infection advances
along the superficial fascial plane, and initially there may be few cutaneous signs to herald the serious nature and extent of the subcutaneous tissue necrosis that is occurring. Skin changes may appear over
24-­48 hours as nutrient vessels are thrombosed and cutaneous ischemia develops. Early clinical findings include ill-­defined cutaneous
erythema and edema that extends beyond the area of erythema. There
is intense pain on movement. Additional signs include formation of bullae filled initially with straw-­colored and later bluish to hemorrhagic
fluid and darkening of affected tissues from red to purple to blue. Skin
anesthesia and, finally, frank tissue gangrene and slough develop owing
to the ischemia and necrosis. Vesiculation or bulla formation, ecchymoses, crepitus, anesthesia, and necrosis are ominous signs indicative
of advanced disease. Children with varicella lesions may initially show
no cutaneous signs of superinfection with invasive S. pyogenes, such
as erythema or swelling. Significant systemic toxicity may accompany
necrotizing fasciitis, including shock, organ failure, and death. Advance
of the infection in this setting can be rapid, progressing to death within
hours. Patients with involvement of the superficial or deep fascia and
muscle tend to be more acutely and systemically ill and have more rapidly advancing disease than those with infection confined solely to subcutaneous tissues above the fascia. There is often hyponatremia (<135
mg/L), an elevated CRP (>20 mg/L), and extreme leukocytosis. In an
extremity, compartment syndrome may develop, manifesting as tight
edema, pain on motion, and loss of distal sensation and pulses; this is a
surgical emergency (see Chapter 80).

Diagnosis

Definitive diagnosis of necrotizing fasciitis is made by surgical exploration, which should be undertaken as soon as the diagnosis is suspected.
Necrotic fascia and subcutaneous tissue are gray and offer little resistance to blunt probing. Although MRI aids in delineating the extent
and tissue planes of involvement, these procedures should not delay
surgical intervention. Frozen-­
section incisional biopsy specimens
obtained early in the course of the infection can aid management by
decreasing the time to diagnosis and helping to establish the margins
of involvement. Gram staining of tissue can be particularly useful if
chains of gram-­positive cocci, indicative of infection with S. pyogenes,
are seen.

Treatment

Early supportive care, surgical debridement, and parenteral antibiotic
administration are mandatory for necrotizing fasciitis. All devitalized
tissue should be removed to freely bleeding edges, and repeat exploration is generally indicated within 24-­36 hours to confirm that no
necrotic tissue remains. This procedure may need to be repeated on
several occasions until devitalized tissue has ceased to form. Meticulous daily wound care is also paramount.
Parenteral antibiotic therapy should be initiated as soon as possible
with broad-­spectrum agents against all potential pathogens. Initial
empirical therapy should be instituted with vancomycin, linezolid,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 706 u Cutaneous Bacterial Infections
or daptomycin to cover gram-­positive organisms and piperacillin-­
tazobactam to cover gram-­negative organisms. An alternative is to
add ceftriaxone with metronidazole to cover mixed aerobic-­anaerobic
organisms. Definitive therapy should then be based on sensitivity of
isolated organisms. Penicillin with clindamycin is indicated for necrotizing fasciitis caused by either group A streptococcus or Clostridium
spp. For group A streptococcus infections, clindamycin is administered
until the patient is hemodynamically stable and no longer requires surgical debridement. Unlike penicillin, the effectiveness of clindamycin
is not influenced by the infectious burden or bacterial stage of growth;
thus its addition early in the course of infection may lead to more rapid
bacterial killing. Doxycycline plus either ciprofloxacin or ceftazidime
is recommended for V. vulnificus necrotizing fasciitis. Duration of
therapy for necrotizing fasciitis depends on the course of the illness.
Antibiotics are generally continued for at least 5 days after signs and
symptoms of local signs and symptoms have resolved; the typical duration of therapy is 4 weeks. Many centers employ hyperbaric oxygen
therapy, although it should not delay resuscitation of shock or surgical
debridement.

4153

to gentle shear force (Nikolsky sign; Fig. 706.2). As large sheets of epidermis peel away, moist, glistening, denuded areas become apparent,
initially in the flexures and subsequently over much of the body surface (Fig. 706.3). This development may lead to secondary cutaneous
infection, sepsis, and fluid and electrolyte disturbances. The desquamative phase begins after 2-­5 days of cutaneous erythema; healing occurs
without scarring in 10-­14 days. Patients may have pharyngitis, conjunctivitis, and superficial erosions of the lips, but intraoral mucosal
surfaces are spared. Although some patients appear ill, many are reasonably comfortable except for the marked skin tenderness.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

A presumed forme fruste of the disease manifests as diffuse, scarlatiniform, tender erythroderma that is accentuated in the flexural areas
but does not progress to blister formation. In patients with this form,
Nikolsky sign may be absent. Although the exanthem is similar to that
of streptococcal scarlet fever, strawberry tongue and palatal petechiae
are absent. Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome may be mistaken
for a number of other blistering and exfoliating disorders, including

Prognosis

The combined case-­fatality rate among children and adults with necrotizing fasciitis and syndrome due to polymicrobial infection or S.
pyogenes has been as high as 60%. However, death is less common in
children and in cases not complicated by toxic shock–like syndrome.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

706.3 Staphylococcal Scalded Skin
Syndrome (Ritter Disease)
Stephen R. Humphrey

ETIOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS

Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome is caused predominantly by
phage group 2 staphylococci, particularly strains 71 and 55, which
are present at localized sites of infection. Foci of infection include the
nasopharynx and, less commonly, the umbilicus, urinary tract, a superficial abrasion, conjunctivae, and blood. The clinical manifestations of
staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome are mediated by hematogenous
spread in the absence of specific antitoxin antibody of staphylococcal
epidermolytic or exfoliative toxins A or B. The toxins have reproduced
the disease in both animal models and human volunteers. Decreased
renal clearance of the toxins may account for the fact that the disease is
most common in infants and young children, as well as a lack of protection from antitoxin antibodies. Epidermolytic toxin A is heat stable
and is encoded by bacterial chromosomal genes. Epidermolytic toxin
B is heat labile and is encoded on a 37.5-­kb plasmid. The site of blister cleavage is subcorneal. The epidermolytic toxins produce the split
by binding to and cleaving desmoglein 1. Intact bullae are consistently
sterile, unlike those of bullous impetigo, but culture specimens should
be obtained from all suspected sites of localized infection and from the
blood to identify the source for elaboration of the epidermolytic toxins.

Fig. 706.2 Nikolsky sign. With slight thumb pressure the skin wrinkles, slides laterally, and separates from the dermis. (From Habif TP, ed.
Clinical Dermatology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2004.)

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome, which occurs predominantly
in infants and children younger than 5 years of age, includes a range
of disease from localized bullous impetigo to generalized cutaneous
involvement with systemic illness. Onset of the rash may be preceded
by malaise, fever, irritability, and exquisite tenderness of the skin. Scarlatiniform erythema develops diffusely and is accentuated in flexural
and periorificial areas. The conjunctivae are inflamed and occasionally
become purulent. The brightly erythematous skin may rapidly acquire
a wrinkled appearance, and in severe cases, sterile, flaccid blisters and
erosions develop diffusely. Circumoral erythema is characteristically
prominent, as is radial crusting and fissuring around the eyes, mouth,
and nose. At this stage, areas of the epidermis may separate in response

Fig. 706.3 Infant with staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4154 Part XXIX u The Skin
bullous impetigo, epidermolysis bullosa, epidermolytic hyperkeratosis,
pemphigus, drug eruption, erythema multiforme, and drug-­induced
toxic epidermal necrolysis. Toxic epidermal necrolysis can often be
distinguished by a history of drug ingestion, the presence of Nikolsky
sign only at sites of erythema, the absence of perioral crusting, full-­
thickness epidermal necrosis, and a blister cleavage plane in the lowermost epidermis.

HISTOLOGY

A subcorneal, granular layer split can be identified on skin biopsy.
Absence of an inflammatory infiltrate is characteristic. Histology is
identical to that seen in pemphigus foliaceus, bullous impetigo, and
subcorneal pustular dermatosis.

TREATMENT

Systemic therapy, given either orally in cases of localized involvement
or parenterally with a semisynthetic antistaphylococcal penicillin (e.g.,
nafcillin), first-­generation cephalosporin (e.g., cefazolin), clindamycin, or vancomycin if MRSA is considered, should be prescribed.
Clindamycin is typically used in addition to other agents to inhibit
bacterial protein (toxin) synthesis; however, it may not provide any
additional coverage compared with cephalosporins unless there is high
MRSA community prevalence. The skin should be gently moistened
and cleansed. Application of an emollient provides lubrication and
decreases discomfort. Topical antibiotics are unnecessary. In neonates,
or in infants or children with severe infection, hospitalization is mandatory, with attention to fluid and electrolyte management, infection
control measures, pain management, and meticulous wound care with
contact isolation. In particularly severe disease, care in an intensive
care or burn unit is required. Recovery is usually rapid, but complications, such as excessive fluid loss, electrolyte imbalance, faulty temperature regulation, pneumonia, septicemia, and cellulitis, may cause
increased morbidity.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

706.4 Ecthyma
Stephen R. Humphrey
See also Chapters 227, 229, and 251.
Ecthyma resembles nonbullous impetigo in onset and appearance
but gradually evolves into a deeper, more chronic infection. The initial
lesion is a vesicle or vesicular pustule with an erythematous base that
erodes through the epidermis into the dermis to form an ulcer with
elevated margins. The ulcer becomes obscured by a dry, heaped-­up,
tightly adherent crust (Fig. 706.4) that contributes to the persistence of
the infection and scar formation. Lesions may be spread by autoinoculation, may be as large as 4 cm, and occur most frequently on the legs.
Predisposing factors include the presence of pruritic lesions, such as
insect bites, scabies, or pediculosis, that are subject to frequent scratching; poor hygiene; and malnutrition. Complications include lymphangitis, cellulitis, and, rarely, poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis. The
causative agent is usually GABHS; S. aureus is also cultured from most
lesions but is probably a secondary pathogen. Crusts should be softened with warm compresses and removed. Systemic antibiotic therapy,
as for impetigo, is indicated; almost all lesions are responsive to treatment with penicillin.
Ecthyma gangrenosum is a necrotic ulcer covered with a gray-­black
eschar. It is usually a sign of P. aeruginosa infection, most often occurring in immunosuppressed patients. Neutropenia is a risk factor for
ecthyma gangrenosum, including variants such as chronic, cyclic, and
transient neutropenia. Ecthyma gangrenosum occurs in up to 6% of
patients with systemic P. aeruginosa infection but can also occur as
a primary cutaneous infection by inoculation. The lesion begins as a
red or purpuric macule that vesiculates and then ulcerates. There is
a surrounding rim of pink to violaceous skin. The punched-­out ulcer
develops raised edges with a dense, black, depressed, crusted center.

Fig. 706.4 Dry, tightly adherent crust in ecthyma.
Lesions may be single or multiple. Patients with bacteremia commonly
have lesions in apocrine areas. Clinically similar lesions may also
develop as a result of infection with other agents, such as S. aureus,
A. hydrophila, Enterobacter spp., Proteus spp., Burkholderia cepacia,
Serratia marcescens, Aspergillus spp., Mucorales, E. coli, and Candida
spp. There is bacterial invasion of the adventitia and media of dermal
veins but not arteries. The intima and lumina are spared. Blood and
skin biopsy specimens for culture should be obtained, and empirical
broad-­spectrum, systemic therapy that includes coverage for P. aeruginosa (e.g., antipseudomonal penicillin or cephalosporin and an aminoglycoside) should be initiated as soon as possible.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

706.5 Other Cutaneous Bacterial Infections
Stephen R. Humphrey

BLASTOMYCOSIS-­LIKE PYODERMA (PYODERMA
VEGETANS)

Blastomycosis-­like pyoderma is an exuberant cutaneous reaction to
bacterial infection that occurs primarily in children who are malnourished and immunosuppressed. The organisms most commonly isolated
from lesions are S. aureus and group A streptococcus, but several other
organisms have been associated with these lesions, including P. aeruginosa, Proteus mirabilis, diphtheroids, Bacillus spp., and C. perfringens.
Crusted, hyperplastic plaques on the extremities are characteristic,
sometimes forming from the coalescence of many pinpoint, purulent,
crusted abscesses (Fig. 706.5). Ulceration and sinus tract formation
may develop, and additional lesions may appear at sites distant from
the site of inoculation. Regional lymphadenopathy is common, but
fever is not. Histopathologic examination reveals pseudoepitheliomatous hyperplasia and microabscesses composed of neutrophils and/or
eosinophils. Giant cells are usually lacking. The differential diagnosis
includes deep fungal infection, particularly blastomycosis (Fig. 706.6)
and tuberculous and atypical mycobacterial infection. Underlying
immunodeficiency should be ruled out, and the selection of antibiotics should be guided by susceptibility testing because the response to
antibiotics is often poor.

BLISTERING DISTAL DACTYLITIS

Blistering distal dactylitis is a superficial blistering infection of the
volar fat pad on the distal portion of the finger or thumb that typically
affects infants and young children (Fig. 706.7). More than one finger
may be involved, as may the volar surfaces of the proximal phalanges,
palms, and toes. Blisters are filled with a watery purulent fluid; polymorphonuclear leukocytes and gram-­positive cocci are identified on
Gram stain. Patients commonly have no preceding history of trauma,
and systemic symptoms are generally absent. Poststreptococcal

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 706 u Cutaneous Bacterial Infections

4155

Fig. 706.5 Large vegetating lesion of pyoderma vegetans.

Fig. 706.8 Perianal streptococcal dermatitis. Bright red erythema

with a moist, tender surface. (From Paller AS, Mancini AJ, eds. Hurwitz
Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2006,
Fig. 17.38.)

of an antibiotic effective against group A streptococcus and S. aureus
(e.g., amoxicillin-­clavulanate, clindamycin, cephalexin); patients may
require initial IV antibiotic therapy.

PERIANAL INFECTIOUS DERMATITIS

Fig. 706.6 Cutaneous blastomycosis. Verrucous, crusted, erythematous plaque on the chin in a 15-­yr-­old boy with respiratory symptoms
and bone pain. (From Paller AS, Mancini AJ, eds. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2006, Fig. 14.13.)

Fig. 706.7 Blistering dactylitis. Edema and a tense bulla on the thumb
of this 7-­yr-­old girl. Culture of the blister fluid yielded Staphylococcus
aureus rather than the more commonly seen group A β-­hemolytic streptococcus. (From Paller AS, Mancini AJ, eds. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric
Dermatology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2006, Fig. 14.14.)

glomerulonephritis has not occurred after blistering distal dactylitis.
The infection is caused most commonly by group A streptococcus but
has also occurred as a result of infection with S. aureus. If left untreated,
blisters may continue to enlarge and extend to the paronychial area.
The infection responds to incision and drainage and a 10-­day course

Perianal infectious dermatitis presents most commonly in boys (70%
of cases) between the ages of 6 months and 10 years as perianal dermatitis (90% of cases) and pruritus (80% of cases; Fig. 706.8). The
incidence of perianal infectious dermatitis is not known precisely but
ranges from 1 in 2,000 to 1 in 218 patient visits. When GABHS is suspected, it is often referred to as perianal streptococcal dermatitis. The
rash is superficial, erythematous, well marginated, nonindurated, and
confluent from the anus outward. Acutely (<6 weeks), the rash tends to
be bright red, moist, and tender to touch. At this stage, a white pseudomembrane may be present. As the rash becomes more chronic, the
perianal eruption may consist of painful fissures, a dried mucoid discharge, or psoriasiform plaques with yellow peripheral crust. In girls,
the perianal rash may be associated with vulvovaginitis. In boys, the
penis may be involved. Approximately 50% of patients have rectal pain,
most commonly described as burning inside the anus during defecation, and 33% have blood-­streaked stools. Fecal retention is a frequent
behavioral response to the infection. Patients also have presented with
guttate psoriasis. Although local induration or edema may occur, constitutional symptoms, such as fever, headache, and malaise, are absent,
suggesting that subcutaneous involvement, as in cellulitis, is absent.
Familial spread of perianal infectious dermatitis is common, particularly when family members bathe together or use the same water.
Perianal infectious dermatitis is usually caused by GABHS, but it
may also be caused by S. aureus. The index case and family members
should undergo culture; follow-­up cultures to document bacteriologic
cure after a course of treatment are recommended.
The differential diagnosis of perianal infectious dermatitis includes
psoriasis, seborrheic dermatitis, candidiasis, pinworm infestation, sexual abuse, and inflammatory bowel disease.
For GABHS perianal infectious dermatitis, treatment with a 7-­day
course of cefuroxime (20 mg/kg/day in two divided doses) is superior
to treatment with penicillin. Concomitant topical mupirocin ointment
two to three times a day also may be used. If S. aureus is cultured, treatment should be based on sensitivities.

ERYSIPELAS

See Chapter 229.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4156 Part XXIX u The Skin
weeks, often leaving postinflammatory hyperpigmentation. Consideration should be given to the use of systemic antibiotics (ciprofloxacin)
in adolescent patients with constitutional symptoms. Immunocompromised children are susceptible to complications of Pseudomonas folliculitis (cellulitis) and should avoid hot tubs.

ABSCESSES AND FURUNCLES
Etiology

Fig. 706.9 Folliculitis. Multiple follicular pustules.

FOLLICULITIS

Folliculitis, or superficial infection of the hair follicle, is most often
caused by S. aureus. The lesions are typically small, discrete, dome-­
shaped pustules with an erythematous base, located at the ostium
of the pilosebaceous canals (Fig. 706.9). Hair growth is unimpaired,
and the lesions heal without scarring. Favored sites include the scalp,
buttocks, and extremities. Poor hygiene, maceration, drainage from
wounds and abscesses, and shaving of the legs can be provocative factors. Folliculitis can also occur as a result of tar therapy or occlusive
wraps. The moist environment encourages bacterial proliferation. In
HIV-­infected patients, S. aureus may produce confluent erythematous
patches with satellite pustules in intertriginous areas and violaceous
plaques composed of superficial follicular pustules in the scalp, axillae, or groin. The differential diagnosis includes Candida, which may
cause satellite follicular papules and pustules surrounding erythematous patches of intertrigo (particularly in groin/buttocks), and Malassezia furfur, which produces 2-­to 3-­mm, pruritic, erythematous,
perifollicular papules and pustules on the back, chest, and extremities,
particularly in patients who have diabetes mellitus or are taking corticosteroids or antibiotics. Diagnosis is made by examining potassium
hydroxide–treated scrapings from lesions. Detection of Malassezia
may require a skin biopsy, demonstrating clusters of yeast and short,
branching hyphae (“macaroni and meatballs”) in widened follicular
ostia mixed with keratinous debris.
Topical antibiotic therapy (e.g., clindamycin 1% lotion or solution
twice a day) is usually all that is needed for mild cases, but more severe
cases may require the use of a systemic antibiotic such as dicloxacillin or cephalexin. Bacterial culture should be performed in treatment-­
resistant cases. In chronic recurrent folliculitis, daily application of
a benzoyl peroxide 5% gel or wash may facilitate resolution. Dilute
bleach baths may also be effective in reducing recurrence.
Folliculitis barbae (sycosis barbae) is a deeper, more severe recurrent inflammatory form of folliculitis caused by S. aureus that involves
the entire depth of the follicle. Erythematous follicular papules and
pustules develop on the chin, upper lip, and angle of the jaw, primarily
in young Black males. Papules may coalesce into plaques, and healing
may occur with scarring. Affected individuals are frequently found to
be S. aureus carriers. Treatment with warm saline compresses and topical antibiotics, such as mupirocin, generally clear the infection. More
extensive, recalcitrant cases may require therapy with β-­lactamase–
resistant systemic antibiotics for several weeks and elimination of S.
aureus from the sites of carriage.
Pseudomonal folliculitis (hot tub folliculitis) is attributable to P.
aeruginosa, predominantly serotype O-­11. It occurs after exposure to
poorly chlorinated hot tubs/whirlpools and swimming pools and to
a contaminated water slide or loofah sponge. The lesions are pruritic
papules and pustules or deeply erythematous to violaceous nodules
that develop 8-­48 hours after exposure and are most dense in areas
covered by a bathing suit (Fig. 685.10). Patients occasionally experience fever, malaise, and lymphadenopathy. The organism is readily
cultured from pus. The eruption usually resolves spontaneously in 1-­2

The causative agent in furuncles (“boils”) and carbuncles is usually S.
aureus, which penetrates abraded perifollicular skin. Furuncles are
nodules that develop from a single follicle, whereas carbuncles are a
coalescence of multiple follicles and are more extensive. Conditions
predisposing to furuncle formation include obesity, hyperhidrosis,
maceration, friction, and preexisting dermatitis. Furunculosis is also
more common in individuals with low serum iron levels, diabetes, malnutrition, HIV infection, or other immunodeficiency states. Recurrent
furunculosis is frequently associated with carriage of S. aureus in the
nares, axillae, or perineum or close contact with someone such as a
family member who is a carrier. Other bacteria or fungi may occasionally cause furuncles or carbuncles.
Community-­acquired MRSA abscesses can also complicate
folliculitis-­related carbuncles or are acquired from penetrating cutaneous trauma unrelated to folliculitis. Community-­acquired MRSA
infections commonly affect children and young adults, especially athletes, where spread of the infection is enhanced by skin-­to-­skin contact.
Infection can also be spread by crowding conditions, shared personal
hygiene items, and a compromised skin barrier. They may occur in any
location; however, they are most common on the lower abdomen, buttocks, and legs.

Clinical Manifestations

This follicular lesion may originate from a preceding folliculitis or may
arise initially as a deep-­seated, tender, erythematous, perifollicular
nodule. Although lesions are initially indurated, central necrosis and
suppuration follow, leading to rupture and discharge of a central core
of necrotic tissue and destruction of the follicle (Fig. 706.11). Healing
occurs with scar formation. Sites of predilection are the hair-­bearing
areas on the face, neck, axillae, buttocks, and groin. Pain may be intense
if the lesion is situated in an area where the skin is relatively fixed, such
as in the external auditory canal or over the nasal cartilages. Patients
with furuncles usually have no constitutional symptoms; bacteremia
may occasionally ensue. Rarely, lesions on the upper lip or cheek may
lead to cavernous sinus thrombosis. Infection of a group of contiguous
follicles, with multiple drainage points, accompanied by inflammatory
changes in surrounding connective tissue is a carbuncle. Carbuncles
may be accompanied by fever, leukocytosis, and bacteremia. Hidradenitis suppurativa should be considered in individuals who have recurrent abscesses.

Treatment

Treatment for furuncle and carbuncle includes regular bathing with
antimicrobial soaps (chlorhexidine) and wearing of loose-­fitting clothing to minimize predisposing factors for furuncle formation. Frequent
application of a hot, moist compress may facilitate the drainage of
lesions. Large lesions should be drained by a small incision. Carbuncles
and large or numerous furuncles should be treated with systemic antibiotics chosen based on culture and sensitivity testing results.
Abscesses are treated with incision and drainage and oral antibiotics for 7-­10 days. Antibiotics with coverage against MRSA are recommended and commonly include oral clindamycin (10-­30 mg/kg/day
in divided doses) or trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole (8-­10 mg trimethoprim/kg/day in divided doses every 12 hours). Children older than
8 years may receive doxycycline. To reduce colonization and hence
reinfection in children with recurrent infections, mupirocin intranasally (twice daily) and either chlorhexidine (in lieu of soap during
showers) or diluted bleach baths (1 teaspoon per gallon of water or 1/4
cup per 1/4 tub [∼13 gallons] of water) once daily for 5 days in patients
and in family members has been recommended. Recolonization often
occurs, typically within 3 months of the decolonization attempt.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 706 u Cutaneous Bacterial Infections

Fig. 706.10 Papules and pustules in hot tub folliculitis.

4157

Fig. 706.12 Superficial erosions of the horny layer in pitted keratolysis.
within 20 hours of Wood lamp examination may remove the water-­
soluble porphyrins. Staining of skin scrapings with methylene blue or
Gram stain reveals the pleomorphic, filamentous coccobacillary forms.
Effective treatment can be achieved with topical erythromycin,
clindamycin, miconazole, or a 10-­to 14-­day course of oral erythromycin or an oral tetracycline (in those older than 8 years of age).

ERYSIPELOID

Fig. 706.11 Rupture and discharge of pus in a furuncle.

PITTED KERATOLYSIS

Pitted keratolysis occurs most frequently in humid tropical and subtropical climates, particularly in individuals whose feet are moist for
prolonged periods, for example, as a result of hyperhidrosis, prolonged
wearing of boots, or immersion in water. It occurs most commonly in
young males from early adolescence to the late 20s. The lesions consist of 1-­to 7-­mm, irregularly shaped, superficial erosions of the horny
layer on the soles, particularly at weight-­bearing sites (Fig. 706.12).
Brownish discoloration of involved areas may be apparent. A rare
variant manifests as thinned, erythematous to violaceous plaques in
addition to the typical pitted lesions. The condition is frequently malodorous and is painful in approximately 50% of cases. The most likely
etiologic agent is Corynebacterium (Kytococcus) sedentarius. Treatment of hyperhidrosis is mandatory with prescription-­strength aluminum chloride products or 40% formaldehyde in petrolatum ointment.
Avoidance of moisture and maceration produces slow, spontaneous
resolution of the infection. Topical or systemic erythromycin and topical imidazole creams are standard therapy.

ERYTHRASMA

Erythrasma is a benign chronic superficial infection caused by Corynebacterium minutissimum. Predisposing factors include heat, humidity, obesity, skin maceration, diabetes mellitus, and poor hygiene.
Approximately 20% of affected patients have involvement of the toe
webs. Other frequently affected sites are moist, intertriginous areas
such as the groin and axillae. The inframammary and perianal regions
are occasionally involved. Sharply demarcated, irregularly bordered,
slightly scaly, brownish red patches are characteristic of the disease.
Mild pruritus is the only constant symptom. C. minutissimum is a complex of related organisms that produce porphyrins that fluoresce brilliant coral red under ultraviolet light. The diagnosis is readily made,
and erythrasma is differentiated from dermatophyte infection and
from tinea versicolor on Wood lamp examination. However, bathing

A rare cutaneous infection, erysipeloid is caused by inoculation of
E. rhusiopathiae from handling contaminated animals, birds, fish, or
their products. The localized cutaneous form is most common, characterized by well-­demarcated, diamond-­shaped, erythematous to violaceous patches at sites of inoculation. Local symptoms are generally
not severe, constitutional symptoms are rare, and the lesions resolve
spontaneously after weeks but can recur at the same site or develop
elsewhere weeks to months later. The diffuse cutaneous form manifests
as lesions at several areas of the body in addition to the site of inoculation. It is also self-­limited. The systemic form, caused by hematogenous
spread, is accompanied by constitutional symptoms and may include
endocarditis, septic arthritis, cerebral infarct and abscess, meningitis,
and pulmonary effusion. Diagnosis is confirmed by skin biopsy, which
reveals the gram-­positive organisms, and culture. The treatment of
choice for localized cutaneous infection is oral penicillin for 7 days;
ciprofloxacin or a combination of erythromycin and rifampin may be
used for penicillin-­allergic patients. Severe diffuse cutaneous or systemic infection may require parenteral penicillin or ceftriaxone.

TUBERCULOSIS OF THE SKIN

See Chapters 261 and 263.
Cutaneous tuberculosis infection occurs worldwide, particularly in
association with HIV infection, malnutrition, and poor sanitary conditions. Primary cutaneous tuberculosis is rare in the United States.
Cutaneous disease is caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Mycobacterium bovis, and, occasionally, by the bacillus Calmette-­Guérin
(BCG), an attenuated vaccine form of M. bovis. The manifestations
caused by a given organism are indistinguishable from one another.
After invasion of the skin, mycobacteria either multiply intracellularly
within macrophages, leading to progressive disease, or are controlled
by the host immune reaction.
Primary cutaneous tuberculosis (tuberculous chancre) results when
M. tuberculosis or M. bovis gains access to the skin or mucous membranes through trauma in a previously uninfected individual without
immunity to the organism. Sites of predilection are the face, lower
extremities, and genitals. The initial lesion develops 2-­4 weeks after
introduction of the organism into the damaged tissue. A red-­brown
papule gradually enlarges to form a shallow, firm, sharply demarcated
ulcer. Satellite abscesses may be present. Some lesions acquire a crust
resembling impetigo, and others become heaped up and verrucous at
the margins. The primary lesion can also manifest as a painless ulcer
on the conjunctiva, gingiva, or palate and occasionally as a painless
acute paronychia. Painless regional adenopathy may appear several

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4158 Part XXIX u The Skin
weeks after the development of the primary lesion and may be accompanied by lymphangitis, lymphadenitis, or perforation of the skin surface, forming scrofuloderma. Untreated lesions heal with scarring
within 12 months but may reactivate, may form lupus vulgaris (sharply
defined red-­brown nodules with a gelatinous consistency that represent progressive infection), or, rarely, may progress to the acute miliary
form. Therefore antituberculous therapy is indicated (see Chapter 261).
M. tuberculosis or M. bovis can be cultured from the skin lesion and
local lymph nodes, but acid-­fast staining of histologic sections, particularly of a well-­controlled infection, often does not reveal the organism.
The differential diagnosis is broad, including a syphilitic chancre; deep
fungal or atypical mycobacterial infection; leprosy; tularemia; cat-­scratch
disease; sporotrichosis; nocardiosis; leishmaniasis; reaction to foreign
substances such as zirconium, beryllium, silk or nylon sutures, talc, and
starch; papular acne rosacea; and lupus miliaris disseminatus faciei.
Scrofuloderma results from enlargement, cold abscess formation,
and breakdown of a lymph node, most frequently in a cervical chain,
with extension to the overlying skin from underlying foci of tuberculous infection. Linear or serpiginous ulcers and dissecting fistulas and
subcutaneous tracts studded with soft nodules may develop. Spontaneous healing may take years, eventuating in cordlike keloid scars.
Lupus vulgaris may also develop. Lesions may also originate from an
underlying infected joint, tendon, bone, or epididymis. The differential diagnosis includes syphilitic gumma, deep fungal infections, actinomycosis, and hidradenitis suppurativa. The course is indolent, and
constitutional symptoms are typically absent. Antituberculous therapy
is indicated (see Chapter 261).
Direct cutaneous inoculation of the tubercle bacillus into a previously infected individual with a moderate to high degree of immunity
initially produces a small papule with surrounding inflammation.
Tuberculosis verrucosa cutis (warty tuberculosis) forms when the
papule becomes hyperkeratotic and warty, and several adjacent papules coalesce or a single papule expands peripherally to form a brownish red to violaceous, exudative, crusted verrucous plaque. Irregular
extension of the margins of the plaque produces a serpiginous border.
Children have the lesions most commonly on the lower extremities
after trauma and contact with infected material such as sputum or soil.
Regional lymph nodes are involved only rarely. Spontaneous healing
with atrophic scarring takes place over months to years. Healing is also
gradual with antituberculous therapy.
Lupus vulgaris is a rare, chronic, progressive form of cutaneous
tuberculosis that develops in individuals with a moderate to high
degree of tuberculin sensitivity induced by previous infection. The
incidence is greater in cool, moist climates, particularly in females.
Lupus vulgaris develops as a result of direct extension from underlying joints or lymph nodes; through lymphatic or hematogenous
spread; or, rarely, by cutaneous inoculation with the BCG vaccine. It
most commonly follows cervical adenitis or pulmonary tuberculosis.
Approximately 33% of cases are preceded by scrofuloderma, and 90%
of cases manifest on the head and neck, most commonly on the nose
or cheek. Involvement of the trunk is uncommon. A typical solitary
lesion consists of a soft, brownish red papule that has an apple-­jelly
color when examined by diascopy. Peripheral expansion of the papule
or, occasionally, the coalescence of several papules forms an irregular
lesion of variable size and form. One or several lesions may develop,
including nodules or plaques that are flat and serpiginous, hypertrophic and verrucous, or edematous in appearance. Spontaneous healing
occurs centrally, and lesions characteristically reappear within the area
of atrophy. Chronicity is characteristic, and persistence and progression of plaques over many years are common. Lymphadenitis is present
in 40% of those with lupus vulgaris, and 10–20% have infection of the
lungs, bones, or joints. Extensive deformities may be caused by vegetative masses and ulceration involving the nasal, buccal, or conjunctival
mucosa; the palate; the gingiva; or the oropharynx. Squamous cell carcinoma, with a relatively high metastatic potential, may develop, usually after several years of the disease. After a temporary impairment in
immunity, particularly after measles infection (lupus exanthematicus),
multiple lesions may form at distant sites as a result of hematogenous
spread from a latent focus of infection. The histopathology reveals a

tuberculoid granuloma without caseation; organisms are extremely difficult to demonstrate. The differential diagnosis includes sarcoidosis,
atypical mycobacterial infection, blastomycosis, chromoblastomycosis,
actinomycosis, leishmaniasis, tertiary syphilis, leprosy, hypertrophic
lichen planus, psoriasis, lupus erythematosus, lymphocytoma, and
Bowen disease. Small lesions can be excised. Antituberculous drug
therapy usually halts further spread and induces involution.
Orificial tuberculosis (tuberculosis cutis orificialis) appears on the
mucous membranes and periorificial skin after autoinoculation of mycobacteria from sites of progressive infection. It is a sign of advanced internal disease and carries a poor prognosis, and it occurs in a sensitized host
with impaired cellular immunity. Lesions appear as painful, yellowish or
red nodules that form punched-­out ulcers with inflammation and edema
of the surrounding mucosa. Treatment consists of identification of the
source of infection and initiation of antituberculous therapy.
Miliary tuberculosis (hematogenous primary tuberculosis) rarely
manifests cutaneously and occurs most commonly in infants and in
individuals who are immunosuppressed after chemotherapy or infection with measles or HIV. The eruption consists of crops of symmetrically distributed, minute, erythematous to purpuric macules, papules, or
vesicles. The lesions may ulcerate, drain, crust, and form sinus tracts or
may form subcutaneous gummas, especially in malnourished children
with impaired immunity. Constitutional signs and symptoms are common, and a leukemoid reaction or aplastic anemia may develop. Tubercle
bacilli are readily identified in an active lesion. A fulminant course should
be anticipated, and aggressive antituberculous therapy is indicated.
Single or multiple metastatic tuberculous abscesses (tuberculous
gummas) may develop on the extremities and trunk by hematogenous
spread from a primary focus of infection during a period of decreased
immunity, particularly in malnourished and immunosuppressed children. The fluctuant, nontender, erythematous subcutaneous nodules
may ulcerate and form fistulas.
Vaccination with BCG characteristically produces a papule approximately 2 weeks after vaccination. The papule expands in size, typically ulcerates within 2-­4 months, and heals slowly with scarring. In
1-­2 per million vaccinations, a complication caused specifically by the
BCG organism occurs, including regional lymphadenitis, lupus vulgaris, scrofuloderma, and subcutaneous abscess formation. Delayed
reactivation with inflammation at the site of BCG vaccination has been
reported with Kawasaki disease and multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C), as well as immunization with the COVID19 and influenza vaccines.
Tuberculids are skin reactions that exhibit tuberculoid features histologically but do not contain detectable mycobacteria. The lesions appear
in a host who usually has moderate to strong tuberculin reactivity, has
a history of previous tuberculosis of other organs, and usually shows a
therapeutic response to antituberculous therapy. The cause of tuberculids is poorly understood. Most affected patients are in good health with
no clear focus of disease at the time of the eruption. The most commonly
observed tuberculid is the papulonecrotic tuberculid. Recurrent crops of
symmetrically distributed, asymptomatic, firm, sterile, dusky-­red papules appear on the extensor aspects of the limbs, the dorsum of the hands
and feet, and the buttocks. The papules may undergo central ulceration
and eventually heal, leaving sharply delineated, circular, depressed
scars. The duration of the eruption is variable, but it usually disappears
promptly after treatment of the primary infection. Lichen scrofulosorum, another form of tuberculid, is characterized by asymptomatic,
grouped, pinhead-­sized, often follicular pink or red papules that form
discoid plaques, mainly on the trunk. Healing occurs without scarring.
Atypical mycobacterial infection may cause cutaneous lesions in
children. Interestingly, there may be some seasonable variation in incidence. It has been postulated that vitamin D may play a role. Mycobacterium marinum is found in saltwater, freshwater, and diseased fish.
In the United States, it is most commonly acquired from tropical fish
tanks and swimming pools. Traumatic abrasion of the skin serves as a
portal of entry for the organism. Approximately 3 weeks after inoculation, a single reddish papule develops and enlarges slowly to form a violaceous nodule or, occasionally, a warty plaque (Fig. 706.13). The lesion
occasionally breaks down to form a crusted ulcer or a suppurating

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 707 u Cutaneous Fungal Infections

Fig. 706.13 Violaceous, warty plaque of Mycobacterium marinum
infection.

abscess. Sporotrichoid erythematous nodules along lymphatics may
also suppurate and drain. Lesions are most common on the elbows,
knees, and feet of swimmers and on the hands and fingers in persons
with aquarium-­acquired infection. Systemic signs and symptoms are
absent. Regional lymph nodes occasionally become slightly enlarged
but do not break down. Rarely, the infection becomes disseminated,
particularly in an immunosuppressed host. A biopsy specimen of a
fully developed lesion demonstrates a granulomatous infiltrate with
tuberculoid architecture. Treatment with two active agents is generally
recommended, with a combination of clarithromycin and ethambutol
providing a reasonable balance between effectiveness and tolerability.
Rifampin should be added to clarithromycin and ethambutol for deep
tissue involvement. Other agents with activity against M. marinum
include trimethoprim-­
sulfamethoxazole, doxycycline, minocycline,
and ciprofloxacin. Although azithromycin has been used as an alternative to clarithromycin for some mycobacterial infections, its effectiveness against M. marinum is not known. Treatment should continue for
1-­2 months after resolution of lesions with a minimum treatment duration of 6 months. The application of heat to the affected site may be a
useful adjunctive therapy (see Chapter 263).
Mycobacterium kansasii primarily causes pulmonary disease; skin
disease is rare, often occurring in an immunocompromised host. Most
commonly, sporotrichoid nodules develop after inoculation of traumatized skin. Lesions may develop into ulcerated, crusted, or verrucous
plaques. The organism is relatively sensitive to antituberculous medications, which should be chosen on the basis of susceptibility testing.
Mycobacterium scrofulaceum causes cervical lymphadenitis (scrofuloderma) in young children, typically in the submandibular region.
Nodes enlarge over several weeks, ulcerate, and drain. The local
reaction is nontender and circumscribed, constitutional symptoms
are absent, and there generally is no evidence of lung or other organ
involvement. Other atypical mycobacteria may cause a similar presentation, including Mycobacterium avium complex, M. kansasii, and
Mycobacterium fortuitum. Treatment is accomplished by excision and
administration of antituberculous drugs (see Chapter 263).
Mycobacterium ulcerans (Buruli ulcer or Bairnsdale ulcers) causes a
painless subcutaneous nodule after inoculation of abraded skin. Most
infections occur in children in tropical rainforests. The nodule usually ulcerates, develops undermined edges, and may spread over large
areas, most commonly on an extremity. Local necrosis of subcutaneous fat, producing a septal panniculitis, is characteristic. Ulcers persist for months to years before healing spontaneously with scarring,
sometimes with contractures (if over a joint) and lymphedema. Constitutional symptoms and lymphadenopathy are absent. Diagnosis is
made by culturing the organism at 32–33°C (89.6–91.4°F). Treatment
of choice is an 8-­week course of rifampin and streptomycin with surgical debridement for larger lesions. Local heat therapy and oral chemotherapy may benefit some patients.
M. avium complex, composed of more than 20 subtypes, most
commonly causes chronic pulmonary infection. Cervical lymphadenitis and osteomyelitis occur occasionally, and papules or purulent

4159

leg ulcers occur rarely by primary inoculation. Skin lesions may be
an early sign of disseminated infection. The lesions may take various
forms, including erythematous papules, pustules, nodules, abscesses,
ulcers, panniculitis, and sporotrichoid spread along lymphatics. For
treatment, see Chapter 263.
M. fortuitum complex causes disease in an immunocompetent host
principally by primary cutaneous inoculation after traumatic injury,
injection, or surgery. A nodule, abscess, or cellulitis develops 4-­6 weeks
after inoculation. In an immunocompromised host, numerous subcutaneous nodules may form, break down, and drain. Treatment is based
on identification and susceptibility testing of the organism. Isolates are
usually susceptible to fluoroquinolones, doxycycline, minocycline, sulfonamides, cefoxitin, and imipenem; macrolides should be used with
caution because many M. fortuitum isolates have the erythromycin
methylase (erm) gene, which confers inducible resistance to macrolides
despite “susceptible” minimum inhibitory concentrations.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 707

Cutaneous Fungal
Infections
Stephen R. Humphrey
TINEA VERSICOLOR

A common, innocuous, chronic fungal infection of the stratum corneum, tinea versicolor is most often caused by the dimorphic yeast
Malassezia globosa, with Malassezia furfur and Malassezia sympodialis as less frequent causative agents. The synonyms Pityrosporum ovale
and Pityrosporum orbiculare were used previously to identify the causal
organism.

Etiology

M. globosa is part of the normal indigenous skin flora, predominantly
in the yeast form, and is found particularly in areas of skin that are
rich in sebum production. Proliferation of filamentous forms occurs
in the disease state. Predisposing factors include a warm, humid environment, excessive sweating, occlusion, high plasma cortisol levels,
immunosuppression, malnourishment, and genetically determined
susceptibility. The disease is most prevalent in adolescents and young
adults.

Clinical Manifestations

The lesions of tinea versicolor vary widely in color. In lighter skin, they
are typically reddish brown, whereas in darker skin, they may be either
hypopigmented or hyperpigmented. The characteristic macules are
covered with a fine scale. They often begin in a perifollicular location,
enlarge, and merge to form confluent patches, most commonly on the
neck, upper chest, back, and upper arms (Fig. 707.1). Facial lesions are
common in adolescents; lesions occasionally appear on the forearms,
dorsum of the hands, and pubis. There may be little or no pruritus.
Involved areas do not tan after sun exposure. A papulopustular perifollicular variant of the disorder may occur on the back, chest, and sometimes the extremities. These pustules tend to be monomorphic.

Differential Diagnosis

Examination with a Wood lamp discloses a yellowish gold fluorescence.
A potassium hydroxide (KOH) preparation of scrapings is diagnostic,
demonstrating groups of thick-­walled spores and myriad short, thick,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4160 Part XXIX u The Skin

Fig. 707.1 Hyperpigmented, sharply demarcated macules of varying
sizes on the upper trunk characteristic of tinea versicolor.

angular hyphae resembling macaroni/spaghetti and meatballs. Skin
biopsy, including culture and special stains for fungi (periodic acid–
Schiff), are often necessary to make the diagnosis in cases of primarily follicular involvement. Microscopically, organisms and keratinous
debris can be seen within dilated follicular ostia.
Tinea versicolor must be distinguished from dermatophyte infections, seborrheic dermatitis, pityriasis alba, pityriasis rosea, and secondary syphilis. Tinea versicolor may mimic nonscaling pigmentary
disorders, such as postinflammatory pigmentary change, if a patient
has removed the scales by scrubbing. M. globosa folliculitis must be
distinguished from the other forms of folliculitis.

Treatment

Many therapeutic agents can be used to treat this disease successfully.
The causative agent, a normal human saprophyte, is not eradicated
from the skin, however, and the disorder recurs in predisposed individuals. Appropriate topical therapy may include one of the following: selenium 2% shampoo applied for 10 minutes before rinsing for 1
week, ketoconazole 2% shampoo once daily for 3 days, and terbinafine
spray once to twice daily for 1-­2 weeks. Antifungal creams are available and can be used; however, these can be impractical to apply given
the large surface of skin involved. Oral therapy may be more convenient and may be achieved successfully with fluconazole 300 mg/wk
for 2-­4 weeks or itraconazole 200 mg/24 hr for 5-­7 days. Recurrent
episodes continue to respond promptly to these agents. Oral therapy is
particularly helpful in those with severe disease or recurrent disease or
in those where topical therapies have failed. Maintenance therapy with
selenium sulfide shampoo or ketoconazole 2% shampoo once a week
may be used.

DERMATOPHYTOSES

Dermatophytoses are caused by a group of closely related filamentous
fungi with a propensity for invading the stratum corneum, hair, and
nails. The three principal genera responsible for infections are Trichophyton, Microsporum, and Epidermophyton.

Etiology

Trichophyton spp. cause lesions of all keratinized tissue, including skin,
nails, and hair. Trichophyton rubrum is the most common dermatophyte pathogen. Microsporum spp. principally invade the hair, and the
Epidermophyton spp. invade the intertriginous skin. Dermatophyte
infections are designated by the word tinea followed by the Latin word
for the anatomic site of involvement. The dermatophytes are also classified according to source and natural habitat. Fungi acquired from the
soil are called geophilic. They infect humans sporadically, inciting an
inflammatory reaction. Dermatophytes that are acquired from animals
are zoophilic. Transmission may be through direct contact or indirectly
by infected animal hair or clothing. Infected animals are frequently

Fig. 707.2 Id reaction. Papular eruption of the face associated with
severe tinea infection of the hand.

asymptomatic. Dermatophytes acquired from humans are referred to
as anthropophilic. These infestations range from chronic low-­grade to
acute inflammatory disease. Epidermophyton infections are transmitted only by humans, but various species of Trichophyton and Microsporum can be acquired from both human and nonhuman sources.

Epidemiology

Host defense has an important influence on the severity of the infection. Disease tends to be more severe in individuals with diabetes mellitus, lymphoid malignancies, immunosuppression, and states with
high plasma cortisol levels, such as Cushing syndrome. Some dermatophytes, most notably the zoophilic species, tend to elicit more severe,
suppurative inflammation in humans. Some degree of resistance to
reinfection is acquired by most infected persons and may be associated
with a delayed hypersensitivity response. However, no relationship has
been demonstrated between antibody levels and resistance to infection.
The frequency and severity of infection are also affected by the geographic locale, the genetic susceptibility of the host, and the virulence
of the strain of dermatophyte. Additional local factors that predispose
to infection include trauma to the skin, hydration of the skin with maceration, occlusion, and elevated temperature.
Occasionally, a secondary skin eruption, referred to as a dermatophytid or “id” reaction, appears in sensitized individuals and has
been attributed to circulating fungal antigens derived from the primary infection. The eruption is characterized by grouped papules
(Fig. 707.2) and vesicles and, occasionally, by sterile pustules. Symmetric urticarial lesions and a more generalized maculopapular eruption also can occur. Id reactions are most often associated with tinea
pedis, but they also occur with tinea capitis.

Tinea Capitis
Clinical Manifestations

Tinea capitis is a dermatophyte infection of the scalp most often caused
by Trichophyton tonsurans, occasionally by Microsporum canis, and,
much less commonly, by other Microsporum and Trichophyton spp.
It is particularly common in children age 3-­7 years old. In Microsporum and some Trichophyton infections, the spores are distributed in a
sheathlike fashion around the hair shaft (ectothrix infection), whereas
T. tonsurans produces an infection within the hair shaft (endothrix).
Endothrix infections may continue past the anagen phase of hair
growth into telogen and are more chronic than infections with ectothrix organisms that persist only during the anagen phase. T. tonsurans
is an anthropophilic species acquired most often by contact with
infected hairs and epithelial cells that are on such surfaces as theater
seats, hats, and combs. Dermatophyte spores may also be airborne
within the immediate environment, and high carriage rates have been
demonstrated in noninfected schoolmates and household members.
M. canis is a zoophilic species that is acquired from cats and dogs.
The clinical presentation of tinea capitis varies with the infecting organism. Endothrix infections such as those caused by T. tonsurans create a

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 707 u Cutaneous Fungal Infections

4161

A
Fig. 707.3 Black-­dot ringworm with hairs broken off at the scalp.

B
Fig. 707.6 A, Kerion. Boggy granulomatous mass of the scalp. B,
Scarring after kerion.

Fig. 707.4 Tinea capitis mimicking seborrheic dermatitis.

Microsporum audouinii, the most common cause of tinea capitis in the
1940s and 1950s, is characterized initially by a small papule at the base of
a hair follicle. The infection spreads peripherally, forming an erythematous and scaly circular plaque (ringworm) within which the infected
hairs become brittle and broken. Numerous confluent patches of alopecia develop, and patients may complain of severe pruritus. M. audouinii
infection is no longer common in the United States. Favus is a chronic
form of tinea capitis that is rare in the United States and is caused by the
fungus Trichophyton schoenleinii. Favus starts as yellowish red papules at
the opening of hair follicles. The papules expand and coalesce to form
cup-­shaped, yellowish, crusted patches that fluoresce dull green under a
Wood lamp. Other species, such as Trichophyton violaceum and Trichophyton soudanense are becoming more common with resettlement and
emigration.

Differential Diagnosis

Fig. 707.5 Lymphadenopathy associated with tinea capitis.
pattern known as “black-­dot ringworm,” characterized initially by many
small circular patches of alopecia in which hairs are broken off close to the
hair follicle (Fig. 707.3). Another clinical variant manifests as diffuse scaling, with minimal hair loss secondary. It strongly resembles seborrheic
dermatitis, psoriasis, or atopic dermatitis (Fig. 707.4). T. tonsurans may
also produce a chronic and more diffuse alopecia. Lymphadenopathy is
common (Fig. 707.5). A severe inflammatory response produces elevated,
boggy granulomatous masses (kerion), which are often studded with
pustules (Fig. 707.6A). Fever, pain, and regional adenopathy are common, and permanent scarring and alopecia may result (see Fig. 707.6B).
The zoophilic organism M. canis or the geophilic organism Microsporum gypseum also may cause kerion formation. The pattern produced by

Tinea capitis can be confused with seborrheic dermatitis, psoriasis, alopecia areata, trichotillomania, and certain dystrophic hair disorders. When
inflammation is pronounced, as in kerion, primary or secondary bacterial
infection must also be considered. In adolescents, the patchy, moth-­eaten
type of alopecia associated with secondary syphilis may resemble tinea
capitis. If scarring occurs, discoid lupus erythematosus and lichen planopilaris must also be considered in the differential diagnosis.
The important diagnostic procedures for the various dermatophyte
diseases include examination of infected hairs with a Wood lamp,
microscopic examination of KOH preparations of infected material,
and identification of the etiologic agent by culture. Hairs infected
with common Microsporum spp. fluoresce a bright blue-­green. Most
Trichophyton-­infected hairs do not fluoresce.
Microscopic examination of a KOH preparation of infected hair
from the active border of a lesion discloses tiny spores surrounding
the hair shaft in Microsporum infections and chains of spores within
the hair shaft in T. tonsurans infections. Fungal elements are not usually seen in scales. A specific etiologic diagnosis of tinea capitis may be
obtained by planting broken-­off infected hairs on Sabouraud medium
with reagents to inhibit growth of other organisms. Such identification
may require 2 weeks or more.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4162 Part XXIX u The Skin
Treatment

Oral administration of griseofulvin microcrystalline (20-­
25 mg/kg/
day with a maximum daily dose of 1000 mg, or 10-­15 mg/kg/day with
a maximum daily dose of 750 mg if the ultramicrosize form is used)
is typically the recommended treatment for all forms of tinea capitis.
Absorption of griseofulvin is enhanced by the ingestion of a fatty meal
and should be recommended for the patient. A minimum of 8 weeks
of treatment is usually required, though longer courses are sometimes
needed. Repeat fungal cultures may help guide treatment length. Treatment for 1 month after a negative culture result minimizes the risk of
recurrence. Adverse reactions to griseofulvin are rare but include nausea, vomiting, headache, blood dyscrasias, phototoxicity, and hepatotoxicity. Terbinafine dosing is weight-based. Off-label use is 125 mg
daily for 6 weeks if under 25 kg. From 25 to 35 kg, the dose is 187.5 mg
daily for 6 weeks. For patients greater than 35 kg, the dose is
250 mg daily for 6 weeks. It is possibly effective in pulse therapy, although
it has limited activity against M. canis, but better activity than griseofulvin for T. tonsurans. The oral granule formulation of terbinafine is
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for tinea
capitis in children 4 years of age and older. Oral itraconazole is useful in
instances of griseofulvin resistance, intolerance, or allergy. Itraconazole
is given for 4-­6 weeks at a dosage of 5 mg/kg/24 hr with food. This is offlabel and length of course depends on organism. Capsules are preferable
to the syrup, which may cause diarrhea. Itraconazole is not approved by
the FDA for treatment of dermatophyte infections in the pediatric population. Topical therapy alone is ineffective, but it may be an important
adjunct because it may decrease the shedding of spores and should be
recommended in all patients. Asymptomatic dermatophyte carriage in
family members is common. Because one in three families have at least
one member who is a carrier, treatment of both patient and potential carriers with a sporicidal shampoo may hasten clinical resolution. Vigorous
shampooing with a 2.5% selenium sulfide, zinc pyrithione, or ketoconazole shampoo is helpful. It is not necessary to shave the scalp.

Tinea Corporis
Clinical Manifestations

Tinea corporis, defined as infection of the glabrous skin, excluding the
palms, soles, and groin, can be caused by most of the dermatophyte
species, although T. rubrum and Trichophyton mentagrophytes are the
most prevalent etiologic organisms. In children, infections with M.
canis are also common. Tinea corporis can be acquired by direct contact with infected persons or by contact with infected scales or hairs
deposited on environmental surfaces. M. canis infections are usually
acquired from infected pets.
The most typical clinical lesion begins as a dry, mildly erythematous,
elevated, scaly papule or plaque that spreads centrifugally and clears
centrally to form the characteristic annular lesion responsible for the
designation of ringworm (Fig. 707.7). At times, plaques with advancing borders may spread over large areas. Grouped pustules are another
variant. Most lesions clear spontaneously within several months, but
some may become chronic. Central clearing does not always occur
(Fig. 707.8), and differences in host response may result in wide variability in the clinical appearance; for example, granulomatous lesions
called Majocchi granuloma, which are caused by the penetration of
organisms along the hair follicle to the level of the dermis, produce a
fungal folliculitis and perifolliculitis (Fig. 707.9) and the kerion-­like
lesions referred to as tinea profunda. Majocchi granuloma is more
common after inappropriate treatment with topical corticosteroids,
especially the superpotent class.

Differential Diagnosis

Many skin lesions, both infectious and noninfectious, must be differentiated from the lesions of tinea corporis. Those most frequently
confused are granuloma annulare, nummular eczema, pityriasis rosea,
psoriasis, seborrheic dermatitis, erythema chronicum migrans, and
tinea versicolor. Microscopic examination of KOH wet mount preparations and cultures should always be performed when fungal infection
is considered. Tinea corporis usually does not fluoresce with a Wood
lamp.

Fig. 707.7 Annular plaque of tinea corporis with central clearing.

Fig. 707.8 Minimal central clearing with tinea corporis.

Fig. 707.9 Follicular papule and pustule in Majocchi granuloma after
use of a superpotent topical steroid.

Treatment

Tinea corporis usually responds to treatment with one of the topical
antifungal agents (e.g., imidazoles, terbinafine, butenafine, naftifine)
twice daily for 2-­4 weeks. In unusually severe or extensive disease,
a course of therapy with oral griseofulvin microcrystalline may be
required for 4 weeks. Terbinafine for 2 weeks can also be used. Itraconazole has produced excellent results in many cases with a 1-­to 2-­week
course of oral therapy. Combination topical corticosteroid/antifungal
preparations should not be used, as they may result in worsening or
persistent infection.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 707 u Cutaneous Fungal Infections
Tinea Cruris
Clinical Manifestations

Tinea cruris, or infection of the groin, occurs most often in adolescent
males and is usually caused by the anthropophilic species Epidermophyton floccosum or T. rubrum, but occasionally by the zoophilic species
T. mentagrophytes.
The initial clinical lesion is a small, raised, scaly, erythematous
patch on the inner aspect of the thigh. This spreads peripherally,
often developing numerous tiny vesicles at the advancing margin. It
eventually forms bilateral, irregular, sharply bordered patches with
hyperpigmented scaly centers. In some cases, particularly in infections with T. mentagrophytes, the inflammatory reaction is more
intense and the infection may spread beyond the crural region. The
scrotum and labia are usually not involved in the infection, which
is an important distinction from candidiasis. Pruritus may be severe
initially but abates as the inflammatory reaction subsides. Bacterial
superinfection may alter the clinical appearance, and erythrasma or
candidiasis may coexist. Tinea cruris is more prevalent in obese persons and in persons who perspire excessively and wear tight-­fitting
clothing. It is a good idea to examine a patient’s feet, which can be a
source for tinea cruris.

Differential Diagnosis

The diagnosis of tinea cruris is confirmed by culture and by demonstration of septate hyphae on a KOH preparation of epidermal scrapings.
The disorder must be differentiated from intertrigo, allergic contact
dermatitis, candidiasis, and erythrasma. Bacterial superinfection must
be precluded when there is a severe inflammatory reaction.

Treatment

Patients should be advised to wear loose cotton underwear. Topical
treatment with an imidazole twice a day for 3-­4 weeks is recommended
for severe infection, especially because these agents are effective in
mixed candidal-­dermatophytic infections. Oral treatments, as mentioned earlier, may also be used.

4163

mild erythema (Fig. 707.11). In some cases, two feet and one hand are
involved. This type of infection is more refractory to treatment and
tends to recur. An inflammatory vesicular type of reaction may occur
with T. mentagrophytes infection. This type is most common in young
children. The lesions involve any area of the foot, including the dorsal
surface, and are usually circumscribed. The initial papules progress to
vesicles and bullae that may become pustular (Fig. 707.12). A number
of factors, such as occlusive footwear and warm, humid weather, predispose to infection. Tinea pedis may be transmitted in shower facilities and swimming pool areas.

Differential Diagnosis

Tinea pedis must be differentiated from simple maceration and peeling
of the interdigital spaces, which is common in children. Infection with
Candida albicans and various bacterial organisms (erythrasma) may
cause confusion or may coexist with primary tinea pedis. Contact dermatitis, vesicular foot dermatitis, atopic dermatitis, and juvenile plantar dermatitis also simulate tinea pedis. Fungal mycelia can be seen on
microscopic examination of a KOH preparation or by culture.

Treatment

Treatment for mild infections includes simple measures such as avoidance of occlusive footwear, careful drying between the toes after
bathing, and the use of an absorbent antifungal powder such as zinc
undecylenate. Topical therapy with an imidazole is curative in most
cases. Each of these agents is also effective against candidal infection.
Several weeks of therapy may be necessary, and low-­grade, chronic
infections, particularly those caused by T. rubrum, may be refractory.
In refractory cases, oral griseofulvin therapy may effect a cure, but
recurrences are common.

Tinea Pedis
Clinical Manifestations

Tinea pedis (athlete’s foot), infection of the toe webs and soles of the
feet, is uncommon in young children but occurs with some frequency
in preadolescent and adolescent males. The usual etiologic agents are T.
rubrum, T. mentagrophytes, and E. floccosum.
Most commonly, the lateral toe webs (third to fourth and fourth to
fifth interdigital spaces) and the subdigital crevice are fissured, with
maceration and peeling of the surrounding skin (Fig. 707.10). Severe
tenderness, itching, and a persistent foul odor are characteristic. These
lesions may become chronic. This type of infection may involve overgrowth by bacterial flora, including Kytococcus sedentarius, Brevibacterium epidermidis, and gram-­negative organisms. Less commonly, a
chronic diffuse hyperkeratosis of the sole of the foot occurs with only

Fig. 707.11 Diffuse, minimally erythematous tinea pedis.

Fig. 707.10 Interdigital tinea pedis.

Fig. 707.12 Vesicobullous tinea pedis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4164 Part XXIX u The Skin
Tinea Unguium
Clinical Manifestations

Tinea unguium (onychomycosis) is a dermatophyte infection of the
nail plate. It occurs most often in patients with tinea pedis, but it may
occur as a primary infection. It can be caused by a number of dermatophytes, of which T. rubrum and T. mentagrophytes are the most
common.
The most superficial form of tinea unguium (i.e., white superficial
onychomycosis) is caused by T. mentagrophytes. It manifests as irregular single or numerous white patches on the surface of the nail unassociated with paronychial inflammation or deep infection. T. rubrum
generally causes a more invasive, subungual infection that is initiated at
the lateral distal margins of the nail and is often preceded by mild paronychia. The middle and ventral layers of the nail plate, and perhaps the
nail bed, are the sites of infection. The nail initially develops a yellowish discoloration and slowly becomes thickened, brittle, and loosened
from the nail bed (Fig. 707.13). In advanced infection, the nail may
turn dark brown to black and may crack or break off.

Differential Diagnosis

Tinea unguium must be differentiated from various dystrophic nail disorders. Changes as a result of trauma, psoriasis, lichen planus, eczema,
and trachyonychia can all be confused with tinea unguium. Nails
infected with C. albicans have several distinguishing features; most
prominently, a pronounced paronychial swelling. Thin shavings taken
from the infected nail, preferably from the deeper areas, should be
examined microscopically with KOH and cultured. Repeated attempts
may be required to demonstrate the fungus. Histologic evaluation of
nail clippings with special stains for dermatophytes can be diagnostic.

Treatment

Systemic antifungals are more effective at treating onychomycosis than
topical antifungals. The long half-­life of itraconazole in the nail has led
to promising trials of intermittent short courses of therapy (double the
normal dose for 1 week of each month for 3-­4 months). Oral terbinafine is also used for the treatment of onychomycosis. Terbinafine once
daily for 12 weeks is more effective than itraconazole pulse therapy.
Pulse terbinafine treatment has also been used in adults and has been
effective. Topical antifungals may be an acceptable treatment for mild
disease without matrix involvement, and typically children have a
better response to topical therapy than adults, likely because of faster
growth of the nails. Several topical agents have been FDA approved
for the treatment of onychomycosis in adults, including ciclopirox,
efinaconazole, and tavaborole. Small clinical trials have demonstrated
efficacy of ciclopirox in children. Efinaconazole and tavaborole can be
used in children 6 and older as well.

Tinea Nigra Palmaris

Tinea nigra palmaris is a rare but distinctive superficial fungal infection that occurs principally in children and adolescents. It is caused
by the dimorphic fungus Phaeoannellomyces werneckii, which imparts

a gray-­black color to the affected palm. The characteristic lesion is a
well-­defined hyperpigmented macule. Scaling and erythema are rare,
and the lesions are asymptomatic. Tinea nigra is often mistaken for
a junctional nevus, melanoma, or staining of the skin by contactants.
Treatment is with an imidazole antifungal. Keratolytic agents, such as
salicylic acid, once to twice daily can also be used.

CANDIDAL INFECTIONS (CANDIDIASIS AND
MONILIASIS)

See Chapter 280.
The dimorphic yeasts of the genus Candida are ubiquitous in the
environment, but C. albicans usually causes candidiasis in children.
This yeast is not part of the indigenous skin flora, but it is a frequent
transient on skin and may colonize the human alimentary tract and
the vagina as a saprophytic organism. Certain environmental conditions, notably elevated temperature and humidity, are associated with
an increased frequency of isolation of C. albicans from the skin. Many
bacterial species inhibit the growth of C. albicans, and alteration of
normal flora by the use of antibiotics may promote overgrowth of the
yeast.
Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis is associated with a diverse
group of primary immunodeficiency diseases (Table 707.1). Chronic
mucocutaneous candidiasis is characterized by chronic or recurrent Candida infections of the oral cavity, esophagus, genitals, nails,
and skin. Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis may also be seen as an
acquired infection in patients with HIV infection and during immunosuppressive treatments.

Oral Candidiasis (Thrush)
See Chapter 280.

Vaginal Candidiasis

See Chapters 163 and 280.
C. albicans is an inhabitant of the vagina in 5–10% of women, and
vaginal candidiasis is not uncommon in adolescent girls. A number of
factors can predispose to this infection, including antibiotic therapy,
corticosteroid therapy, diabetes mellitus, pregnancy, and the use of oral
contraceptives. The infection manifests as cheesy white plaques on an
erythematous vaginal mucosa and a thick white-­yellow discharge. The
disease may be relatively mild or may produce pronounced inflammation and scaling of the external genitals and surrounding skin with
progression to vesiculation and ulceration. Patients often complain of
severe itching and burning in the vaginal area. Before treatment is initiated, the diagnosis should be confirmed by microscopic examination
and/or culture. The infection may be eradicated by insertion of nystatin
or imidazole vaginal tablets, suppositories, creams, or foam. If these
products are ineffective, the addition of one dose of fluconazole (150
mg) is effective for adolescents.

Congenital Cutaneous Candidiasis
See Chapter 280.

Candidal Diaper Dermatitis

Fig. 707.13 Hyperkeratotic nail in onychomycosis.

Candidal diaper dermatitis is a ubiquitous problem in infants and,
although relatively benign, is often frustrating because of its tendency
to recur. Predisposed infants usually carry C. albicans in their intestinal
tracts, and the warm, moist, occluded skin of the diaper area provides
an optimal environment for its growth. A seborrheic, atopic, or primary
irritant contact dermatitis usually provides a portal of entry for the yeast.
The primary clinical manifestation consists of an intensely erythematous, confluent plaque with a scalloped border and a sharply demarcated edge. It is formed by the confluence of numerous papules and
vesicular pustules. Satellite pustules, those that stud the contiguous
skin, are a hallmark of localized candidal infections. The perianal skin,
inguinal folds, perineum, and lower abdomen are usually involved (Fig.
707.14). In males, the entire scrotum and penis may be involved, with
an erosive balanitis of the perimeatal skin. In females, the lesions may
be found on the vaginal mucosa and labia. In some infants, the process is generalized, with erythematous lesions distant from the diaper

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 707 u Cutaneous Fungal Infections

4165

Table 707.1  Primary Immunodeficiencies Underlying Candida and Other Fungal Infections
DISEASE
CMC
SCID

CID
CD25 deficiency
NEMO or iκBγ deficiency

ASSOCIATED INFECTIONS

IMMUNOLOGIC PHENOTYPE

GENE, TRANSMISSION

Bacteria, viruses, fungi,
mycobacteria

No T cells, with or without B and/
or NK cell lymphopenia

>30 genes:
IL2RG, X-­linked; JAK3, autosomal
recessive; RAG1, autosomal
recessive; RAG2, autosomal
recessive; ARTEMIS, autosomal
recessive; ADA, autosomal
recessive; CD3, autosomal
recessive, etc.

Viruses and bacteria

T-­cell defect

IL2RA, autosomal recessive

Pyogenic bacteria, mycobacteria,
viruses

NEMO or IKBG X-­linked

IκBα GOF pathogenic variant

IKBA, autosomal dominant

DOCK8 deficiency

Viruses, bacteria and fungi

DOCK8, autosomal recessive

TCR-­α deficiency

Viruses and bacteria

TCRA, autosomal recessive

CRACM1 deficiency

Viruses, mycobacteria, bacteria
and fungi

CRACM1, autosomal recessive

MST1/STK4 deficiency

Viruses and bacteria

MST1/STK4, autosomal recessive

MHC class II deficiency

Viruses, bacteria and fungi

CIITA, RFXANK, RFXC, RFXAP, all
autosomal recessive

Idiopathic CD4 lymphopenia

Pneumocystis, Cryptococcus, virus

CD4 T cells <300 cells/mm3

UNC119, autosomal dominant,
MAGT1 X-­linked, RAG1,
autosomal recessive

SYNDROMIC CMC
Interleukin-­12Rβ1 and interleukin-­
12p40 deficiencies

Mycobacteria, Salmonella

Deficit of interleukin-­17–
producing T cells

IL12RB1, autosomal recessive,
IL12B, autosomal recessive

STAT3 deficiency (autosomal
dominant-­HIES)

Staphylococcus aureus,
Aspergillus

Hyperimmunoglobulin E, deficit of
interleukin-­17–producing T cells

STAT3, autosomal dominant

APECED/APS-­1

No

Neutralizing antiinterleukin-­17A,
antiinterleukin-­17F, and/or
antiinterleukin-­22 autoantibodies

AIRE, autosomal recessive

CARD9 deficiency

Dermatophytes, Candida, brain
abscess

Deficit of interleukin-­17–
producing T cells

CARD9, autosomal recessive

CMCD
Complete interleukin-­17RA
deficiency

S. aureus

No interleukin-­17 response

IL17RA, autosomal recessive

Partial interleukin-­17F deficiency

S. aureus

Impaired interleukin-­17F,
interleukin-­17A/F function

IL17F, autosomal dominant

STAT1 GOF pathogenic variants

Bacteria, viruses, fungi,
mycobacteria

Low interleukin-­17–producing T
cells

STAT1, autosomal dominant

CMC, Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis; SCID, severe combined immunodeficiency; NK, natural killer; CID, combined immunodeficiency; NEMO, nuclear factor κβ essential
modulator; iκBγ, inhibitor of nuclear factor of kappa light polypeptide gene enhancer in B cells, gamma; IκBα, inhibitor of nuclear factor of kappa light polypeptide gene enhancer
in B cells, alpha; GOF, gain-­of-­function; DOCK8, dedicator of cytokinesis 8; TCR, T-­cell receptor; CRACM1, calcium release-­activated calcium modulator 1; MST1, macrophage
stimulating 1; STK4, serine/threonine protein kinase 4; MHC, major histocompatibility complex; STAT, signal transducer and activator of transcription; HIES, hyperimmunoglobulin E
syndrome; APECED, autoimmune polyendocrinopathy–candidiasis–ectodermal dystrophy; APS-­1, autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndrome type 1; AIRE, autoimmune regulator;
CARD9, caspase recruitment domain-­containing protein 9; CMCD, chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis disease.
From Lanternier F, Cypowyj S, Picard, C, et al. Primary immunodeficiencies underlying fungal infections. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2013;25:736–747.

area. In some cases, the generalized process may represent a fungal id
(hypersensitivity) reaction.
The differential diagnosis of candidal diaper dermatitis includes
other eruptions of the diaper area that may coexist with candidal infection. For this reason, it is important to establish a diagnosis by means
of KOH preparation or culture.
Treatment consists of applications of an imidazole cream 2 times
daily. The combination of a corticosteroid and an antifungal agent

may be justified if inflammation is severe but may confuse the
situation if the diagnosis is not firmly established. Corticosteroids
should not be continued for more than a few days. Protection of the
diaper area by an application of thick zinc oxide paste overlying the
anticandidal preparation may be helpful. The paste is more easily
removed with mineral oil than with soap and water. Fungal id reactions gradually abate with successful treatment of the diaper dermatitis or may be treated with a mild corticosteroid preparation. When

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4166 Part XXIX u The Skin
pruritus from pinworm infestation. It may become superinfected
with C. albicans, especially in children who are receiving oral antibiotic or corticosteroid medication. The involved skin becomes erythematous, macerated, and excoriated, and the lesions are identical
to those of candidal intertrigo or candidal diaper rash. Application
of a topical antifungal agent in conjunction with improved hygiene
is usually effective. Underlying disorders such as pinworm infection
must also be treated (see Chapter 339).

Candidal Paronychia and Onychia
See Chapter 704.

Candidal Granuloma
Fig. 707.14 Erythematous confluent plaque caused by candidal infection.

Candidal granuloma is a rare response to an invasive candidal infection of skin. The lesions appear as crusted, verrucous plaques and
hornlike projections on the scalp, face, and distal limbs. Affected
patients may have single or numerous defects in immune mechanisms, and the granulomas are often refractory to topical therapy. A
systemic anticandidal agent may be required for palliation or eradication of the infection.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 708

Cutaneous Viral Infections
Lamiaa Hamie and Stephen R. Humphrey
Fig. 707.15 Intertriginous candidiasis of the neck.

recurrences of diaper candidiasis are frequent, it may be helpful to
prescribe a course of oral anticandidal therapy to decrease the yeast
population in the gastrointestinal tract. Some infants seem to be
receptive hosts for C. albicans and may reacquire the organism from
a colonized adult.

Intertriginous Candidiasis

Intertriginous candidiasis occurs most often in the axillae and
groin, on the neck (Fig. 707.15), under the breasts, under pendulous abdominal fat folds, in the umbilicus, and in the gluteal cleft.
Typical lesions are large, confluent areas of moist, denuded, erythematous skin with an irregular, macerated, scaly border. Satellite
lesions are characteristic and consist of small vesicles or pustules on
an erythematous base. With time, intertriginous candidal lesions
may become lichenified, dry, scaly plaques. The lesions develop on
skin subjected to irritation and maceration. Candidal superinfection is more likely to occur under conditions that lead to excessive perspiration, especially in obese children and in children with
underlying disorders, such as diabetes mellitus. A similar condition,
interdigital candidiasis, commonly occurs in individuals whose
hands are constantly immersed in water. Fissures occur between the
fingers and have red denuded centers, with an overhanging white
epithelial fringe. Similar lesions between the toes may be secondary
to occlusive footwear. Treatment is the same as for other candidal
infections.

Perianal Candidiasis

Perianal dermatitis develops at sites of skin irritation as a result
of occlusion, constant moisture, poor hygiene, anal fissures, and

WART (VERRUCA)
Etiology

Human papillomaviruses (HPVs) cause a spectrum of diseases from
warts (verrucae vulgaris) to squamous cell carcinoma of the skin
and mucous membranes, including the larynx (see Chapter 438.2).
The HPVs are classified by genus, species, and type. More than 200
types are known, and the entire genomes of approximately 100 are
completely sequenced. The incidence of all types of warts is highest
in children and adolescents. HPV is spread by direct contact and
autoinoculation; transmission within families and by fomites also
occurs. The clinical manifestations of infection develop 1 month or
longer after inoculation and depend on the HPV type, the size of
the inoculum, the immune status of the host, and the anatomic site.

Clinical Manifestations

Cutaneous warts develop in 5–10% of children. Common warts
(verruca vulgaris), caused most commonly by HPV types 2 and 4,
occur most frequently on the fingers, dorsum of the hands (Fig.
708.1), paronychial areas, face, knees, and elbows. They are well-­
circumscribed papules with an irregular, roughened, keratotic
surface. When the surface is pared away, many black dots representing thrombosed dermal capillary loops are often visible. Periungual warts are often painful and may spread beneath the nail
plate, separating it from the nail bed (Fig. 708.2). Plantar warts
(verruca plantaris), although similar to the common wart, are
caused by HPV type 1 and are usually flush with the surface of the
sole because of the constant pressure from weight bearing. When
plantar warts become hyperkeratotic (Fig. 708.3), they may be painful. Similar lesions (palmar-­verruca palmaris) can also occur on
the palms. They are sharply demarcated, often with a ring of thick
callus. The surface keratotic material must sometimes be removed
before the boundaries of the wart can be appreciated. Several

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 708 u Cutaneous Viral Infections

Fig. 708.1 Verrucous papules on the back of the hand.

Fig. 708.2 Periungual wart with disruption of nail growth.

Fig. 708.3 Hyperkeratotic plantar wart.

contiguous warts (HPV type 4) may fuse to form a large plaque,
known as the mosaic wart. Flat warts (verruca plana), caused by
HPV types 3 and 10, are slightly elevated, minimally hyperkeratotic papules that usually remain <3 mm in diameter and vary in
color from pink to brown. They may occur in profusion on the face,
arms, dorsum of the hands, and knees. The distribution of several
lesions along a line of cutaneous trauma (koebnerization) is a helpful diagnostic feature (Fig. 708.4). Lesions may be disseminated in
the beard area and on the legs by shaving and from the hairline onto

4167

Fig. 708.4 Multiple flat warts on the face with lesions in line of
trauma.

Fig. 708.5 Condylomata acuminata in the perianal area of a toddler.

the scalp by combing the hair. Epidermodysplasia verruciformis
(EVER1, EVER2 genes), caused primarily by HPV types 5 and 8 (β-­
papillomaviruses, species 1), manifests as many diffuse verrucous
papules. Wart types 9, 12, 14, 15, 17, 25, 36, 38, 47, and 50 may
also be involved. Inheritance is thought to be primarily autosomal
recessive, but an X-­linked recessive form has also been postulated.
Warts progress to squamous cell carcinoma in 10% of patients with
epidermodysplasia verruciformis.
Genital HPV infection occurs in sexually active adolescents,
most commonly as a result of infection with HPV types 6 and 11.
Condylomata acuminata (mucous membrane warts) are moist,
fleshy, papillomatous lesions that occur on the perianal mucosa
(Fig. 708.5), labia, vaginal introitus, and perineal raphe and on the
shaft, corona, and glans penis. Occasionally, they can obstruct the
urethral meatus or the vaginal introitus. Because they are located in
intertriginous areas, they may become moist and friable. When left
untreated, condylomata proliferate and become confluent, at times
forming large cauliflower-­like masses. Lesions can also occur on the
lips, gingivae, tongue, and conjunctivae. Genital warts in children
may occur after inoculation during birth through an infected birth
canal, as a consequence of sexual abuse, or from incidental spread
from cutaneous warts. A significant proportion of genital warts in
children contain HPV types that are usually isolated from cutaneous warts. HPV infection of the cervix is a major risk factor for the
development of carcinoma, particularly if the infection is caused by
HPV type 16, 18, 31, 33, 35, 39, 45, 52, 59, 67, 68, or 70. Immunization against types 6, 11, 16, 18, 31, 33, 45, 52, and 58 is available
(see Chapter 438.2). Laryngeal (respiratory) papillomas contain
the same HPV types as in anogenital papillomas. Transmission is
believed to occur from mothers with a genital HPV infection to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4168 Part XXIX u The Skin
Prolonged, severe, or recalcitrant warts with
lymphopenia

Check quantitative immunoglobulins

↑or normal
IgG, IgA
↓IgM
↑or normal
IgG, IgA

DOCK8
sequencing

↓↓↓ or absent
IgG,A,M,E

↓or normal
IgA, M, E

Lymphocyte subset

Lymphocyte subset

CD3 count
may be
normal in EV

↓CD3
↓CD16
↓CD20

CD4<300
CD8, CD20,
CD16 variable

STK4
sequencing

SPINKS
sequencing

↓CD4
↓CD20
↓CD16

DOCK8

Neutropenia

AT

ADA
functional
analysis
Infectious,
rheumatologic,
hematologic, and
oncologic
evaluation: if
negative

EV

↓CD4, CD8
Variable IgM
↓CD4
↑IgM
↓IgG, IgA, IgE

↓↓CD4, CD8
↓↓CD20
↓↓CD16

GATA2
sequencing

ATM
sequencing
STK4

Netherton
syndrome

EVER1/2
sequencing

Lymphocyte subset

CD3 count may
be normal in
GXTA2

Monocytopenia
↓CD4
↓CD16
Normal CD20

↑IgM

Lymphocyte subset
↓CD3
Normal
CD20,
CD16
CD3

*May also have high
IgA and IgE and neopterin

Lymphocyte subset
↓CD4
↓CD8
Normal
CD20,
CD16

↓IgG

Lymphocyte subset

↓CD4
↓or normal CD20
Normal CD8, CD16

Lymphocyte subset

Normal
immunoglobulins

↓or normal IgG

↑IgG

↑↑↑IgE

NEMO
sequencing
ADCC

CXC84
sequencing
CD40L
sequencing

WHIM
NEMO

ADA SCID

GATA2
ICL

HIGMI

Fig. 708.6 Algorithm for diagnosis of primary immune deficiency with warts and lymphopenia. ADA SCID, adenosine deaminase severe combined

immunodeficiency; AT, ataxia-telanglectasia; DOCK8, Dedicator of cytokinesis 8; EV, epidermodysplasia verruciformis; ICL, idiopathic CD4 lymphopenia; NEMO, nuclear factor κB essential modulator deficiency; STK4, serine/threonine kinase 4 deficiency; WHIM, warts, hypogammaglobulinemia,
recurrent bacterial infections, and myelokathexis; XHIGM1, x-linked hyper IgM syndrome type 1/CD40L deficiency. (From Lieding JW, Holland SM.
Warts and all: HPV in primary immunodeficiencies. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2012;130[5]:1030–1048, Fig. 3, p. 1043.)

neonates who aspirate infectious virus during birth and may subsequently develop laryngeal papillomatosis.

Differential Diagnosis

Common warts are most often confused with molluscum contagiosum. Plantar and palmar warts may be difficult to distinguish from
punctate keratoses, corns, and calluses. In contrast to calluses, warts
obliterate normal skin markings. Juvenile flat warts mimic lichen
planus, lichen nitidus, angiofibromas, syringomas, milia, and acne.
Condylomata acuminata may resemble condylomata lata of secondary syphilis. Patients with recurrent, multiple, difficult-­to-­treat or
disseminated warts may have a primary immune deficiency disorder
(Fig. 708.6).

Treatment

Various therapeutic measures are effective in the treatment of warts.
More than 65% of warts disappear spontaneously within 2 years. Warts
are epidermal lesions and do not produce scarring unless subjected to
surgical procedures or overly aggressive treatments. Hyperkeratotic
lesions (common, plantar, and palmar warts) are more responsive
to therapy if the excess keratotic debris is gently pared with a scalpel
until thrombosed capillaries are apparent; further paring may induce

bleeding. Treatment is most successful when performed regularly and
frequently (every 2-­4 weeks).
Common warts can be eradicated by applications of liquid nitrogen or by laser therapy, such as carbon dioxide or pulsed dye laser.
Daily application of salicylic acid in flexible collodion or as a stick
is a slow but painless method of removal that is effective in some
patients. Plantar and palmar warts may be treated with 40% salicylic
acid plasters. These should be applied for 5 days at a time with a
2-­day rest period between applications. After removal of the plaster
and prolonged soaking in hot water, keratotic debris can be removed
with an emery board or pumice stone. Condylomata respond best
to weekly applications of 25% podophyllin in tincture of benzoin.
The medication should be left on the warts for 4-­6 hours and then
removed by bathing. Keratinized warts near the genitals (buttocks)
do not respond to podophyllin. Imiquimod (5% cream) applied 3
times weekly is also beneficial. Imiquimod is not only indicated for
genital warts but also has been used successfully to treat warts in
other locations; however, it can cause inflammation and irritation,
particularly in occluded areas. For nongenital warts, imiquimod
should be applied daily. Cimetidine 30-­40 mg/kg/day by mouth has
been used in children with multiple warts unresponsive to other
treatment, though its efficacy remains unclear. Immunotherapy
with intralesional candida, MMR (measles, mumps, and rubella)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 708 u Cutaneous Viral Infections

Fig. 708.7 Grouped molluscum.

4169

Fig. 708.8 Molluscum with surrounding dermatitis.

vaccine or Trichophyton antigen may also be employed, especially
when lesions are numerous or resistant to other therapies. Immunotherapy is performed in clinic, and multiple treatments at 1-month
intervals (at least three to four) are usually required. With all types
of therapy, care should be taken to protect the surrounding normal
skin from irritation. Other treatments include 5-­f luorouracil, a chemotherapy agent, which can be helpful, particularly when used with
occlusion and sometimes in combination with salicylic acid. Topical cidofovir, an antiviral agent, and intralesional bleomycin, have
also been used in refractory cases.

MOLLUSCUM CONTAGIOSUM
Etiology

The poxvirus that causes molluscum contagiosum is a large double-­
stranded DNA virus that replicates in the cytoplasm of host epithelial cells. Type 1 virus causes most infections. The disease is
acquired by direct contact with an infected person or from fomites and is spread by autoinoculation. Children age 2-­6 years who
are otherwise well and individuals who are immunosuppressed are
most commonly affected. The incubation period is estimated to be
2 weeks or longer.

Clinical Manifestations

Discrete, pearly, skin-­colored, smooth, dome-­shaped papules vary in
size from 1 to 5 mm. They typically have a central umbilication from
which a plug of cheesy material can be expressed. Although these papules can emerge anywhere on the body, they have a predilection for
sites such as the face, eyelids, neck, axillae, and thighs (Fig. 708.7). They
may be found in clusters on the genitals or in the groin of adolescents
and may be associated with other venereal diseases in sexually active
individuals. Lesions commonly involve the genital area in children but
are not acquired by sexual transmission in most cases. Mild surrounding erythema or an eczematous dermatitis may accompany the papules
(Fig. 708.8). Lesions on patients with AIDS tend to be large and numerous, particularly on the face. Exuberant lesions may also be found in
children with leukemia and other immunodeficiencies. Children with
atopic dermatitis are susceptible to widespread involvement in areas
of dermatitis. A pustular eruption can develop at the site of individual
molluscum lesions (Fig. 708.9). It is not a secondary bacterial infection,
but rather an immunologic reaction to the molluscum virus; hence
treatment with antibiotics is unnecessary. Atrophic scars may often follow this type of reaction.

Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis of molluscum contagiosum includes
trichoepithelioma, basal cell carcinoma, ectopic sebaceous glands,
syringoma, hidrocystoma, keratoacanthoma, juvenile xanthogranulomas, and warty dyskeratoma. In individuals with AIDS,

Fig. 708.9 Inflamed molluscum. Crusted papule at the site of a previous molluscum.

cryptococcosis may be indistinguishable clinically from molluscum
contagiosum. Rarely, coccidioidomycosis, histoplasmosis, or Penicillium marneffei infection masquerades as molluscum-­like lesions
in an immunocompromised host.

Treatment

Molluscum contagiosum is a self-limited disease, with an average
duration of 6-9 months. However, lesions can persist for years,
spreading to distant sites and potentially transmitting to others.
Affected patients should be advised to avoid shared baths and
towels until the infection is clear. In cases of atopic dermatitis or
immunodeficiency, infection may rapidly spread, leading to the
development of hundreds of lesions in children. Immunotherapy
with either Candida or Trichophyton antigen is the most commonly
used treatment. This is repeated every 4 weeks until resolution. If
lesions are limited in number, then depending on the age of the
patient, individual lesions can be treated with liquid nitrogen cryotherapy. For younger children, cantharidin may be applied to the
lesions and covered with adhesive bandages to prevent unwanted
spread of the blistering agent. A blister forms at the application site,
facilitating the removal of the molluscum. However, it’s important
to note that cantharidin should not be applied to the face. Cantharidin availability is either very limited or completely unavailable in
the United States. Imiquimod has not been proven more effective
than placebo in randomized trials. Considering that molluscum is
an epidermal disease, caution should be exercised to avoid excessive
treatment that may result in scarring.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4170 Part XXIX u The Skin

Chapter 709

Arthropod Bites and
Infestations
709.1 Arthropod Bites
Lamiaa Hamie and Stephen R. Humphrey
Arthropod bites are a common affliction of children and occasionally
pose a problem in diagnosis. A patient may be unaware of the source
of the lesions or may deny being bitten, making interpretation of the
eruption difficult. In these cases, knowledge of the habits, life cycle,
and clinical signs of the more common arthropod pests of humans may
help lead to a correct diagnosis (Table 709.1).

immediate petechial reaction is occasionally seen. After repeated bites,
sensitivity develops, producing a pruritic papule (Fig. 709.1) approximately 24 hours after the bite. This is the most common reaction seen in
young children. With prolonged, repeated exposure, a wheal develops
within minutes after a bite, followed 24 hours later by papule, vesicle,
or bullae formation. By adolescence or adulthood, only a wheal may
form, unaccompanied by the delayed papular reaction. Thus adults in
the same household as affected children may be unaffected. Ultimately,
as a person becomes insensitive to the bite, no reaction occurs at all.
This stage of nonreactivity is maintained only as long as the individual
continues to be bitten regularly. Individuals in whom papular urticaria
develops are in the transitional phase between development of a primarily delayed papular reaction and development of an immediate
urticarial reaction.
Arthropod bites may occur as solitary, numerous, or profuse lesions,
depending on the feeding habits of the perpetrator. Fleas tend to sample
their host several times within a small localized area, whereas mosquitoes tend to attack a host at more randomly scattered sites. Delayed

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The type of reaction that occurs after an arthropod bite depends on
the insect species and the age-­group and reactivity of the human
host. Arthropods may cause injury to a host by various mechanisms,
including mechanical trauma, such as the lacerating bite of a tsetse
fly; invasion of host tissues, as in myiasis; contact dermatitis, as seen
with repeated exposure to cockroach antigens; granulomatous reaction to retained mouthparts; transmission of systemic disease; injection of irritant cytotoxic or pharmacologically active substances, such
as hyaluronidase, proteases, peptidases, and phospholipases in sting
venom; and induction of anaphylaxis. Most reactions to arthropod
bites depend on antibody formation to antigenic substances in saliva
or venom. The type of reaction is determined primarily by the degree
of previous exposure to the same or a related species of arthropod.
When someone is bitten for the first time, no reaction develops. An

Fig. 709.1 Pruritic papules after bed bug bites.

Table 709.1  Bed Bugs Versus Other Arthropod Bites: Main Clinical and Epidemiologic Features*
ARTHROPOD

CLINICAL FEATURES ON
EXAMINATION

LOCATION

TIMING OF PRURITUS

CONTEXT

Bed bugs

3-­4 bites in a line or curve

Uncovered areas

Morning

Traveling

Fleas

3-­4 bites in a line or curve

Legs and buttocks

Daytime

Pet owners or rural living

Mosquitoes

Nonspecific urticarial
papules

Potentially anywhere

Anopheles spp. night;
Culex spp. night; Aedes
spp. day

Worldwide distribution

Head lice

Live lice on the head
associated with itchy,
scratched lesions

Scalp, ears, and neck

Any

Children, parents, or
contact with children

Body lice

Excoriated papules and
hyperpigmentation; live
lice inside clothes

Back

Any

Unhoused people

Sarcoptes scabiei mites
(scabies)

Vesicles, burrows,
nodules, and nonspecific
secondary lesions

Interdigital spaces,
forearms, breasts,
genitals

Night

Sexually transmitted,
households or
institutions

Ticks

Erythema migrans or ulcer

Potentially anywhere

Asymptomatic

Pet owners or hikers

Pyemotes ventricosus

Comet sign, a linear,
erythematous, macular
tract

Under clothes

Any time when inside
habitat

People exposed
to woodworm-­
contaminated furniture
(Pediculoides ventricosus
is a woodworm parasite)

Spiders

Necrosis (uncommon)

Face and arms

Immediate pain, no itching

Rural living

*It is difficult to diagnose a bite. Diagnosis relies on an array of arguments, none of which is specific by itself; it is the association of elements that is suggestive. Any arthropod bite
can be totally asymptomatic.
From Bernardeschi C, Le Cleach L, Delaunay P, Chosidow O. Bed bug infestation [published correction appears in BMJ. 2013;346:F1044]. BMJ. 2013;346:f138.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 709 u Arthropod Bites and Infestations 4171
Table 709.2  Patient Education to Eliminate Bed Bugs
DETECTION
• Look for brown insects no bigger than apple seeds on the
mattress, sofa, and curtains and in darker places in the room
(especially cracks in the walls, crevices in box springs, and
furniture)
• Look for black spots on the mattress or blood traces on the sheets
ELIMINATION
• Contact a pest management company
• Wash clothes at 60°C (140°F) or freeze delicate clothing, vacuum,
and clean your home before the pest manager visits
• Collaborate with professionals who are used to dealing with bed
bug infestation to increase eradication efficacy

Fig. 709.2 Red-­brown papules in papular urticaria.
hypersensitivity reactions to insect bites—the predominant lesions in
the young and uninitiated—are characterized by firm, persistent papules
that may become hyperpigmented and are often excoriated and crusted.
Pruritus may be mild or severe, transient or persistent. A central punctum is usually visible but may disappear as the lesion ages or is scratched.
The immediate hypersensitivity reaction is characterized by an evanescent, erythematous wheal. If edema is marked, a tiny vesicle may surmount the wheal. Certain beetles produce bullous lesions through the
action of cantharidin, and various insects, including beetles and spiders,
may cause hemorrhagic nodules and ulcers. Bites on the lower extremities are more likely to be severe or persistent or become bullous than
those located elsewhere. Complications of arthropod bites include development of impetigo, folliculitis, cellulitis, lymphangitis, and severe anaphylactic hypersensitivity reactions, particularly after the bite of certain
hymenopterans. The histopathologic changes are variable, depending on
the arthropod, the age of the lesion, and the reactivity of the host. Acute
urticarial lesions tend to show central vesiculation in which eosinophils
are numerous. Papules most commonly show dermal edema and a mixed
superficial and deep perivascular inflammatory infiltrate, often including a number of eosinophils. At times, however, the dermal cellular infiltrate is so dense that a lymphoma is suspected. Many young children
demonstrate extensive dermal but nonerythematous, nontender edema
in response to mosquito bites (Skeeter syndrome), which responds to
oral antihistamines; this must be distinguished from cellulitis, which
tends to be painful, tender, and red. Retained mouthparts may stimulate
a foreign body type of granulomatous reaction.
Papular urticaria occurs principally in the first decade of life. It may
occur at any time of the year. The most common culprits are species
of fleas, mites, bed bugs, gnats, mosquitoes, chiggers, and animal lice.
Individuals with papular urticaria have predominantly transitional
lesions in various stages of evolution between delayed-­onset papules
and immediate-­onset wheals. The most characteristic lesion is an
edematous, red-­brown papule (Fig. 709.2). An individual lesion frequently starts as a wheal that, in turn, is replaced by a papule. A given
bite may incite an id reaction at distant sites of quiescent bites in the
form of erythematous macules, papules, or urticarial plaques. After a
season or two, the reaction progresses from a transitional to a primarily
immediate hypersensitivity urticarial reaction.
One of the most commonly encountered arthropod bites is that
resulting from human, cat, or dog fleas (family Pulicidae). Eggs, which
are generally laid in dusty areas and cracks between floorboards, give
rise to larvae that then form cocoons. The cocoon stage can persist for
up to 1 year, and the flea emerges in response to vibrations from footsteps, accounting for the assaults that frequently befall the new owners of a recently reopened dwelling. Adult dog fleas can live without
a blood meal for approximately 60 days. Attacks from fleas are more
likely to occur when the fleas do not have access to their usual host;
cat or dog fleas are more voracious and problematic when one visits an
area frequented by the pet than when the pet is encountered directly.
Flea bites tend to be grouped in lines or irregular clusters on the lower
extremities. Fleas are often not seen on the body of a pet. Diagnosis of

PREVENTION
• Carefully examine secondhand furniture to assure the absence of
bed bugs before purchase so as not to contaminate your home
• When sleeping in a hotel, even an upmarket establishment, lift
mattresses to look for bed bugs or black spots
• Do not leave luggage in dark places, near furniture, or close to
your bed. Before going to bed, close suitcases and put them in
the bathroom—in the bathtub or shower stall
From Bernardeschi C, Le Cleach L, Delaunay P, Chosidow O. Bed bug infestation
[published correction appears in BMJ. 2013;346:F1044]. BMJ. 2013;346:f138.

flea bites is aided by examination of debris from the animal’s bedding
material. The debris is collected by shaking the bedding into a plastic
bag and examining the contents for fleas or their eggs, larvae, or feces.

TREATMENT

Treatment is directed at alleviation of pruritus by oral antihistamines
and cool compresses. Potent topical corticosteroids are helpful. Topical
antihistamines are potent immunologic sensitizers and have no role in
the treatment of insect bite reactions. A short course of systemic steroids may be helpful if many severe reactions occur, particularly around
the eyes. Insect repellents containing N,N-­diethyl-­3-­methylbenzamide
(DEET) may afford moderate protection against mosquitoes, fleas,
flies, chiggers, and ticks, but are relatively ineffective against wasps,
bees, and hornets. DEET must be applied to exposed skin and clothing to be effective. The most effective protection against mosquitoes,
the human body louse, and other blood-­feeding arthropods is the
use of DEET and permethrin-­impregnated clothing. However, these
measures are not effective against the phlebotomine sand fly, which
transmits leishmaniasis. Because of the potential for toxicity, the lowest
effective DEET dose should be selected. Additional insect repellents
include picaridin (flies, mosquitoes, chiggers, ticks), IR3535 (mosquitoes), oil of lemon, eucalyptus (mosquitoes), and citronella (mosquitoes). Table 709.2 lists methods to eliminate bed bugs.
An effort should be made to identify and eradicate the etiologic agent.
Pets should be carefully inspected. Crawl spaces, eaves, and other sites
of the house or outbuildings frequented by animals and birds should be
decontaminated, and baseboard crevices, mattresses, rugs, furniture,
and animal sleeping quarters should be decontaminated. Agents that
are effective for ridding the home of fleas include lindane, pyrethroids,
and organic thiocyanates. Flea-­infested pets may be treated with powders containing rotenone, pyrethroids, malathion, or methoxychlor.
Lufenuron, an agent that prevents fleas from reproducing, is effective
for animals in oral and injectable formulations. Fipronil is effective as a
topical agent for the prevention of flea infestation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

709.2 Scabies
Lamiaa Hamie and Stephen R. Humphrey
Scabies is caused by burrowing and release of toxic or antigenic substances by the female mite Sarcoptes scabiei var. hominis. The most

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4172 Part XXIX u The Skin
Table 709.3  Different Presenting Forms of Scabies
PRESENTING FORMS OF
SCABIES

SPECIFIC HIGH-­RISK
POPULATIONS

Classic scabies (scabies vulgaris)

Infants and children; sexually
active adults; men who have sex
with men

Intense generalized pruritus,
worse at night; inflammatory
pruritic papules localized to
finger webs, flexor aspects of
wrists, elbows, axillae, buttocks,
genitalia, female breasts; lesions
and pruritus spare the face,
head, and neck; secondary
lesions include eczematization,
excoriation, impetigo

Dermatitis herpetiformis, drug
reactions, eczema, pediculosis
corporis, lichen planus, pityriasis
rosea

Scalp scabies

Infants and children;
institutionalized older adults;
AIDS patients; patients with
preexisting crusted scabies

Atypical crusted papular lesions of
the scalp, face, palms, and soles

Dermatomyositis, ringworm,
seborrheic dermatitis

Crusted scabies (Norwegian
scabies, scabies norvegica,
scabies crustosa)

Institutionalized older
adults; institutionalized
developmentally disabled
(Down syndrome); unhoused
persons, especially HIV-­positive;
all immunocompromised
patients, particularly those
with AIDS or positive for HIV or
HTLV-­1; transplant recipients;
patients on prolonged
systemic corticosteroids and
chemotherapy

Psoriasiform hyperkeratotic
papular lesions of the scalp,
face, neck, hands, feet, with
extensive nail involvement;
eczematization and impetigo
common

Contact dermatitis, drug
reactions, eczema,
erythroderma, ichthyosis,
psoriasis

Nodular scabies

Sexually active adults; men who
have sex with men; HIV-­positive
men > HIV-­positive women

Violaceous pruritic nodules
localized to male genitalia,
groin, axillae, representing
hypersensitivity reaction to mite
antigens

Acropustulosis, atopic dermatitis,
Darier disease, lupus
erythematosus, lymphomatoid
papulosis, papular urticaria,
necrotizing vasculitis, secondary
syphilis

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

LIMITED DIFFERENTIAL
DIAGNOSES

HTLV-­1, Human T-­cell lymphotropic virus type 1.
From Bennett JE, Blaser MJ, Dolin R, et al., eds. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett’s Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2015: Table 295.1, p.
3252.

important factor that determines spread of scabies is the extent and duration of physical contact with an affected individual. Children and sexual
partners of affected individuals are most at risk. Scabies is transmitted
only rarely by fomites because the isolated mite dies within 2-­3 days.

ETIOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS

An adult female mite measures approximately 0.4 mm in length; has four
sets of legs; and has a hemispheric body marked by transverse corrugations,
brown spines, and bristles on the dorsal surface. A male mite is approximately half her size and is similar in configuration. After impregnation on
the skin surface, a gravid female exudes a keratolytic substance and burrows into the stratum corneum, often forming a shallow well within 30
minutes. She gradually extends this tract by 0.5-­5.0 mm/24 hours along
the boundary with the stratum granulosum. She deposits 10-­25 oval eggs
and numerous brown fecal pellets (scybala) daily. When egg laying is completed, in 4-­5 weeks, she dies within the burrow. The eggs hatch in 3-­5
days, releasing larvae that move to the skin surface to molt into nymphs.
Maturity is achieved in approximately 2-­3 weeks. Mating occurs, and the
gravid female invades the skin to complete the life cycle.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

In an immunocompetent host, scabies is frequently heralded by intense
pruritus, particularly at night (Table 709.3). The first sign of the infestation often consists of 1-­to 2-­mm red papules, some of which are excoriated, crusted, or scaling. Threadlike burrows are the classic lesion of
scabies (Figs. 709.3 and 709.4) but may not be seen in infants. In infants,
bullae and pustules are relatively common. The eruption may also include
wheals, papules, vesicles, and a superimposed eczematous dermatitis (Fig. 709.5). The palms, soles, and scalp are often affected. In older

Fig. 709.3 Classic scabies burrow.
children and adolescents, the clinical pattern is similar to that in adults,
in whom preferred sites are the interdigital spaces; wrist flexors; anterior
axillary folds; ankles, buttocks, umbilicus and belt line; groin; genitals in
men; and areolas in women. The head, neck, palms, and soles are generally spared. Infants will often have a diffuse eczematous eruption that will
involve the scalp, neck, and face. Red-­brown nodules, most often located
in covered areas such as the axillae, groin, and genitals, predominate in
the less common variant called nodular scabies. Additional clues include
facial sparing, affected family members, poor response to topical antibiotics, and transient response to topical steroids. Untreated, scabies may lead
to eczematous dermatitis, impetigo, ecthyma, folliculitis, furunculosis,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 709 u Arthropod Bites and Infestations 4173
cellulitis, lymphangitis, and id reaction. Glomerulonephritis has developed
in children from streptococcal impetiginization of scabies lesions. In some
tropical areas, scabies is the predominant underlying cause of pyoderma. A
latent period of approximately 1 month follows an initial infestation. Thus
itching may be absent and lesions may be relatively inapparent in contacts
who are asymptomatic carriers. However, on reinfestation, reactions to
mite antigens are noted within hours.

seborrheic dermatitis, and the less common bullous disorders of childhood may be suspected in infants with predominantly bullous lesions.
Nodular scabies is frequently misdiagnosed as urticaria pigmentosa
and Langerhans cell histiocytosis. The histopathologic appearance of
nodular scabies, consisting of a deep, dense, perivascular infiltrate of
lymphocytes, histiocytes, plasma cells, and atypical mononuclear cells,
may mimic malignant lymphoid neoplasms.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

TREATMENT

The differential diagnosis of scabies can often be made clinically but is
confirmed by microscopic identification of mites (Fig. 709.6A), ova, and
scybala (see Fig. 709.6B) in epithelial debris. Scrapings most often test
positive when obtained from burrows or fresh papules. A reliable method
is application of a drop of mineral oil on the selected lesion, scraping of it
with a No. 15 blade, and transferring the oil and scrapings to a glass slide.
The differential diagnosis depends on the types of lesions present.
Burrows are virtually pathognomonic for human scabies. Papulovesicular lesions are confused with papular urticaria, canine scabies,
chickenpox, viral exanthems, drug eruptions, dermatitis herpetiformis,
and folliculitis. Eczematous lesions may mimic atopic dermatitis and

The treatment of choice for scabies is permethrin 5% cream (Elimite)
applied to the entire body from the neck down, with particular attention
to intensely involved areas, which is also standard therapy (Table 709.4).
Scabies is frequently found above the neck in infants (younger than 2

A

Fig. 709.4 Scabies. Felt-­tipped ink pen has penetrated and high-

lighted a burrow. The ink is retained after the surface is wiped clean
with an alcohol swab. (From Habif TP, ed. Clinical Dermatology, 6th ed.
Philadelphia: Mosby; 2016: Fig 15-­16.)

B
Fig. 709.6 A, Human scabies mite obtained from scraping. B, Scabies
ova and scybala.

Fig. 709.5 A, Diffuse scabies on an

A

B

infant. The face is clear. The lesions
are most numerous around the axillae, chest, and abdomen. B, Scabies.
Infestation of the palms and soles is
common in infants. The vesicular lesions have all ruptured. (From Habif
TP, ed. Clinical Dermatology, 4th ed.
Philadelphia: Mosby; 2004: Figs. 15.8
and 15.9.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4174 Part XXIX u The Skin
Table 709.4  Currently Recommended Treatment for Scabies
FDA
­APPROVED?

PREGNANCY
CATEGORY*

DOSING SCHEDULE

SAFETY PROFILE

CONTRAINDICATIONS

5% Permethrin
cream (Actin,
Nix, Elimite)

Yes

B

Apply from neck down; wash
off after 8-­14 hr; good
residual activity, but second
application recommended
after 1 wk

Excellent; itching and
stinging on application

Prior allergic reactions;
infants <2 mo of age;
breastfeeding

1% Lindane lotion
or cream

Yes

B

Apply 30-­60 mL from neck
down; wash off after 8-­
12 hr; no residual activity;
increasing drug resistance

Potential for central nervous
system toxicity from
organochloride poisoning,
usually manifesting as
seizures, with overapplication
and ingestions

Preexisting seizure
disorder; infants
and children <6 mo
of age; pregnancy;
breastfeeding

10% Crotamiton
cream or lotion
(Eurax)

Yes

C

Apply from neck down on 2
consecutive nights; wash
off 24 hr after second
application

Excellent; not very effective;
exacerbates pruritus

None

2–10% Sulfur
in petrolatum
ointments

No

C

Apply for 2-­3 days, then wash

Excellent; not very effective

Preexisting sulfur allergy

10–25% Benzoyl
benzoate lotion

No

None

Two applications for 24 hr
with 1-­day to 1-­wk interval

Irritant; exacerbates pruritus;
can induce contact irritant
dermatitis and pruritic
cutaneous xerosis

Preexisting eczema

0.5% Malathion
lotion (Ovide),
1% malathion
shampoo
(unavailable
in the United
States)

No

B

95% ovicidal; rapid (5 min)
killing; good residual
activity; increasing drug
resistance

Flammable 78% isopropyl
alcohol vehicle stings
eyes, skin, mucosa;
increasing drug resistance;
organophosphate poisoning
risk with overapplication and
ingestions

Infants and children <6 mo
of age; pregnancy;
breastfeeding

Ivermectin
(Stromectol)

Yes

C

200-­μg/kg single PO dose,
may be repeated in 14-­15
days; not ovicidal, second
dose on day 14 or 15
highly recommended;
recommended for endemic
or epidemic scabies in
institutions and refugee
camps

Excellent; may cause nausea
and vomiting; take on
empty stomach with water

Safety in pregnancy
uncertain; probably safe
during breastfeeding;
not recommended for
children younger than
5 yr of age or weighing
<15 kg

SCABICIDES

*U.S. Food and Drug Administration safety in pregnancy categories: A, safety established; B, presumed safe; C, uncertain safety; D, unsafe; X, highly unsafe.
From Bennett JE, Blaser MJ, Dolin R, et al., eds. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett’s Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2015: Table 295.2, p. 3253.

years old), necessitating treatment of the scalp. The medication is left on
the skin for 8-­12 hours and should be reapplied in 1 week for another 8-­
to 12-­hour period. Additional therapies include sulfur ointment 5–10%,
and crotamiton 10% lotion or cream. Lindane 1% lotion or cream should
only be used as an alternative therapy, given the risk of systemic toxicity.
For severe infestations or in immunocompromised patients, ivermectin
200 μg/kg per dose given orally for two doses 2 weeks apart can be used
(off-­label use). Single-­dose ivermectin (200 μg/kg) has also been effective
in immunocompetent patients, with improvement (cure) noted in 60%
at 2 weeks and 89% at 4 weeks after treatment (see Table 709.4).
Transmission of mites is unlikely more than 24 hours after treatment. Pruritus, which is a result of hypersensitivity to mite antigens,
may persist for a number of days to weeks, and may be alleviated by
a topical corticosteroid preparation. If pruritus persists for >2 weeks
after treatment and new lesions are occurring, the patient should be
reexamined for mites. Nodules are extremely resistant to treatment
and may take several months to resolve. The entire family should be
treated, as should caretakers of the infested child. Clothing, bed linens,
and towels should be washed in hot water and dried using high heat.
Clothing or other items (e.g., stuffed animals) that cannot be washed
may be dry cleaned or stored in bags for 3 days to 1 week, as the mite
will die when separated from the human host.

CRUSTED SCABIES

The Norwegian variant of human scabies is highly contagious and
occurs mainly in individuals who are cognitively and physically debilitated, particularly those who are institutionalized and those with Down
syndrome; in patients with poor cutaneous sensation (leprosy, spina
bifida); in patients who have severe systemic illness (leukemia, diabetes); and in immunosuppressed patients (HIV infection). Affected
individuals are infested by a myriad of mites that inhabit the crusts
and exfoliating scales of the skin and scalp (Fig. 709.7). The nails may
become thickened and dystrophic. The subungual debris is densely
populated by mites. The infestation is often accompanied by generalized lymphadenopathy and eosinophilia. There is massive orthokeratosis and parakeratosis with numerous interspersed mites, psoriasiform
epidermal hyperplasia, foci of spongiosis, and neutrophilic abscesses.
Norwegian scabies is thought to represent a deficient host immune
response to the organism. Management is difficult, requiring scrupulous isolation measures, removal of the thick scales, and repeated
but careful applications of permethrin 5% cream. Ivermectin (200-­250
μg/kg) has been used successfully as single-­dose therapy in refractory
cases, particularly in HIV-­infected patients. A second dose may be
needed a week later. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has not
approved this agent for the treatment of scabies.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 709 u Arthropod Bites and Infestations 4175

Fig. 709.7 Norwegian scabies. A and B,

A

B

CANINE SCABIES

Canine scabies is caused by S. scabiei var. canis, the dog mite that is
associated with mange. The eruption in humans, which is most frequently acquired by cuddling an infested puppy, consists of tiny papules, vesicles, wheals, and excoriated eczematous plaques. Burrows are
not present because the mite infrequently inhabits human stratum corneum. The rash is pruritic and has a predilection for the arms, chest,
and abdomen, the usual sites of contact with dogs. Onset is sudden and
usually follows exposure by 1-­10 days, possibly resulting from development of a hypersensitivity reaction to mite antigens. Recovery of mites
or ova from scrapings of human skin is rare. The disease is self-­limited
because humans are not a suitable host. Bathing and changing clothes
are generally sufficient. Removal or treatment of the infested animal is
necessary. Symptomatic therapy for itching is helpful. In rare cases in
which mites are demonstrated in scrapings from an affected child, they
can be eradicated by the same measures applicable to human scabies.

OTHER TYPES OF SCABIES

Other mites that occasionally bite humans include the chigger or harvest mite (Eutrombicula alfreddugesi), which prefers to live on grass,
shrubs, vines, and stems of grain. Larvae have hooked mouthparts,
which allow the chigger to attach to the skin, but not to burrow, to
obtain a blood meal, most commonly on the lower legs. Avian mites
may affect those who come into close contact with chickens or pet gerbils. Humans may occasionally be assaulted by avian mites that have
infested a nest outside a window, an attic, heating vents, or an air conditioner. The dermatitis is variable, including grouped papules, wheals,
and vesicular lesions on the wrists, neck, breasts, umbilicus, and anterior axillary folds. A prolonged investigation is often undertaken before
the cause and source of the dermatitis are discovered.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

709.3 Pediculosis
Lamiaa Hamie and Stephen R. Humphrey
Three types of lice are obligate parasites of the human host: body or
clothing lice (Pediculus humanus corporis), head lice (Pediculus humanus capitis), and pubic or crab lice (Phthirus pubis). Only the body louse
serves as a vector of human disease (typhus, trench fever, relapsing
fever). Body and head lice have similar physical characteristics. They are
approximately 2-­4 mm in length. Pubic lice are only 1-­2 mm in length
and are greater in width than in length, giving them a crablike appearance. Female lice live for approximately 1 month and deposit 3-­10 eggs
daily on the human host. However, body lice generally lay eggs in or near
the seams of clothing. The ova or nits are glued to hairs or fibers of clothing but not directly on the body. Ova hatch in 1-­2 weeks and require
another week to mature. Once the eggs hatch, the nits remain attached to
the hair as empty sacs of chitin. Freshly hatched larvae die unless a meal
is obtained within 24 hours and every few days thereafter. Both nymphs

Right side of the head and neck and right
leg before treatment showing diffuse,
scaly hyperkeratotic rash, crusts, and fissures with areas of skin erythema (arrow)
caused by hyperinfestation after infection
with Sarcoptes scabiei in a patient with
Down syndrome. (Modified from Lee K,
Heresi G, Hammond RA. Norwegian scabies in a patient with Down syndrome. J
Pediatr. 2019;209:253.)

and adult lice feed on human blood, injecting their salivary juices into
the host and depositing their fecal matter on the skin. Symptoms of infestation do not appear immediately but develop as an individual becomes
sensitized. The hallmark of all types of pediculosis is pruritus.
Pediculosis corporis is rare in children except under conditions of poor
hygiene, especially in colder climates when the opportunity to change
clothes on a regular basis is lacking. The parasite is transmitted mainly on
contaminated clothing or bedding. The primary lesion is a small, intensely
pruritic, red macule or papule with a central hemorrhagic punctum,
located on the shoulders, trunk, or buttocks. Additional lesions include
excoriations, wheals, and eczematous, secondarily infected plaques. Massive infestation may be associated with constitutional symptoms of fever,
malaise, and headache. Chronic infestation may lead to “vagabond’s skin,”
which manifests as lichenified, scaling, hyperpigmented plaques, most
commonly on the trunk. Lice are found on the skin only transiently when
they are feeding. At other times, they inhabit the seams of clothing. Nits
are attached firmly to fibers in the cloth and may remain viable for up to
1 month. Nits hatch when they encounter warmth from the host’s body
when the clothes are worn again. Therapy consists of improved hygiene
and hot water laundering of all infested clothing and bedding. A uniform
temperature of 65°C (149°F), wet or dry, for 15-­30 minutes kills all eggs
and lice. Alternatively, eggs hatch and nymphs starve if clothing is stored
for 2 weeks at 23.9–29.4°C (75–85°F).
Pediculosis capitis is an intensely pruritic infestation of lice in the
scalp hair. It is the most common form of lice to affect children, in particular those between the ages of 3 and 12 years. Fomites and head-­to-­
head contact are important modes of transmission. In summer months
in many areas of the United States and in the tropics at all times of the
year, shared combs, brushes, or towels have a more important role in
louse transmission. Translucent 0.5-­mm eggs are laid near the proximal portion of the hair shaft and become adherent to one side of the
shaft (Fig. 709.8). A nit cannot be moved along or knocked off the hair
shaft with the fingers. Secondary pyoderma, after trauma from scratching, may result in matting together of the hair and cervical and occipital lymphadenopathy. Hair loss does not result from pediculosis but
may accompany the secondary pyoderma. Head lice are a major cause
of numerous pyodermas of the scalp, particularly in tropical environments. Lice are not always visible, but nits are detectable on the hairs,
most commonly in the occipital region and above the ears, rarely on
beard or pubic hair. Dermatitis may also be noted on the neck and pinnae. An id reaction, consisting of erythematous patches and plaques,
may develop, particularly on the trunk.
In cases of resistance (which is common) of head lice to pyrethroids,
malathion 0.5% in isopropanol is the treatment of choice and should
be applied to dry hair until hair and scalp are wet and left on for 12
hours. A second application 7-­9 days after the initial treatment may
be necessary. This product is flammable, so care should be taken to
avoid open flames. Malathion, like lindane shampoo, is not indicated
for use in neonates and infants; however, additional approved therapies
include spinosad (if >6 months), benzyl alcohol lotion (if >6 months),
and ivermectin for difficult-­to-­treat head lice (Table 709.5). All household members should be treated at the same time. Nits can be removed

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4176 Part XXIX u The Skin

Fig. 709.8 Phthiriasis palpebrarum. Dermoscopy examination of eyelashes in a 27-­mo-­old boy, showing nits and parasites (arrow). (From Ouedraogo M, Ventejou S, Leducq S, et al. Crusts on the eyelashes. J Pediatr. 2019;209:254.)

Table 709.5  Drugs for Head Lice

DRUG

RESISTANCE

FDA-­APPROVED
LOWER AGE OR
WEIGHT LIMIT

DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION

COST*/SIZE

Ivermectin 0.5% lotion—
Sklice (Arbor)

No

6 mo

Apply to dry hair and scalp for 10 min,
then rinse†

$297.60/4 oz

Ivermectin tablets‡—
Stromectol (MSD)

No

15 kg§

200-­400 μg/kg PO once; repeat 7-­10
days later

$9.30#

Spinosad 0.9%
suspension—Natroba
(ParaPro)

No

6 mo

Apply to dry hair for 10 min, then
rinse; repeat 7 days later if
necessary¶

$246.10/4 oz

Benzyl alcohol 5% lotion—
Ulesfia (Lachlan)

No

6 mo

Apply to dry hair for 10 min, then
rinse; repeat 7 days later**

$181.30/8 oz

Pyrethrins with piperonyl
butoxide shampoo‡—
Generic Rid (Bayer)

Yes

2 yr

Apply to dry hair for 10 min, then
shampoo; repeat 7-­10 days later

$15.00/8 oz‡‡
$20.00/8 oz‡‡

Permethrin 1% creme
rinse‡—Generic Nix
(Insight)

Yes

2 mo

Apply to shampooed, towel-­dried
hair for 10 min, then rinse; repeat 7
days later

$18.00/4 oz‡‡
$21.00/4 oz‡‡

Malathion 0.5% lotion—
Generic Ovide (Taro)

Not in the United
States

6 yr§§

Apply to dry hair for 8-­12 hr, then
shampoo; repeat 7-­9 days later if
necessary##,¶¶

$221.70/2 oz
$246.40/2 oz

Abametapir lotion 0.74%
(Xeglyze)

No

6 mo

Apply to dry hair for 10 min on
day 0 and then rinse with water

Not available yet

*Approximate WAC for the indicated size. WAC represents a published catalogue or list price and may not represent an actual transactional price. Source: AnalySource Monthly.
November 5, 2016. Reprinted with permission by First Databank, Inc. All rights reserved. Copyright 2016. www.fdbhealth.com/policies/drug-­pricing-­policy. Total cost of treatment
may vary based on hair length and number of applications required to completely eradicate lice.
†The manufacturer recommends using up to one single-­use, 4-­oz tube of topical ivermectin lotion per application.
‡Not FDA approved for treatment of head lice.
§The safety and effectiveness of oral ivermectin have not been established in children weighing <15 kg.
#Cost of two 3-­mg tablets (one dose for a 30-­kg child at the lowest dosage).
¶The manufacturer recommends using up to one 4-­oz (120-­mL) bottle of spinosad 0.9% suspension per application.
**The amount of benzoyl alcohol 5% lotion recommended per application depends on hair length.
‡‡Approximate cost according to Walgreens.com. Accessed November 10, 2016.
§§The safety and effectiveness of malathion lotion have not been established in children <6 yr old; it is contraindicated in children <24 mo old.
##In clinical trials, patients used a maximum of 2 fl oz of malathion lotion per application.
¶¶One or two 20-­min applications have also been effective (Meinking TL, Vicaria M, Eyerdam DH, et al: Efficacy of a reduced application time of Ovide lotion [0.5% malathion]
compared to Nix creme rinse [1% permethrin] for the treatment of head lice. Pediatr Dermatol 21:670–674, 2004.)
††Available without a prescription.
FDA, U.S. Food and Drug Administration; MSD, Merck Sharp Dohme; WAC, wholesaler acquisition cost or manufacturer’s published price to wholesalers.
From The Medical Letter. Drugs for head lice. Med Lett Drugs Ther. 2016;58:150–152.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 710 u Acne

4177

709.4 Seabather’s Eruption
Lamiaa Hamie and Stephen R. Humphrey
Seabather’s eruption is a severely pruritic dermatosis of inflammatory
papules that develops within about 12 hours of bathing in saltwater,
primarily on body sites that were covered by a bathing suit. The eruption has been described primarily in connection with bathing in the
waters of Florida and the Caribbean. Lesions, which may include pustules, vesicles, and urticarial plaques, are more numerous in individuals who keep their bathing suits on for an extended period after leaving
the water. The eruption may be accompanied by systemic symptoms
of fatigue, malaise, fever, chills, nausea, and headache; in one large
series, ∼40% of children younger than 16 years of age had fever. Duration of the pruritus and skin eruption is 1-­2 weeks. Lesions consist of a
superficial and deep perivascular and interstitial infiltrate of lymphocytes, eosinophils, and neutrophils. The eruption appears to be caused
by an allergic hypersensitivity reaction to venom from larvae of the
thimble jellyfish (Linuche unguiculata). Treatment is largely symptomatic. Potent topical corticosteroids have been shown to provide relief to
some patients.

Fig. 709.9 Intact nits on human hairs.

Chapter 710
with a fine-­toothed comb after application of a damp towel to the scalp
for 30 minutes. Clothing and bed linens should be laundered in very
hot (54.4°C [>130°F]) water and then dried for at least 10 minutes at
the highest setting or dry-­cleaned; brushes and combs should be discarded or coated with a pediculicide for 15 minutes and then thoroughly cleaned in boiling water. If the object cannot be washed, it can
be sealed in a plastic bag for 48 hours. Children may return to school
after the initial treatment.
Pediculosis pubis is transmitted by skin-­to-­skin or sexual contact with an infested individual; the chance of acquiring the lice
with one sexual exposure is 95%. The infestation is usually encountered in adolescents, although small children may occasionally
acquire pubic lice on the eyelashes (see Fig. 709.8). Patients experience moderate to severe pruritus and may develop a secondary
pyoderma from scratching. Excoriations tend to be shallow, and
the incidence of secondary infection is lower than in pediculosis
corporis. Maculae ceruleae are steel-­gray spots, usually <1 cm in
diameter, which may appear in the pubic area and on the chest,
abdomen, and thighs. Oval translucent nits, which are firmly
attached to the hair shafts, may be visible to the naked eye or may
be readily identified by a hand lens or by microscopic examination
(Fig. 709.9). Grittiness, as a result of adherent nits, may sometimes
be detected when the fingers are run through infested hair. Adult
lice are more difficult to detect than head or body lice because of
their lower level of activity and smaller, translucent bodies. Because
pubic lice occasionally may wander or may be transferred to other
sites on fomites, terminal hair on the trunk, thighs, axillary region,
beard area, and eyelashes should be examined for nits. The coexistence of other venereal diseases should be considered. Treatment
with a 10-­minute application of a pyrethrin preparation is usually
effective. Retreatment may be required in 7-­10 days. Infestation of
eyelashes is eradicated by petrolatum applied 3-­5 times per 24 hours
for 8-­10 days. Clothing, towels, and bed linens may be contaminated with nit-­bearing hairs and should be thoroughly laundered
or dry-­cleaned.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Acne
Leah Lalor
ACNE VULGARIS

Acne is a chronic inflammatory disorder of the pilosebaceous unit with
a multifactorial pathogenesis that affects at least 85% of adolescents but
can occur in any age-­group.

Pathogenesis

There are four main pathogenic factors leading to the development of acne: (1) increased sebum production; (2) abnormal keratinization of the follicular infundibulum; (3) Cutibacterium acnes
(formerly Propionibacterium acnes)–mediated responses; and (4)
inflammation.
The initial lesion of acne is a microcomedone, which progresses
to a comedone. A comedone is a dilated, epithelium-­lined follicular
sac filled with lamellated keratinaceous material, lipid, and bacteria.
An open comedone, known as a blackhead, has a patulous pilosebaceous orifice that permits visualization of the plug. An open comedone becomes inflammatory less commonly than does a closed
comedone, or whitehead, which has only a pinpoint opening. An
inflammatory papule or nodule develops from a comedone that
has ruptured and extruded its follicular contents into the subadjacent dermis, inducing a neutrophilic inflammatory response. If the
inflammatory reaction is close to the surface, a papule or pustule
develops. If the inflammatory infiltrate develops deeper in the dermis, a nodule forms. Suppuration and an occasional giant cell reaction to keratin and hair are the cause of nodulocystic lesions. These
are not true cysts but liquefied masses of inflammatory debris.
Comedonal acne (Fig. 710.1), particularly of the forehead and
central face, is frequently the first sign of pubertal maturation. Most
patients with acne do not have endocrine abnormalities. Many
women with acne (25–50%) note acne flares about 1 week before
menstruation.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4178 Part XXIX u The Skin

Fig. 710.2 Inflammatory papules and pustules.

Fig. 710.1 Primarily comedonal acne in a 7-­yr-­old female.

Clinical Manifestations

Acne vulgaris is characterized by four basic types of lesions: open
and closed comedones, papules, pustules (Fig. 710.2), and nodulocystic lesions (Fig. 710.3 and Table 710.1). One or more types of
lesions may predominate. In its mildest form, which is often seen
early in adolescence, lesions are limited to comedones on the central area of the face. Lesions may also involve the chest, upper back,
and deltoid areas. A predominance of lesions on the forehead, particularly closed comedones, is common in early acne but can also
be seen with prolonged use of greasy hair preparations (pomade
acne) (Fig. 710.4). Marked involvement on the trunk is most often
seen in males. Lesions often heal with temporary postinflammatory
erythema and hyperpigmentation. Pitted, atrophic, or hypertrophic
scars may be interspersed, depending on the severity, depth, and
chronicity of the process.
Diagnosis of acne is rarely difficult, although flat warts, folliculitis,
and other types of acne (drug-­induced or exacerbated: glucocorticoid
agents, anabolic steroids, gold, dactinomycin, isoniazid, iodides, bromides, cyclosporin, interferon beta, epidermal growth factor inhibitors, lithium, phenobarbital, phenytoin, progestins/Depo-­
Provera)
may be confused with acne vulgaris. Definable autoinflammatory
syndromes and androgen excess disorders are often associated with
difficult-­to-­treat acne or when acne is noted with other cutaneous or
systemic symptoms (Fig. 710.5). The differential diagnosis includes
sarcoidosis, angiofibromas, keratosis pilaris, chloracne, rosacea, and
fibrofolliculomas.

Treatment

An effective treatment strategy targets multiple pathogenic factors. There is no single treatment that addresses all four pathogenic
factors other than the systemic retinoid isotretinoin; thus a combination approach is typically preferred. Therapy must be individualized based on acne lesion assessment and severity and aimed
at preventing comedone formation. Inflammatory acne is frequently
underdiagnosed in people of color, as the characteristic erythema
may be masked by darker skin pigment. Careful evaluation of acne
type is warranted to ensure appropriate treatment is selected.
Initial control requires 10-­12 weeks of regular daily use of
medications. Acne can be controlled and severe scarring prevented
by judicious maintenance therapy that is continued until the disease
process has abated spontaneously (Table 710.2 and Fig. 710.6).
It is also important to address the potentially severe emotional
impact of acne on adolescents. The pediatrician must be aware of the
frequently poor correlation between acne severity and psychosocial
impact, particularly in adolescents. As adolescents become preoccupied with their appearance, offering treatment even to the youngster
whose acne is mild may enhance self-­image.

Fig. 710.3 Severe nodulocystic acne.

Table 710.1  One Approach to the Classification of Acne
SEVERITY

DESCRIPTION

Mild

Comedones (noninflammatory lesions) are
the main lesions. Papules and pustules
may be present but are small and few in
number (generally <10).

Moderate

Moderate numbers of papules and pustules
(10-­40) and comedones (10-­40) are
present. Mild disease of the back and
trunk may also be present.

Moderately severe

Numerous papules and pustules are present
(40-­100), usually with many comedones
(40-­100) and occasional larger, deeper
nodular inflammatory lesions (up to 5).
Widespread affected areas usually involve
the face, chest, and back.

Severe

Nodulocystic acne and conglobate acne,
including many large inflammatory, painful
nodular or pustular lesions along with
many smaller papules, pustules, and
comedones.

The American Academy of Dermatology acknowledges that there is no universally
agreed upon grading/severity classification for acne.
Modified from James WD. Clinical practice: Acne. N Engl J Med. 2005;352:1463–1472.

Diet

Little evidence shows that the ingestion of particular foods can trigger
acne flares, though high nonfat milk ingestion and high-­glycemic-­load
diets may be contributory. When a patient is convinced that certain

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 710 u Acne
dietary items exacerbate acne, it is prudent for the patient to omit those
foods, provided that such omissions do not lead to excessive dietary
restrictions.

4179

Topical Therapy

All topical preparations must be used for 10-­12 weeks before their
effectiveness can be assessed (Table 710.3). Retinoids are first-­line
therapy and may be used alone for mild acne, but combination therapy
is frequently more effective. A popular and effective combination is
use of a benzoyl peroxide preparation in the morning and a retinoid at
night. Recommendations for specific acne presentations are presented
in Tables 710.2 and 710.3.
Retinoids. A topical retinoid should be the primary treatment for
acne vulgaris. Topical retinoids have multiple actions, including inhibition of the formation and number of microcomedones, reduction of
mature comedones, reduction of inflammatory lesions, and production
of normal desquamation of the follicular epithelium. Retinoids should
be applied nightly to all affected areas. The main side effects of retinoids
are irritation and dryness. Not all patients initially tolerate daily use
of a retinoid. It may be prudent to begin therapy every other or every
third day and slowly increase the frequency of application as tolerated.
Tretinoin, adapalene, tazarotene, and trifarotene (Table 710.4) are the
available retinoids. They vary in strength and efficacy, although adapalene tends to be less irritating and tazarotene is more irritating but
may be more effective.
Benzoyl Peroxide. Benzoyl peroxide is primarily an antimicrobial
agent and does have mild comedolytic activity. It has an advantage over
topical antibiotics in that it does not enhance antimicrobial resistance.
It is available in multiple formulations and concentrations. The gel formulations are preferred, owing to better stability and more consistent
release of the active ingredient. Washes and cleansers are useful for
covering large surface areas such as the chest and back. As with retinoids, the main side effects are irritation and drying. Benzoyl peroxide
can also bleach clothing, which sometimes limits the use of leave-­on
preparations like gels.
Topical Antibiotics. Topical antibiotics are indicated for the
treatment of inflammatory acne. Clindamycin is the most commonly used. It is not as effective as oral antibiotics. It should never
be used as monotherapy because it does not inhibit microcomedone
formation and has the potential to induce antimicrobial resistance.
Irritation and dryness are generally less than with retinoids or benzoyl peroxide. Topical antibiotics should not be used as monotherapy and can be prescribed as a combination product or separately.
The most common combination product is benzoyl peroxide/
clindamycin. A combination tretinoin/clindamycin product may
also be used.

Climate

Climate appears to influence acne in that improvement frequently
occurs in summer and flares are more common in winter. Remission in summer may relate partly to the relative absence of stress.
Emotional tension and fatigue seem to exacerbate acne in many
individuals; the mechanism is unclear but has been proposed to
relate to an increased adrenocortical response.

Cleansing

Cleansing with soap and water removes surface lipid and renders
the skin less oily in appearance. It is generally recommended to
wash with a gentle cleanser twice daily, followed by moisturizing
with a noncomedogenic emollient, for all acne patients. Repetitive
cleansing can be harmful because it irritates the skin, and use of
harsh scrubs is not recommended. Greasy cosmetic and hair preparations must be discontinued because they exacerbate preexisting
acne and cause further plugging of follicular pores. Manipulation
and squeezing of facial lesions can lead to scarring and should be
avoided.

Fig. 710.4 Pomade acne along the hairline.

Difficult-to-treat and rare forms of acne

Fig. 710.5 Rare and difficult forms of
“True” acne

Acneiform

Acne vulgaris

Acne variants

Acne in syndromes

• Not responding
• Acne conglobata

• Acne fulminans

• SAPHO
• PAPA
• PASH
• CAH
• PAC
• PAPASH
• SAHA
• HAIR-AN
• PCOS
• PASS

• Rosacea
• Demodicosis
• Perioral dermatitis
• Drug-induced acne (see text)
• Acne cosmetica
• Infection
• Cutaneous Iymphoma

acne. CAH, Congenital adrenal hyperplasia; PAPA, pyogenic sterile arthritis, pyoderma gangrenosum, acne syndrome;
PASH, pyoderma gangrenosum, acne,
and suppurative hidradenitis syndrome;
SAPHO, synovitis, acne, pustulosis, hyperostosis, osteitis syndrome; PAC, pyoderma gangrenosum, acne, ulcerative
colitis; PAPASH, pyogenic arthritis, pyoderma gangrenosum, acne, suppurative
hidradenitis; SAHA, seborrhea, acne, hirsutism, androgenic alopecia; HAIR-­
AN,
hyperandrogenism, insulin resistance,
acanthosis nigricans; PCOS, polycystic ovarian syndrome; PASS, pyoderma
gangrenosum acne, spondyloarthritis.
(Modified from Dessinioti C, Katsambas
A. Difficult and rare forms of acne. Clin
Dermatol. 2017;35[2]:138–146.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4180 Part XXIX u The Skin
Table 710.2  Acne Treatment Algorithm
SEVERITY (LESION TYPE)
MILD
(COMEDONAL)

THERAPY

MILD
(INFLAMMATORY/
MIXED)

MODERATE
(INFLAMMATORY/
MIXED)

SEVERE
(INFLAMMATORY/
MIXED)

SEVERE
(NODULAR/
SCARRING)

Initial therapy
options*,†

Topical retinoid
BP
Salicylic acid cleanser

BP/retinoid combo
BP/antibiotic combo
Antibiotic/retinoid
combo + BP

BP/retinoid combo
BP/antibiotic combo
± topical retinoid
Antibiotic/retinoid
combo + BP
± oral antibiotic

BP/retinoid combo +
oral antibiotic
BP/antibiotic combo
+ topical retinoid +
oral antibiotic
Antibiotic/retinoid
combo + BP + oral
antibiotic

Isotretinoin

Alternative therapy
options*,†,‡

Add BP or retinoid
if not already
prescribed
BP/antibiotic combo
BP/retinoid combo
Antibiotic/retinoid
combo

Substitute another
combo product
Add missing
component (e.g.,
topical retinoid, BP,
topical antibiotic)
Change type,
strength, or
formulation of
topical retinoid

Substitute another
combo product
Add missing
component (i.e.,
topical retinoid, BP,
topical antibiotic,
oral antibiotic)
Change type,
strength, or
formulation of
topical retinoid
Consider hormonal
therapy§ for female
patients
Consider oral
isotretinoin

Consider changing
oral antibiotic
Consider isotretinoin
Consider hormonal
therapy§ for female
patients

Consider hormonal
therapy§ for female
patients

Maintenance therapy

Topical retinoid or BP/
retinoid combo

Topical retinoid or BP/
retinoid combo

Topical retinoid or BP/
retinoid combo

Topical retinoid or BP/
retinoid combo

Topical retinoid or BP/
retinoid combo

*If combination products not available to patient, consider substitution of individual components as separate prescriptions.
†Topical dapsone may be considered in place of topical antibiotic.
‡If needed as determined by physician assessment and patient satisfaction.
§Combined oral contraceptive or oral spironolactone.
BP, Benzoyl peroxide.
Adapted from Zaenglein AL, Thiboutot DM. Expert committee recommendations for acne management. Pediatrics 2006;118(3):1188–1199; Thiboutot D, Gollnick H, Bettoli V, et al.
New insights into the management of acne: An update from the Global Alliance to Improve Outcomes in Acne Group. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2009;60:S1–50; Eichenfield LF, Krakowski
AC, Piggott C, et al. Evidence-­based recommendations for the diagnosis and treatment of pediatric acne. Pediatrics. 2013;131(3):S163–S186; Thiboutot DM, Gollnick HP. Treatment
considerations for inflammatory acne: Clinical evidence for adapalene 0.1% in combination therapies. J Drugs Dermatol. 2006;5(8):785–794; Gollnick H, Cunliffe W, Berson D, et al.
Management of acne: A report from a Global Alliance to Improve Outcomes in Acne. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2003;49(Suppl 1):S1–S37; and Zaenglein AL, Pathy AL, Schlosser BJ,
et al. Guidelines of care for the management of acne vulgaris. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2016;74:945–973. From Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 6th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022, Table 8.1, p. 210.

Azelaic Acid. Azelaic acid (20% cream) has mild antimicrobial and
keratolytic properties. It can also help expedite resolution of postinflammatory hyperpigmentation and is less irritating than many other
topical acne treatments.
Clascoterone. Clascoterone 1% cream is a topical androgen antagonist, a first in its class, and is approved for use in males and females 12
years and older. It has shown efficacy in improving both inflammatory
and noninflammatory acne in trials, but how this medication will be
used under real-­world circumstances is yet to be determined.

Systemic Therapy

Antibiotics, especially tetracycline and its derivatives (see Table
710.4), are indicated for the treatment of patients whose acne has
not responded to topical medications, who have moderate to severe
inflammatory papulopustular and nodulocystic acne, and who have a
propensity for scarring (Table 710.5). Tetracycline and its derivatives
act by reducing the growth and metabolism of C. acnes. They also have
antiinflammatory properties. For most adolescent patients, therapy
may be initiated twice daily, for at least 6-­8 weeks, in combination with
a judicious topical regimen, and should not be used for longer than 3-­6
months. The drugs should always be administered in combination with
a topical retinoid and topical benzoyl peroxide but not with topical
antibiotics. Doxycycline is the preferred oral antibiotic in acne because
of its high efficacy and lower risk of long-­term side effects compared
with similar medications. Minocycline and doxycycline should be

taken with food. Side effects of tetracycline and derivatives are rare
and include vaginal candidiasis, particularly in those who take tetracycline concurrently with oral contraceptives; gastrointestinal irritation;
phototoxic reactions, including onycholysis and brown discoloration
of nails; esophageal ulceration; inhibition of fetal skeletal growth; and
staining of growing teeth, precluding its use during pregnancy and in
those younger than 8 years of age. Doxycycline is the most photosensitizing of the tetracycline derivatives and is also more likely to cause
pill esophagitis. Rarely, minocycline causes dizziness, intracranial
hypertension, bluish discoloration of the skin and mucous membranes,
hepatitis, a lupus-­like syndrome, and drug hypersensitivity. A possible
complication of prolonged systemic antibiotic use is proliferation of
gram-­negative organisms—particularly Enterobacter, Klebsiella, Escherichia coli, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa—producing severe refractory
folliculitis.
Females who have acne and hormonal abnormalities, whose acne
is unresponsive to antibiotic therapy, or who are not candidates for
isotretinoin therapy should be considered for a trial of hormonal
therapy. Combined oral contraceptive pills are the primary form of
hormonal therapy. Spironolactone has also shown effectiveness. Young
women with acne that is refractory to conventional therapy and have
other signs of hyperandrogenism should be evaluated for polycystic
ovarian syndrome.
Isotretinoin (13-­cis-­retinoic acid) is indicated for severe nodulocystic
acne and moderate to severe acne that has not responded to conventional

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 710 u Acne

4181

Global Alliance Acne Treatment Algorithm
Acne
severity

Moderate

Mild

Severe

Comedonal

Mixed and
papular/pustular

Mixed and
papular/pustular

Nodular

Nodular/conglobate

First choice

Topical
retinoid

Topical retinoid
 topical antimicrobial

Oral antibiotic
 topical retinoid
 BPO

Oral antibiotic
 topical retinoid
 BPO

Oral
isotretinoin

Alternatives

Alt. topical retinoid
or
azelaic acid
or
salicylic acid

Alt. topical retinoid
antimicrobial agent
 alt. topical retinoid
or
azelaic acid

Alt. oral antibiotic
 alt. topical retinoid
 BPO

Oral isotretinoin
or
alt. oral antibiotic
 alt. topical retinoid
 BPO/azelaic acid

High dose
oral antibiotic
 topical retinoid
 BPO

See first choice

Oral antiandrogen
 topical retinoid/
azelaic acid
 topical
antimicrobial

Oral antiandrogen
 topical retinoid/
 oral antibiotic
 alt. antimicrobial

High dose
oral antiandrogen
 topical retinoid
 alt. topical
antimicrobial

Alternatives for
females

Maintenance
therapy

See first choice

Topical retinoid

Topical retinoid  BPO

Fig. 710.6 Acne treatment algorithm. BPO, Benzoyl peroxide. (From Thiboutot D, Gollnick H; Global Alliance to Improve Acne, et al. New insights
into the management of acne: an update from the Global Allegiance to Improve Outcomes in Acne. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2009;60:S1–S50.)

Table 710.3  Recommendations for Topical Therapies
• Benzoyl peroxide or combinations with erythromycin or
clindamycin are effective acne treatments and are recommended
as monotherapy for mild acne, or in conjunction with a topical
retinoid, or systemic antibiotic therapy for moderate to severe
acne.
• Benzoyl peroxide is effective in the prevention of bacterial
resistance and is recommended for patients on topical or systemic
antibiotic therapy.
• Topical antibiotics (e.g., erythromycin and clindamycin) are
effective acne treatments but are not recommended as
monotherapy because of the risk of bacterial resistance.
• Topical retinoids are important in addressing the development
and maintenance of acne and are recommended as monotherapy
in primarily comedonal acne or in combination with topical or oral
antimicrobials in patients with mixed or primarily inflammatory
acne lesions.
• Treatment with multiple topical agents that affect different
aspects of acne pathogenesis can be useful. Combination therapy
should be used in the majority of patients with acne.
• Topical adapalene, tretinoin, and benzoyl peroxide can be safely
used in the management of preadolescent acne in children.
• Azelaic acid is a useful adjunctive acne treatment and
is recommended in the treatment of postinflammatory
dyspigmentation.
• Topical dapsone 5% gel is recommended for inflammatory acne,
particularly in adult females with acne.
• There is limited evidence to support recommendations for
sulfur, nicotinamide, resorcinol, sodium sulfacetamide, aluminum
chloride, and zinc in the treatment of acne.
From Zaenglein AL, Pathy AL, Scholsser BJ, et al. Guidelines of care for the
management of acne vulgaris. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2016;74(5):945–973, Table V, p. 951.

therapy. The recommended dosage is 0.5-­1.0 mg/kg/day. A standard
course in the United States lasts 16-­20 weeks or until acne is clear. At
the end of one course of isotretinoin, 70–80% of patients are cured,
10–20% need conventional topical and/or oral medications to maintain adequate control, and 10–20% have relapses and need an additional course of isotretinoin. Isotretinoin addresses all four pathogenic

mechanisms of acne, is highly effective, and only has very rare treatment failures.
Isotretinoin use has many side effects. It is highly teratogenic
and is absolutely contraindicated in pregnancy. Pregnancy should
be avoided for 4 weeks after discontinuation of therapy. Two forms
of birth control are required, or a confirmation of total abstinence,
as are monthly pregnancy tests. Concerns over cases of pregnancy
despite warnings have prompted a manufacturer registration program,
iPLEDGE (www.ipledgeprogram.com), which requires physician enrollment and careful patient pregnancy screening to prescribe isotretinoin.
Many patients also experience cheilitis, xerosis, periodic epistaxis, and
blepharoconjunctivitis. Increased serum triglyceride and cholesterol
levels are also common. It is important to rule out preexisting liver
disease and hyperlipidemia before initiating therapy and to recheck
laboratory values when the dosage is established. Less common but significant side effects include arthralgias, myalgias, temporary thinning
of the hair, paronychia, increased susceptibility to sunburn, formation
of pyogenic granulomas, and colonization of the skin with Staphylococcus aureus, leading to impetigo, secondarily infected dermatitis,
and scalp folliculitis. Rarely, hyperostotic lesions of the spine develop
after more than one course of isotretinoin. Concomitant use of an oral
tetracycline and isotretinoin is contraindicated because either drug,
but particularly when they are used together, can cause benign intracranial hypertension. Although no cause-­and-­effect relationship has
been established, drug-­induced mood changes and depression and/or
suicide have mandated close attention to psychiatric well-­being before
and during isotretinoin prescription. An increased risk of inflammatory bowel disease with the use of isotretinoin is debated.

Surgical Therapy

Intralesional injection of low-­dose (3-­5 mg/mL) midpotency glucocorticoids (e.g., triamcinolone) with a 30-­gauge needle on a tuberculin syringe may hasten the healing of individual painful nodulocystic
lesions. Dermabrasion or laser peel to minimize scarring should be
considered only after the active process is quiescent. Figure 710.7
describes the management of scarring.
The role of pulsed dye laser in the treatment of inflammatory acne is
controversial and inconclusive.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4182 Part XXIX u The Skin
Table 710.4  Medications for the Treatment of Acne
DRUG

DOSE

SIDE EFFECTS

OTHER CONSIDERATIONS

Applied once nightly; strengths of
0.025–0.1% available*

Irritation (redness and scaling)

Generics available.

Adapalene

Applied once daily, at night or in
the morning; 0.1% and 0.3%*

Minimal irritation

0.1% generic available.

Tazarotene†

Applied once nightly; 0.05% and
0.1%*

Irritation

Limited data suggest tazarotene is
more effective than alternatives.

Trifarotene

Applied once nightly; 0.005%
cream

Mild irritation

Labeled for trunk use.

Antimicrobials
Benzoyl peroxide, 2.5–10%

Applied once or twice daily

Benzoyl peroxide can bleach
clothing and bedding

Available over the counter; 2.5–5%
concentrations as effective
as and less drying than 10%
concentration.

Clindamycin, erythromycin‡

Applied once or twice daily

Propensity to resistance

Most effective for inflammatory
lesions (rather than comedones);
resistance a concern when used
alone.

Minocycline

Applied once or twice daily; 4%
foam

None

Brand name, expensive.

Combination benzoyl
peroxide and clindamycin or
erythromycin; combination
tretinoin and clindamycin

Applied once or twice daily

Side effects from benzoyl
peroxide (bleach clothing or
bedding) and from topical
antibiotics (propensity to
resistance)

Combination more effective than
topical antibiotics alone; limits
development of resistance;
use of individual products in
combination less expensive and
appears similarly effective.

Other Topical Agents
Azelaic acid‡

Applied twice daily; 20% cream

Well tolerated

Helpful for postinflammatory
dyspigmentation; 10% cream
available over the counter

Salicylic acid

Applied once or twice daily

Peeling, irritation

Low efficacy

Dapsone

Applied once daily; 5% and 7.5%
gel

Mild irritation

Evidence of particular efficacy in
skin of color

Clascoterone

Applied twice daily; 1% cream

Mild irritation

Brand name, expensive.

ORAL ANTIBIOTICS§
Tetracycline#

250-­500 mg once or twice daily

Gastrointestinal upset, intracranial
hypertension

Inexpensive; dosing limited by
need to take on empty stomach.

Doxycycline#

50-­100 mg once or twice daily

Phototoxicity, intracranial
hypertension, pill esophagitis,
gastrointestinal upset

20-­mg dose antiinflammatory
only; limited data on efficacy.

Minocycline#

50-­100 mg once or twice daily

Hyperpigmentation of
teeth, oral mucosa, and
skin; lupus-­like reactions
with long-­term treatment,
intracranial hypertension, drug
hypersensitivity

Sarecycline

Daily for 12 wk based on weight;
60-­mg, 100-­mg, 150-­mg tablets

Intracranial hypertension,
lightheadedness, candidiasis,
nausea

Newest antimicrobial agent

Trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole

One dose (160 mg trimethoprim,
800 mg sulfamethoxazole) twice
daily

Toxic epidermal necrolysis and
allergic eruptions

Trimethoprim may be used alone
in a 300-­mg dose twice daily;
limited data available; not
generally recommended.

Erythromycin‡

250-­500 mg twice daily

Gastrointestinal upset

Resistance problematic; efficacy
is limited.

TOPICAL AGENTS
Retinoids
Tretinoin

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 710 u Acne

4183

Table 710.4  Medications for the Treatment of Acne—cont’d
DRUG

DOSE

SIDE EFFECTS

OTHER CONSIDERATIONS

HORMONAL AGENTS¶
Spironolactone#

50-­200 mg in 1-­2 divided doses

Temporary menstrual irregularities
and breast tenderness; possible
potassium elevations in those
with renal or cardiac disease

Higher doses more effective but
cause more side effects; best
given in combination with oral
contraceptives.

Daily

Potential side effects include
thromboembolism

Several approved specifically for
acne, but all COCs have efficacy
in acne treatment

0.5-­1.0 mg/kg/day in 2 divided
doses

Birth defects; adherence to
pregnancy prevention program
outlined by drug manufacturer,
including two initial negative
pregnancy tests, is essential;
hypertriglyceridemia, elevated
results on liver function tests,
abnormal night vision, benign
intracranial hypertension,
dryness of the lips, ocular,
nasal, and oral mucosa and
skin, secondary staphylococcal
infections, arthralgias, and
mood disturbances are possible
common or important side
effects; laboratory testing of
lipid profiles and liver function
tests when dosage established

Relapse rate higher if patient is
younger than age 16 yr at initial
treatment, if acne is of high
severity and involves the trunk,
or if drug is used in adult women

Estrogen-­containing oral
contraceptives
ORAL RETINOID
Isotretinoin**

*As cream or gel.
†Tazarotene is in pregnancy category X: contraindicated in pregnancy.
‡Clindamycin, erythromycin, and azelaic acid are in pregnancy category B: no evidence of risk in humans.
§Oral antibiotics are indicated for moderate to severe disease; for the treatment of acne on the chest, back, or shoulders; and in patients with inflammatory disease in whom topical

combinations have failed or are not tolerated.
#This drug is in pregnancy category D: positive evidence of risk in humans.
¶Hormonal agents are for use in women only.

**Isotretinoin is in pregnancy category X: contraindicated in pregnancy. It should be used only in patients with severe acne that does not clear with combined oral and topical
therapy.
Modified from James WD. Clinical practice: Acne. N Engl J Med. 2005;352:1463–1472.

Table 710.5  Recommendations for Systemic Antibiotics
• Systemic antibiotics are recommended in the management of
moderate and severe acne and forms of inflammatory acne that
are resistant to topical treatments.
• Doxycycline and minocycline are more effective than tetracycline.
• Although oral erythromycin or azithromycin can be effective in
treating acne, its use should be limited to those who cannot
use the tetracyclines (i.e., pregnant women or children <8 years
of age). Erythromycin use should be restricted because of its
increased risk of bacterial resistance.
• Use of systemic antibiotics other than the tetracyclines and
macrolides is discouraged because there are limited data for their
use in acne. Trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim
use should be restricted to patients who are unable to tolerate
tetracyclines or to treatment-­resistant patients.
• The use of systemic antibiotics should be limited to the shortest
possible duration. Reevaluate at 3-­4 mo to minimize the
development of bacterial resistance. Monotherapy with systemic
antibiotics is not recommended.
• Concomitant topical therapy with benzoyl peroxide or a retinoid
should be used with systemic antibiotics and for maintenance
after completion of systemic antibiotic therapy.
From Zaenglein AL, Pathy AL, Scholsser BJ, et al. Guidelines of care for the
management of acne vulgaris. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2016;74(5):945–973, Table VI, p.
952.

DRUG-­INDUCED ACNE

Pubertal and postpubertal patients who are receiving systemic corticosteroid therapy are predisposed to steroid-­induced acne. This
monomorphous folliculitis occurs primarily on the face, neck, chest

(Fig. 710.8), shoulders, upper back, arms, and, rarely, on the scalp.
Onset follows the initiation of steroid therapy by approximately 2
weeks. The lesions are small, erythematous papules or pustules that
may erupt in profusion and are all in the same stage of development.
Comedones may occur subsequently, but nodulocystic lesions and
scarring are rare. Pruritus is occasional. Although steroid acne is
relatively refractory if the medication is continued, the eruption may
respond to the use of tretinoin and a benzoyl peroxide gel.
Other drugs that can induce acneiform lesions in susceptible individuals include isoniazid, phenytoin, phenobarbital, trimethadione,
lithium carbonate, androgens (anabolic steroids), and vitamin B12.
Other causes of acne, including halogens and chloracne, are rare and
typically obvious with judicious history-­taking.

NEONATAL CEPHALIC PUSTULOSIS (FORMERLY
NEONATAL ACNE)

Approximately 20% of normal neonates demonstrate pustules and
red papules on the face in the first 6 weeks of life. Small inflammatory papules and pustules predominate on the cheeks and forehead
(Fig. 710.9); comedones are absent. The cause of neonatal acne is
unknown, but it has been theorized that it may be an inflammatory
reaction to Pityrosporum species rather than true acne. Other theories include placental transfer of maternal androgens, hyperactive
neonatal adrenal glands, and a hypersensitive neonatal end-­organ
response to androgenic hormones. The eruption involutes spontaneously over a few months. Treatment is usually unnecessary. If
desired, the lesions can be treated effectively with topical antifungals and/or benzoyl peroxide.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4184 Part XXIX u The Skin
Icepick (V)

Rolling (U)

Punch excision
(deep bases)

Combined
therapy

Elevation and
grafting

Micrograft and
subcision

Laser resurfacing/
dermabrasion
(many scars close
together)


 Filler
Resurfacing
microdermabrasion

Spot TCA peel

Deep-spot TCA
peel

Boxcar (M)

Keloids

Shallow
3 mm diameter-laser
skin resurfacing
3 mm diameter-laser
skin resurfacing  punch
elevation
Deep
3 mm diameter-punch
excision

Intralesional
corticosteroids
Intralesional 5-FU
Intralesional bleomycin
Compression
Imiquimod after
intralesional excision

3 mm diameter-punch
excision or punch
elevation

Cryotherapy

Fractional thermolysis
(deep or shallow)

Excision 
electrotherapy

Hypertrophic

Intralesional steroids
Intralesional 5-FU
Vascular laser
Intralesional bleomycin
Compression
Imiquimod after
intralesional excision

Pulsed-dye laser

Dermabrasion
CO2 laser resurfacing
Adjunctive treatment: Topical retinoids 2 wk before and after treatment, sunscreens, moisturizers
Nonablative lasers for mild disease; ablative and fractional lasers for moderate scarring

Fig. 710.7 Treatment options for acne scars. CO2, Carbon dioxide; FU, fluorouracil; TCA, trichloroacetic acid. (From Thiboutot D, Gollnick H;
Global Alliance to Improve Acne, et al. New insights into the management of acne: an update from the Global Allegiance to Improve Outcomes in
Acne. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2009;60:S1–S50.)

INFANTILE ACNE

Infantile acne usually manifests between 6 weeks and 2 years of age,
more commonly in males than in females (Fig. 710.10). Open and
closed comedones predominate on the face. Papules and pustules occur
frequently, but only occasionally do nodulocystic lesions develop. Pitted scarring is seen in 10–15%. The course may be relatively brief, or
the lesions may persist for many months or years, although the eruption generally resolves by 4 years of age. Use of topical benzoyl peroxide
gel and topical retinoid, as would be recommended for typical acne,
is effective but off-­label. Some acne medications are approved down
to age 9 years but none for infants. Oral erythromycin is occasionally
necessary, and isotretinoin can be used in severe cases. A child with
refractory acne or other signs of pubertal development warrants a
search for an abnormal source of androgens, such as a virilizing tumor
or congenital adrenal hyperplasia.

Fig. 710.8 Monomorphous papular eruption of steroid acne.

MID-­CHILDHOOD ACNE

Acne that begins between 1 and 7 years of age is not considered
normal. Although the neonatal adrenal gland secretes high levels of
androgens through the first year of life, it becomes quiescent until adrenarche, which occurs around age 7. Underlying endocrine abnormality
should be investigated in those presenting with acne in middle childhood. Precocious puberty, late-­onset congenital adrenal hyperplasia,
or an androgen-­secreting tumor may underlie acne in this age-­group.
Workup for androgen excess is indicated.

ACNE FULMINANS (ACUTE FEBRILE ULCERATIVE
ACNE)

Acne fulminans is characterized by abrupt onset of extensive inflammatory, tender, ulcerative acneiform lesions in typically male teenagers
and may be related to recent initiation of isotretinoin. The distinctive

feature is the tendency for large nodules to form exudative, necrotic,
ulcerated, crusted plaques. Lesions heal with extensive scarring.
A preceding history of mild papulopustular or nodular acne is noted
in most patients. Constitutional symptoms and signs are common,
including fever, debilitation, arthralgias, myalgias, weight loss, and
leukocytosis. Blood cultures are sterile. Lesions of erythema nodosum
sometimes develop on the shins. Osteolytic bone lesions may develop
in the clavicle, sternum, and epiphyseal growth plates; affected bones
appear normal or have slight sclerosis or thickening on healing. Salicylates may be helpful for the myalgias, arthralgias, and fever. Treatment
should be directed by a dermatologist and includes systemic corticosteroids and isotretinoin. Antibiotics are not indicated unless there is
evidence of secondary infection.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 711 u Tumors of the Skin

4185

the cyst is derived from the follicular infundibulum. A mass of layered
keratinized material that may have a cheesy consistency fills the cavity.
Cysts may arise from occlusion of pilosebaceous follicles (acneiform
cysts), implantation of epidermal cells into the dermis as a result of
an injury that penetrates the epidermis (epidermal inclusion cysts),
and rests of epidermal cells (epidermoid cysts). Multiple epidermoid
cysts may be present in Gardner syndrome and nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome. Excision of the cyst with removal of the entire sac and
its contents is indicated, particularly if the cyst becomes recurrently
inflamed. A fluctuant cyst should be incised and drained and, if there
is surrounding erythema, treated with antibiotics or intralesional corticosteroids. After the inflammation subsides, the cyst may be removed.

MILIUM
Fig. 710.9 Comedonal acne in a neonate.

A milium is a 1-­to 2-­mm, firm, pearly white or yellowish subepidermal
keratin cyst. Milia in newborns are discussed in Chapter 688. Secondary milia occur in association with subepidermal blistering diseases
and after dermabrasion or other injury to the skin. They are retention cysts caused by hyperproliferation of injured epithelium and are
indistinguishable histopathologically from primary milia. Those that
develop after blistering usually arise from the eccrine sweat duct, but
they may develop from the hair follicle, sebaceous duct, or epidermis.
A milium body differs from an infundibular follicular cyst only in its
small size and superficial location.

FIBROFOLLICULOMAS

Fig. 710.10 Inflammatory infantile acne.

These lesions usually appear in late adolescence or in young adults
and are characterized by multiple dome-­shaped, clear-­white papules
appearing on the nose, cheeks, and neck, and at times the trunk or ears
(Fig. 711.2). They are associated with the familial cancer syndrome of
Birt-­Hogg-­Dubé, an autosomal dominant disorder that results from
a pathogenic variant in the folliculin (FLCN) tumor suppressor gene.
Associated features include pulmonary cysts, pneumothorax, renal cell
carcinoma, and other benign or malignant tumors.

PILAR CYST (TRICHILEMMAL CYST)
Pyogenic Arthritis with Pyoderma Gangrenosum and Acne (PAPA
Syndrome) (see Fig. 710.5, Chapter 204, and Chapter 702).
Chronic Recurrent Multifocal Osteomyelitis/Synovitis Acne Pustulosis Hyperostosis Osteitis (SAPHO) Syndrome (see Chapter 204).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 711

Tumors of the Skin
Kari L. Martin
See also Chapter 636.

INFUNDIBULAR FOLLICULAR CYST

Infundibular follicular cysts (more commonly referred to as epidermoid
cysts or sebaceous cysts) are the nodules most commonly seen in children. Such a cyst is a sharply circumscribed, dome-­shaped, firm, freely
movable, skin-­colored nodule (Fig. 711.1), often with a central dimple
or punctum that is a plugged, dilated pore of a pilosebaceous follicle.
Follicular cysts form most frequently on the face, neck, chest, or upper
back and may periodically become inflamed and infected secondarily,
particularly in association with acne vulgaris. The cyst wall may also
rupture and induce an inflammatory reaction in the dermis. The wall of

A pilar cyst may be clinically indistinguishable from an infundibular
follicular cyst. It manifests as a smooth, firm, mobile nodule, predominantly on the scalp (Fig. 711.3). Pilar cysts occasionally develop on the
face, neck, or trunk. A cyst may become inflamed and may occasionally
suppurate and ulcerate. The cyst wall is composed of stratified squamous epithelium with indistinct intercellular bridges. The peripheral
cell layer of the wall shows a palisade arrangement, which is not seen in
an epidermoid cyst. No granular layer is present. The cyst cavity contains dense homogeneous eosinophilic keratinous material, and foci of
calcification are seen in 25% of cases. The propensity for development
of pilar cysts may be inherited in an autosomal dominant manner.
More than one cyst generally develops in a patient. Numerous pilar
and epidermoid cysts, desmoid tumors, fibromas, lipomas, or osteomas
may be associated with colonic polyposis or adenocarcinoma in Gardner syndrome. Pilar cysts shell out easily from the dermis.

PILOMATRICOMA (PILOMATRIXOMA)

The second most common nodule seen in children, pilomatricoma is
a benign tumor that manifests as a 3-­to 30-­mm, firm, solitary, deep
dermal or subcutaneous tumor on the head, neck, or upper extremities. The overlying epidermis is usually normal. The tumor may occasionally be located more superficially, however, tinting the overlying
skin blue-­red (Fig. 711.4). Multiple pilomatricomas are seen in myotonic dystrophy, Gardner syndrome, Rubinstein-­Taybi syndrome, and
Turner syndrome. In general, however, pilomatricomas are not hereditary. Histopathologically, irregularly shaped islands of epithelial cells
with eosinophilic, anucleate “ghost cells” are embedded in a cellular
stroma. Calcium deposits are found in 75% of tumors. Pilomatricomas
are caused by pathogenic variants in β-­catenin.

TRICHOEPITHELIOMA

A 2-­to 8-­
mm, smooth, round, firm, skin-­
colored papule,
trichoepithelioma is derived from an immature hair follicle.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4186 Part XXIX u The Skin

Fig. 711.1 Flesh-­colored cyst on the forehead.

Fig. 711.4 Pilomatricoma. Firm tumor with overlying bluish discoloration of the skin.

ERUPTIVE VELLUS HAIR CYSTS

Eruptive vellus hair cysts are 1-­to 3-­mm, asymptomatic, soft, skin-­
colored follicular papules on the central chest (Fig. 711.5). They may
become crusted or umbilicated. Abnormal vellus hair follicles become
occluded at the level of the infundibulum, resulting in retention of
hairs within an epithelium-­lined cystic dilation of the proximal part
of the follicle. Most cases are chronic, but spontaneous regression has
been reported.

STEATOCYSTOMA MULTIPLEX

Fig. 711.2 Multiple dome-­shaped, whitish papules on the nose and

cheeks in a 31-­yr-­old carrier of an FLCN pathogenic variant. (From Menko FH, van Steensel MAM, Giraud S, et al. Birt-­Hogg-­Dubé syndrome:
diagnosis and management. Lancet. 2009;10:1199–1206, Fig. 1.)

An autosomal dominant (KRT17 gene) condition, steatocystoma multiplex usually manifests in adolescence or early adulthood as numerous
soft to firm cystic nodules that are adherent to the underlying skin and
are 3 mm to 3 cm in diameter. When punctured, the cysts may drain
oily or cheesy material. Sites of predilection include the sternal region,
axillae, arms, and scrotal skin. The multiply folded cyst wall is lined on
the luminal side with a thick, homogeneous, eosinophilic horny layer;
there is no granular layer. Flattened sebaceous gland lobules are often
visible in the cyst wall, and lanugo hairs may be present in a cystic cavity that appears otherwise empty (a processing artifact).

SYRINGOMA

The benign tumors known as syringomas are soft, small, skin-­colored
or yellowish-­brown papules that develop on the face, particularly in
the periorbital regions (Fig. 711.6). Other sites of predilection include
the axillae and umbilical and pubic areas. They often develop during puberty and are more frequent in females. Eruptive syringomas
develop in crops over the anterior trunk during childhood or adolescence. A syringoma is derived from an intraepidermal sweat gland
duct. Syringomas are of cosmetic significance only. Sparse lesions may
be excised, but they are often too numerous to remove.

INFANTILE DIGITAL FIBROMA
Fig. 711.3 Pilar cyst of the anterior scalp.

Trichoepitheliomas generally occur singly on the face in childhood or early adulthood. Multiple trichoepitheliomas are inherited
autosomal dominantly (type 1: CYLD gene; type 2: 9p21 gene currently unidentified), appear in childhood or at puberty, and gradually increase in number on the nasofacial folds, nose, forehead, and
upper lip; occasionally they occur on the scalp, neck, and upper
trunk. Microscopically, these benign tumors are characterized by
horn cysts composed of a fully keratinized center surrounded by
basophilic cells in an adenoid network. Topical imiquimod therapy
may be beneficial. Surgical excision has been used for therapy, as
have cryotherapy, electrosurgery, and laser vaporization.

Infantile digital fibroma is a smooth, firm, erythematous or skin-­
colored nodule on the dorsal or lateral surface of a distal phalanx of
a finger or toe. More than 80% of tumors occur in infancy or may be
present at birth. Lesions may be solitary or multiple and may manifest as “kissing” tumors on opposing digits. They are usually asymptomatic, but flexion deformity of the digits may occur. Clinically the
lesion resembles a fibroma, leiomyoma, angiofibroma, acquired digital
fibrokeratoma, accessory digit, or mucous cyst. The diagnosis is confirmed by the finding of numerous spindle-­shaped fibroblasts that
contain small, round, dense eosinophilic cytoplasmic inclusion bodies
composed of collections of actin microfilaments. Local recurrence after
simple excision of this tumor has been reported in 75% of patients.
Because the tumor does not metastasize and may regress spontaneously in 2-­3 years, a course of expectant observation is advised. If functional impairment or flexion deformity of the digit becomes apparent,
prompt full excision of the tumor is indicated.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 711 u Tumors of the Skin

Fig. 711.5 Eruptive vellus hair cysts. Multiple papules on the chest.

4187

Fig. 711.7 Dermatofibroma. Red-­brown nodular variant.

A

Fig. 711.6 Syringomas. Multiple yellow papules near the eye.

DERMATOFIBROMA

A benign dermal tumor, dermatofibroma may be pedunculated, nodular (Fig. 711.7), or flat and is usually well circumscribed and firm
but occasionally feels soft on palpation. The overlying skin is usually
hyperpigmented; it may be shiny or keratotic and dimples when the
tumor is pinched. Dermatofibromas range in size from 0.5 to 10.0 mm,
arise most frequently on the limbs, and are usually asymptomatic but
may occasionally be pruritic. They are composed of fibroblasts, young
and mature collagen, capillaries, and histiocytes in varying proportions, forming a nodule in the dermis that has poorly defined edges.
The cause of these tumors is unknown, but trauma such as an insect
bite or folliculitis appears to induce reactive fibroplasia. The differential diagnosis includes epidermal inclusion cyst, juvenile xanthogranuloma, hypertrophic scar, and neurofibroma. Dermatofibromas may be
excised or left intact, according to the patient’s preference. They usually
persist indefinitely.

JUVENILE XANTHOGRANULOMA

A firm, dome-­shaped, yellow, pink, or orange papule or nodule (Fig.
711.8), juvenile xanthogranuloma varies from 5 mm to approximately
4 cm in diameter. The average age at onset is 2 years. These nodules are
10 times more common in White than in Black individuals. Sites of

B
Fig. 711.8 A, Juvenile xanthogranuloma. A 4-­mm, apricot-­colored,

dome-­
shaped, firm papule with overlying telangiectasias below the
nasal columella. B, Pink-­red rim in a “setting-­sun” pattern seen by dermoscopy. (From Bell KA, Marathe K, Burke KT, Cardis MA. A persistent
pimple in a 5-­year-­old girl. J Pediatr. 2020;224:172–173, Figs. 1 and 2,
p. 172).

predilection are the scalp, face, and upper trunk, where they may erupt
in profusion or remain as solitary lesions. Nodular lesions may appear
on the oral mucosa. The diagnosis is usually made clinically. Mature
lesions are characterized histopathologically by a dermal infiltrate of
lipid-­laden histiocytes, admixed inflammatory cells, and Touton giant
cells. Clinically the lesions may resemble papulonodular urticaria pigmentosa, dermatofibromas, or xanthomas of hyperlipoproteinemia,
but they can be distinguished from these entities histopathologically.
Affected infants are nearly always otherwise normal, and blood
lipid values are not elevated. Café-­au-­lait macules are found on 20% of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4188 Part XXIX u The Skin
patients with juvenile xanthogranuloma. Xanthogranulomatous infiltrates occur occasionally in the iris or other ocular tissues. This process
may result in glaucoma, hyphema, uveitis, heterochromia iridis, iritis,
or sudden proptosis. When seen in patients <2 years of age, multiple
lesions and periocular location may heighten concerns for intraocular involvement. There appears to be an association among juvenile
xanthogranuloma, neurofibromatosis, and childhood leukemia, most
frequently juvenile chronic myelogenous leukemia. There is no need to
remove the benign lesions of juvenile xanthogranuloma because most
of them regress spontaneously in the first few years. Residual dyspigmentation and atrophy may result.

LIPOMA

A benign collection of fatty tissue, lipoma appears on the trunk, neck,
or proximal portions of the limbs. Lipomas are soft, compressible, lobulated subcutaneous masses. Multiple lesions may occur occasionally,
as in Gardner syndrome. Atrophy, calcification, liquefaction, or xanthomatous change may sometimes complicate their course. A lipoma
is composed of normal fat cells surrounded by a thin connective tissue capsule. Lipomas represent a cosmetic defect and may be surgically excised. Multiple lipomas, identical to those that occur singly, are
inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion and often appear by the
third decade in patients with familial multiple lipomatosis. Lipomas
may appear intraabdominally, intramuscularly, and subcutaneously.
Congenital lipomatosis manifests in the first few months of life as large
subcutaneous fatty masses on the chest with extension into skeletal
muscle. Congenital lipomatosis can also be a manifestation of Proteus
syndrome (overgrowth/hyperplasia skin, connective tissue, pathogenic variant in AKT1). Angiolipomas usually manifest as numerous
painful subcutaneous nodules on the arms and trunk.
CLOVES syndrome (congenital lipomatous overgrowth, vascular
malformations, epidermal nevi, and scoliosis/skeletal and spinal anomalies) is usually a sporadic disorder caused by a pathogenic variant in
the PIK3CA gene with an asymmetric truncal lipomatous mass present at birth. Additional features include macrodactyly, vascular malformations (low flow), linear epidermal nevus, and renal anomalies.

A

B

The differential diagnosis includes Proteus, Klippel-­Trenaunay, and
Bannayan-­Riley-­Ruvalcaba syndromes.
PIK3CA somatic pathogenic variants and those in the related AKT-­
mTOR pathway (PIK3CA-­related overgrowth spectrum [PROS]) are
associated with segmental overgrowth syndromes (Fig. 711.9; see also
Fig. 691.6). In addition to regional/localized tissue overgrowth, there
is a spectrum of malformations (hemimegaloencephaly, macrodactyly,
lymphatic, muscle hemihypertrophy, epidermal nevi, capillary, polydactyly, syndactyly).

BASAL CELL CARCINOMA

Basal cell carcinoma is very rare in children in the absence of a predisposing condition, such as nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome, xeroderma pigmentosum, nevus sebaceus of Jadassohn, arsenic intake, or
exposure to irradiation. The lesions are smooth, pearly, pink telangiectatic papules that enlarge slowly and may bleed or ulcerate. Sites of predilection are the face, scalp, and upper back. The differential diagnosis
includes pyogenic granuloma, nevocellular nevus, epidermal inclusion
cyst, closed comedo, dermatofibroma, and adnexal tumor. Depending
on the site of occurrence and associated disease of the host, electrodesiccation and curettage or simple excision of basal cell carcinoma
is usually curative. When the tumor is recurrent, >2 cm in diameter,
located on problematic anatomic areas such as the midface or ears, or
is an aggressive histopathologic type, Mohs microscopically controlled
surgery may be the most appropriate treatment.

NEVOID BASAL CELL CARCINOMA SYNDROME
(BASAL CELL NEVUS SYNDROME, GORLIN
SYNDROME)

The autosomal dominant entity known as nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome is caused by pathogenic variants in the PTCH1,
PTCH2 (“patched”), and SUFU genes. These tumor-­suppressor genes,
part of the hedgehog signaling pathway, are important in determining embryonic patterning and cell fate in a number of structures in
the developing embryo. Pathogenic variants in these genes produce dysregulation of several genes involved in organogenesis and

C

D

Fig. 711.9 Photographs and MRIs of participants with isolated LM, CLOVES, KTS, and FAVA. A, An 8-­mo-­old boy (LM1) with isolated LM. Note

swelling in deltoid region without cutaneous vascular signs. Coronal and sagittal fat-­saturated T2-­weighted MRI demonstrates macrocystic LM (a
multilocular cystic mass) involving the anterolateral aspects of the right shoulder without muscular infiltration (arrows); humeral head (asterisk). B, A
19-­mo-­old female (CL12) with CLOVES syndrome. Note asymmetric distribution of truncal lipomatous masses and bilateral lower extremity involvement. Coronal fat-­saturated T1-­weighted MRI after contrast administration demonstrates moderate heterogeneous enhancement of the bilateral
truncal masses (arrows). Axial T1-­weighted MRI without contrast depicts truncal lipomatous overgrowth (arrows); segment VI of the liver (asterisk).
C, A 3-­yr-­old boy (KT4) with KTS. Note capillary LM and overgrowth involving the right lower extremity. Coronal and axial fat-­saturated T2-­weighted
MRI shows the persistent marginal vein system (bent arrows) and marked enlargement of the subcutaneous tissues due to a combination of lymphatic fluid and fat (straight arrow). There are also intramuscular venous malformations. D, A 9-­yr-­old boy (F8) with FAVA of the left gastrocnemius
muscle; note absence of overgrowth and cutaneous vascular anomalies. Sagittal fat-­saturated T1-­weighted MRI after contrast administration demonstrates the longitudinal distribution of the diffuse FAVA (arrows). Axial fat-­saturated T2-­weighted MRI with (upper) and without (lower) contrast. Note
that the right head of the gastrocnemius muscle is diffusely replaced by a contrast-­enhancing heterogeneous soft tissue lesion (arrows). CLOVES,
Congenital lipomatous overgrowth with vascular, epidermal, and skeletal anomalies; FAVA, fibroadipose vascular anomaly; KTS, Klippel-­Trenaunay
syndrome; LM, lymphatic malformation. (From Luks VL, Kamitaki N, Vivero MP, et al. Lymphatic and other vascular malformative/overgrowth disorders are caused by somatic pathogenic variants in PIK3CA. J Pediatr. 2015;166:1048–1054, Fig. 1, p. 1051.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 712 u Nutritional Dermatoses 4189
carcinogenesis. Consequently, the syndrome includes a wide spectrum
of defects involving the skin, eyes, central nervous and endocrine systems, and bones. The predominant features are early-­onset basal cell
carcinomas and mandibular cysts. Approximately 20% of those in
whom a basal cell carcinoma develops before age 19 years have this
syndrome. Basal cell carcinomas appear between puberty and age 35
years, erupting in crops of tumors that vary in size, color, and number;
they may be difficult to distinguish from other types of skin lesions.
Sites of predilection are the periorbital skin, nose, malar areas, and
upper lip, but the lesions can also develop on the trunk and limbs and
are not restricted to sun-­exposed areas. Ulceration, bleeding, crusting,
and local invasion can occur. Small milia, epidermal cysts, pigmented
lesions, hirsutism, and palmar and plantar pits are additional cutaneous findings.
The facies of patients with this syndrome are characterized by temporoparietal bossing, prominent supraorbital ridges, a broad nasal
root, ocular hypertelorism or dystopia canthorum, and prognathism.
Keratinized cysts (odontogenic keratocysts) in the maxilla and mandible occur in most patients. These cysts range in size from a few
millimeters to several centimeters; may result in maldevelopment of
the teeth; and cause pain, swelling of the jaw, facial deformity, bone
erosion, pathologic fractures, and suppurating sinus tracts. Osseous
defects such as anomalous rib development, spina bifida, kyphoscoliosis, and brachymetacarpalism occur in 60% of patients, and ocular
abnormalities—including cataracts, glaucoma, coloboma, strabismus,
and blindness—occur in approximately 25%. Some males have hypogonadism, and the testes are absent or undescended. Kidney malformations have also been reported. Neurologic manifestations include
calcification of the falx, seizures, mental retardation, partial agenesis of
the corpus callosum, hydrocephalus, and nerve deafness. The incidence
of medulloblastoma, ameloblastoma of the oral cavity, fibrosarcoma of
the jaw, teratoma, cystadenoma, cardiac fibroma, ovarian fibroma, and
fetal-­onset rhabdomyoma is higher in patients with nevoid basal cell
carcinoma syndrome.
Treatment of these patients requires the participation of various
specialists according to individual clinical problems. Basal cell carcinomas should not be treated with irradiation. Most of the basal cell
carcinomas have a clinically benign course, and it is often impossible
to remove them all. Those with an aggressive growth pattern and those
on the central areas of the face, however, should be removed promptly.
Treatment options include surgery, Mohs micrographic surgery, laser
ablation, cryotherapy, photodynamic therapy, topical 5% imiquimod
and oral retinoids (0.5-­1.0 mg/kg/day). Vismodegib, which inhibits
smoothened protein in the hedgehog pathway, is a targeted therapy
available for unresectable basal cell carcinomas. Genetic counseling is
also indicated.

MELANOMA
See Chapter 692.

MUCOSAL NEUROMA SYNDROME (MULTIPLE
ENDOCRINE NEOPLASIA TYPE IIB)

Mucosal neuroma syndrome, an autosomal dominant trait, is characterized by an asthenic or marfanoid habitus with scoliosis, pectus excavatum, pes cavus, and muscular hypotonia. The syndrome is caused
by pathogenic variants in the tyrosine kinase domain of the RET gene.
Patients have thick, patulous lips and soft tissue prognathism simulating acromegaly. Multiple mucosal neuromas or neurofibromas appear
as pink, pedunculated, or sessile nodules on the anterior third of the
tongue, at the commissures of the lips, and on the buccal mucosa and
palpebral conjunctiva. Various ophthalmologic defects and intestinal
ganglioneuromatosis with recurrent diarrhea are additional common
findings. There is a high incidence of medullary thyroid carcinoma
in association with high calcitonin levels, pheochromocytoma, and
hyperparathyroidism in patients with this syndrome. Periodic screening tests for the associated malignant tumors are mandatory.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 712

Nutritional Dermatoses
Joel C. Joyce
OVERVIEW

There are many cutaneous manifestations of nutritional deficiencies
(Table 712.1). For more details see Chapters 64-­72.

ACRODERMATITIS ENTEROPATHICA

Acrodermatitis enteropathica is a rare autosomal recessive disorder
caused by an inability to absorb sufficient zinc from the diet. The genetic
variant is in the intestinal zinc-­specific transporter gene SLC39A4.
Initial signs and symptoms usually occur in the first few months of
life, often after weaning from breast milk to cow’s milk. The cutaneous
eruption consists of vesiculobullous, eczematous, dry, scaly, or psoriasiform skin lesions symmetrically distributed in the perioral, acral,
and perineal areas (Fig. 712.1) and on the cheeks, knees, and elbows
(Fig. 712.2). The hair often has a peculiar, reddish tint, and alopecia
of some degree is characteristic. Ocular manifestations include photophobia, conjunctivitis, blepharitis, and corneal dystrophy detectable
by slit-­lamp examination. Associated manifestations include chronic
diarrhea, stomatitis, glossitis, paronychia, nail dystrophy, growth retardation, irritability, delayed wound healing, intercurrent bacterial infections, and superinfection with Candida albicans. Lymphocyte function
and free radical scavenging are impaired. Without treatment the course
is chronic and intermittent but often relentlessly progressive. When the
disease is less severe, only growth retardation and delayed development
may be apparent.
The diagnosis is established by the constellation of clinical findings
and detection of a low plasma zinc concentration. A serum zinc level
less than 50 μg/dL is suggestive, but not diagnostic, of acrodermatitis enteropathica. Levels of alkaline phosphatase, a zinc-­dependent
enzyme, may also be decreased. Histopathologic changes in the skin
are nonspecific and include parakeratosis and pallor of the upper epidermis. The variety of manifestations of the syndrome may stem from
the fact that zinc has a role in numerous metabolic pathways—including those of copper, protein, essential fatty acids, and prostaglandins—
and that zinc is incorporated into many zinc metalloenzymes. Other
nutritional deficiencies may produce similar findings (see Table 712.1),
although the classic findings are highly suggestive of acrodermatitis
enteropathica.
Oral therapy with zinc compounds is the treatment of choice.
Replacement for individuals with inherited acrodermatitis enteropathica is with elemental zinc 3 mg/kg/24 hr in the form of zinc sulfate, gluconate, or acetate (i.e., 220 mg of zinc sulfate contains 50 mg
of elemental zinc). Zinc gluconate carries less risk of gastrointestinal
distress. However, plasma zinc levels should be monitored every 3-­6
months so as to individualize the dosage. Zinc therapy rapidly abolishes the manifestations of the disease. Supplementation is for life. A
syndrome resembling acrodermatitis enteropathica has been observed
in patients with secondary zinc deficiency resulting from long-­term
total parenteral nutrition without supplemental zinc or to chronic malabsorption syndromes. A rash similar to acrodermatitis enteropathica
has also been reported in infants fed breast milk that is low in zinc and
in those with maple syrup urine disease, organic aciduria, methylmalonic acidemia, biotinidase deficiency, essential fatty acid deficiency,
severe protein malnutrition (kwashiorkor), and cystic fibrosis. Cutaneous manifestations tend to appear in more severe forms. For those
individuals with acquired zinc deficiency, oral replacement with elemental zinc, 0.5-­1.0 mg/kg/24 hr, should be undertaken and the cause
of underlying malnutrition should be addressed.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4190 Part XXIX u The Skin
Table 712.1  Distinctive Skin Changes of Nutritional Disorders and Selected Differential Diagnosis
SKIN CHANGE

NUTRITIONAL DISORDER

SELECTED DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Exfoliative erythroderma

Kwashiorkor

Atopic dermatitis, psoriasis, staphylococcal
scalded skin syndrome

Phrynoderma

Vitamin A deficiency, vitamin B–complex
deficiencies, vitamin C deficiency, essential
fatty acid deficiency

Keratosis pilaris, pityriasis rubra pilaris

Petechiae, purpura

Vitamin K deficiency, vitamin C deficiency
(perifollicular petechiae)

Consumptive coagulopathy, coagulation
disorder, thrombocytopenia, vascular
fragility syndrome (Ehlers-­Danlos), cutaneous
vasculitis (e.g., Henoch-­Schoenlein purpura)

Yellow-­orange discoloration

Carotenemia

Jaundice, quinacrine-­induced

Hyperpigmentation

Vitamin B12 deficiency, folate deficiency

Addison disease

Photodistributed dermatitis

Vitamin B3 deficiency (pellagra), vitamin B6
deficiency

Connective tissue disease (systemic
lupus erythematosus, dermatomyositis),
polymorphous light eruption

Seborrheic dermatitis–like changes

Vitamin B–complex deficiencies

Seborrheic dermatitis, psoriasis

Angular stomatitis

Vitamin B–complex deficiencies, iron
deficiency

Angular cheilitis with candidal overgrowth

Glossitis

Vitamin B–complex deficiencies, zinc
deficiency, iron deficiency

Sjogren syndrome, oral lichen planus, syphilis

Diaper dermatitis

Zinc deficiency, vitamin B–complex
deficiencies

Irritant or allergic contact dermatitis,
seborrheic dermatitis, inverse psoriasis,
Langerhans cell histiocytosis

Lightening of hair

Kwashiorkor, marasmus, vitamin B–complex
deficiencies, copper deficiency

Poliosis, vitiligo

Corkscrew hairs

Vitamin C deficiency

Nail changes

Koilonychia: iron deficiency
Longitudinal hyperpigmented streaks: vitamin
B3 deficiency (pellagra)

Koilonychia: chronic irritant, lichen planus,
psoriasis, Plummer–Vinson syndrome,
transient in young children
Longitudinal hyperpigmented streaks:
physiologic, drug-­induced, trauma

From Wong CY, Chu DH. Cutaneous signs of nutritional disorders. Inter J Women Dermatol. 2021;7:647–652: Table 1, p. 649.

ESSENTIAL FATTY ACID DEFICIENCY

Essential fatty acid deficiency causes a generalized scaly dermatitis
composed of thickened, erythematous, desquamating plaques. Individuals may also show failure to thrive, growth retardation, alopecia,
thrombocytopenia, and poor wound healing. The eruption has been
induced experimentally in animals fed a fat-­free diet and has been
observed in patients with chronic severe malabsorption, as in short-­gut
syndrome, and in those sustained on a fat-­free diet or fat-­free parenteral alimentation. Linoleic acid (18:2 n-­6) and arachidonic acid (20:4
n-­6) are deficient, and an abnormal metabolite, 5,8,11-­eicosatrienoic
acid (20:3 n-­9), is present in the plasma. Alterations in the triene/tetraene ratio are diagnostic (arachidonic acid/eicosatrienoic acid ratio
>0.4 or linoleic acid/arachidonic acid ratio >2.3). The horny layer of
the skin contains microscopic cracks, the barrier function of the skin is
disturbed, and transepidermal water loss is increased. Topical application of linoleic acid, which is present in sunflower seed and safflower
oils, may ameliorate the clinical and biochemical skin manifestations,
although absorption can be inconsistent. Oral and/or parenteral therapy can also be considered. Appropriate nutrition should be provided,
with the recommendation that 1–4% of total calories should be from
linoleic acid.

KWASHIORKOR

Severe protein and essential amino acid deprivation in association with
adequate caloric intake can lead to kwashiorkor, particularly at the
time of weaning to a diet that consists primarily of corn, rice (or rice

milk), or beans (see Chapter 64). Children can be fed such a restricted
diet for cultural reasons or because of misdiagnosis on the part of the
child’s parents or healthcare providers of perceived food allergies.
Diffuse, fine, reddish-­brown scaling (enamel/flaky paint sign) is the
classic cutaneous finding. In severe cases, erosions and linear fissures
develop (Fig. 712.3). Nails are thin and soft, and hair is sparse, thin, and
depigmented, sometimes displaying a “flag sign” consisting of alternating light and dark bands that reflect alternating periods of adequate
and inadequate nutrition. The cutaneous manifestations may closely
resemble those of acrodermatitis enteropathica; however, edema of the
extremities and face (“moon facies”) and a protuberant abdomen (“pot
belly”) are key features uniformly observed in kwashiorkor. The serum
zinc level is often deficient; in some cases, skin lesions of kwashiorkor
heal more rapidly when zinc is applied topically. See Chapter 64 for
treatment recommendations.

CYSTIC FIBROSIS

See Chapter 454.
Protein-­calorie malnutrition develops in 5–10% of patients with
cystic fibrosis. Rash in infants with cystic fibrosis and malnutrition
is rare but may appear by age 6 months. The initial eruption consists of scaling, erythematous papules and progresses in 1-­3 months
to extensive desquamating plaques. The rash is accentuated around
the mouth and perineum and on the extremities (lower greater than
upper). Alopecia may be present, but mucous membranes and nails
are uninvolved.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 712 u Nutritional Dermatoses 4191
PELLAGRA

See Chapter 67.3.
Pellagra manifests as edema, erythema, and burning of sun-­exposed
skin on the face, neck, and dorsal aspects of the hands, forearms, and
feet. Lesions of pellagra may also be provoked by burns, pressure, friction, and inflammation. The eruption on the face frequently follows a
butterfly distribution, and the dermatitis encircling the neck has been
termed “Casal’s necklace.” Blisters and scales develop, and the skin
increasingly becomes dry, rough, thickened, cracked, and hyperpigmented. Skin infections may be unusually severe. Pellagra develops
in patients with insufficient dietary intake or malabsorption of niacin
and/or tryptophan. Administration of isoniazid, 6-­mercaptopurine,
or 5-­fluorouracil may also produce pellagra. Hartnup disease (see
Chapter 105), caused by a pathogenic gene variant in SLC6A19, which
encodes a neutral amino acid transporter, is a rare autosomal recessive
disorder that presents in infancy with a “pellagra-­like syndrome” as a
result of decreased absorption of tryptophan. Nicotinamide supplementation and sun avoidance are the mainstays of therapy in pellagra.
See Chapter 67.3 for treatment recommendations.

A

B
Fig. 712.1 A, Periorificial eruption. B, Diaper rash. The skin findings

are typical of zinc deficiency, in this case caused by low levels of zinc
in breast milk. (From Eichenfield LF, Frieden IJ, Esterly NB. Textbook of
Neonatal Dermatology. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2001: Fig. 14.14.)

Fig. 712.3 Erosions and scaling in kwashiorkor.

Fig. 712.2 A, Psoriasiform le-

A

B

sion of zinc deficiency dermatitis
on the ankles. B, Similar lesions on
the elbows.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4192 Part XXIX u The Skin
SCURVY (VITAMIN C OR ASCORBIC ACID
DEFICIENCY)

See Chapter 68.
Scurvy manifests initially as follicular hyperkeratosis, or coiling
of the hair on the upper arms, back, buttocks, and lower extremities
(Fig. 712.4). Other features are perifollicular erythema and hemorrhage, particularly on the legs and advancing to involve large areas of
hemorrhage; swollen, erythematous gums (Fig. 712.5); stomatitis; and
subperiosteal hematomas. In children, the most common risk factors
are behavioral or psychiatric disease resulting in poor nutrition. The
best method of confirmation of a clinical diagnosis of scurvy is a trial
of vitamin C supplementation. Treatment is with 100-­200 mg/day of
vitamin C supplementation orally or parenterally for up to 3 months.

VITAMIN A DEFICIENCY
See Chapter 66.

Fig. 712.5 Clinical photograph showing inflamed marginal gingiva

in scurvy. (From Agarwal A, Shaharyar A, Kumar A, et al. Scurvy in
pediatric age group – a disease often forgotten? J Clin Ortho Trauma.
2015;6:101–107, Fig. 1, p. 103.)

Vitamin A deficiency manifests initially as impairment of visual
adaptation to the dark. Cutaneous changes include xerosis and hyperkeratosis and hyperplasia of the epidermis, particularly the lining of
hair follicles and sebaceous glands. In severe cases, desquamation may
be prominent. See Chapter 66 for treatment recommendations.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.
Fig. 712.4 Scurvy. (Photo courtesy Albert Yan, MD.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

