The Nervous System
Chapter 630

Neurologic Evaluation
Yolanda F. Holler-­Managan
HISTORY

A detailed history is the cornerstone of neurologic assessment.
Although parents may be the primary informants, most children older
than 3-­4 years can contribute to their history and should be questioned.
The history should begin with the chief complaint and its significance
in the context of normal development (see Chapters 21-­28). The latter step is critical because a 13-­month-­old who cannot walk may be
normal, whereas a 4-­year-­old who cannot walk might have a serious
neurologic condition.
Next, the history of the present illness should provide a chronological outline of the patient’s symptoms, with attention paid to location,
quality, intensity, duration, associated features, and alleviating or exacerbating factors. It is essential to perform a review of systems because
abnormalities of the central nervous system (CNS) often manifest with
vague, nonfocal symptoms that may be misattributed to other organ
systems (e.g., vomiting, constipation, urinary incontinence). A detailed
history might suggest that vomiting is a result of increased intracranial
pressure (ICP) rather than gastritis or that constipation and urinary
incontinence are caused by a spinal cord tumor rather than behavioral stool withholding. In addition, a systemic illness may produce
CNS manifestations, as do lupus erythematosus (seizures, psychosis, demyelination), mitochondrial disorders (developmental delay,
strokes, hypotonia), or celiac disease (headaches, seizures, peripheral
neuropathy).
After obtaining the chief complaint and history of the present illness,
the physician should obtain a complete birth history, particularly if a
congenital or perinatal disorder is suspected. The birth history should
begin with a review of the pregnancy, including specific questions
about common complications, such as pregnancy-­induced hypertension, preeclampsia, gestational diabetes, vaginal bleeding, infections,
and falls. It is important to quantify any cigarette, alcohol, or drug (prescription, herbal, illicit) use. Inquiring about fetal movement might
provide clues to an underlying diagnosis, because decreased or absent
fetal activity can be associated with chromosomal anomalies and CNS
or neuromuscular disorders. Finally, any abnormal ultrasound or
amniocentesis results should be noted.
The mother’s labor history should address the gestational age at
birth and mode of delivery (spontaneous vaginal, vacuum-­or forceps-­
assisted, cesarean section) and should comment on the presence or
absence of fetal distress. If delivery was by cesarean section, it is essential to record the indication for surgery.
The birthweight, length, and head circumference provide useful
information about the duration of a given problem, as well as insights
into the uterine environment. Parents can usually provide a reliable history of their child’s postnatal course; however, if the patient was resuscitated or had a complicated hospital stay, it is often helpful to obtain
the hospital records. The physician should inquire about the infant’s
general well-­being, feeding and sleeping patterns, activity level, and the
nature of the infant’s cry. If the infant had jaundice, it is important to
determine both the degree of jaundice and how it was managed. Features of neurologic dysfunction at full term include inability to breathe
spontaneously; poor, uncoordinated suck; or the need for an inordinate
amount of time to feed or a requirement for gavage feeding. Again,

PART

XXV

it is important to consider the developmental context because all of
these issues would be expected in premature infants, particularly those
with a very low birthweight. Double-­checking the newborn screening
results may provide a clue to abnormal neurologic manifestations in
an infant.
A major component of the neurologic history is the developmental
assessment (see Chapters 21-­28). Careful evaluation of a child’s social,
cognitive, language, fine motor skills, and gross motor skills is required
to distinguish normal development from either an isolated or a global
(i.e., in two or more domains) developmental delay. A static abnormality in development from birth suggests a congenital, intrauterine,
or perinatal cause, but a loss of skills (regression) over time strongly
suggests an underlying degenerative disease of the CNS, such as an
inborn error of metabolism or genetic disorder. The ability of parents
to recall the precise timing of their child’s developmental milestones is
extremely variable. It is often helpful to request old photographs of the
child or to review the baby book, where the milestones may have been
dutifully recorded. In general, parents are aware when their child has
a developmental problem, and the physician should show appropriate
concern. Table 630.1 outlines the upper limits of normal for attaining
specific developmental milestones. Chapter 28 includes a comprehensive review of developmental screening tests and their interpretation.
Next, the family history must be reviewed. Most parents are cooperative in securing medical information about family members, particularly if it might have relevance for their child. The history should
document the age and history of neurologic disease, including developmental delay, epilepsy, migraine, stroke, and inherited disorders,
for all first-­and second-­degree relatives. It is important to inquire
directly about miscarriages or fetal deaths and to document the sex
of the relevant embryo or fetus, as well as the gestational age at the
time of demise. When available, the results of postmortem examinations should be obtained, because they can have a direct bearing on
the patient’s condition. The parents should be questioned about their
ethnic backgrounds because some genetic disorders occur more commonly within specific populations (e.g., Tay-­Sachs disease in the Ashkenazi Jewish population). They should also be asked if there is any
chance that they could be related to each other, because the incidence
of metabolic and degenerative disorders of the CNS is increased significantly in children of consanguineous marriages.
The social history should detail the child’s current living environment
and the child’s relationship with other family members. It is important
to inquire about recent stressors, such as divorce, remarriage, birth of
a sibling, or death of a loved one, because they can affect the child’s
behavior. If the child is in daycare or school, one should document the
child’s academic and social performance, paying particular attention to
any abrupt changes. Academic performance can be assessed by asking
about the child’s latest report card, and peer relationships can be evaluated by having the child name his or her best friends. Any child who
is unable to name at least two or three playmates might have abnormal social development. In some cases, discussions with the daycare
worker or teacher provide useful ancillary data.

NEUROLOGIC EXAMINATION

The neurologic examination begins during the interview. Indirect
observation of the child’s appearance and movements can yield valuable information about the presence of an underlying disorder. For
instance, it may be obvious that the child has dysmorphic facies, an
unusual posture, or an abnormality of motor function manifested by a
hemiparesis or gait disturbance. The child’s behavior while playing and
interacting with his or her parents may also be telling. A normal child
usually plays independently early in the visit but then engages in the
interview process. A child with attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder

3550
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 630 u Neurologic Evaluation

3551

Table 630.1  Screening Scheme for Developmental Delay: Upper Range
AGE (MO)

GROSS MOTOR

FINE MOTOR

SOCIAL SKILLS

LANGUAGE

3

Supports weight on forearms

Opens hands spontaneously

Smiles appropriately

Coos, laughs

6

Sits momentarily

Transfers objects

Shows likes and dislikes

Babbles

9

Pulls to stand

Pincer grasp

Plays pat-­a-­cake, peek-­a-­boo

Imitates sounds

12

Walks with one hand held

Releases an object on command

Comes when called

One to two meaningful words

18

Walks upstairs with assistance

Feeds self from a spoon

Mimics actions of others

At least six words

24

Runs

Builds a tower of six blocks

Plays with others

Two-­to three-­word sentences

might display impulsive behavior in the examining room, and a child
with neurologic impairment might exhibit complete lack of awareness
of the environment. Finally, note should be made of any unusual odors
about the patient, because some metabolic disorders produce characteristic scents (e.g., the musty smell of phenylketonuria or the sweaty
feet smell of isovaleric acidemia; see Chapter 104). If such an odor is
present, it is important to determine whether it is persistent or transient, occurring only with illnesses.
The examination should be conducted in a nonthreatening, child-­
friendly setting. The child should be allowed to sit where the child is
most comfortable, whether it be on a parent’s lap or on the floor of
the examination room. The physician should approach the child slowly,
reserving any invasive, painful, or discomforting tests for the end of the
examination (e.g., measurement of head circumference, gag reflex). In
the end, the more that the examination seems like a game, the more the
child will cooperate. Because the neurologic examination of an infant
requires a somewhat modified approach from that of an older child,
these two groups are considered separately (see Chapters 21-­23 and
115 vs Chapters 24-­27).

Mental State

Age aside, the neurologic examination should include an assessment
of the patient’s mental state in terms of both the level of arousal and
the interaction with the environment. Premature infants born at <28
weeks of gestation do not have consistent periods of alertness, whereas
slightly older infants arouse from sleep with gentle physical stimulation. Sleep–wake patterns are well developed at term. Because the level
of alertness of a neonate depends on many factors, including the time
of the last feeding, room temperature, and gestational age, serial examinations are critical when evaluating for changes in neurologic function.
An older child’s mental state can be assessed by watching the child play.
Having the child tell a story, draw a picture, or complete a puzzle can
also be helpful in assessing cognitive function. Memory can be evaluated informally as patients recount their personal information, as well
as more formally by asking them to register and recall three objects or
perform a digit span.

Head

Correct measurement of the head circumference is important. It
should be performed at every visit for patients younger than 3 years
and should be recorded on a suitable head growth chart. To measure, a
nondistensible plastic measuring tape is placed over the mid-­forehead
and extended circumferentially to include the most prominent portion of the occiput. If the patient’s head circumference is abnormal, it
is important to document the head circumferences of the parents and
siblings. Errors in the measurement of a newborn skull are common
because of scalp edema, overriding sutures, and the presence of cephalohematomas. The average rate of head growth in a healthy premature
infant is 0.5 cm in the first 2 weeks, 0.75 cm in the third week, and 1.0
cm in the fourth week and every week thereafter until the fortieth week
of development. The head circumference of an average term infant
measures 34-­35 cm at birth, 44 cm at 6 months, and 47 cm at 1 year of
age (see Chapters 21 and 22).
If the brain is not growing, the skull will not grow; therefore a small
head frequently reflects a small brain, or microcephaly. Microcephaly

Fig. 630.1 Congenital hydrocephalus. Note the enlarged cranium
and prominent scalp veins.

may develop in utero or postnatally and may, for example, be related
to intrauterine infection or drug exposure or to perinatal or postnatal
injury. Conversely, a large head may be associated with a large brain,
or macrocephaly, which is most commonly familial but may be from
a disturbance of growth (Sotos syndrome), neurocutaneous disorder
(e.g., neurofibromatosis), chromosomal defect (e.g., Klinefelter syndrome), or lysosomal storage disorder. Alternatively, the head size may
be increased secondary to hydrocephalus (Fig. 630.1) or chronic subdural hemorrhages. In the latter case, the skull tends to assume a square
or boxlike shape, because the long-­standing presence of fluid in the
subdural space causes enlargement of the middle fossa.
The shape of the head should be documented carefully. Plagiocephaly, or flattening of the skull, can be seen in normal infants but may
be particularly prominent in hypotonic or weak infants, who are less
mobile. A variety of abnormal head shapes can be seen when cranial
sutures fuse prematurely, as in the various forms of inherited craniosynostosis (see Chapter 631.10).
An infant has two fontanels at birth: a diamond-­shaped anterior
fontanel at the junction of the frontal and parietal bones that is open at
birth, and a triangular posterior fontanel at the junction of the parietal
and occipital bones that can admit the tip of a finger or may be closed
at birth. If the posterior fontanel is open at birth, it should close over
the ensuing 6-­8 weeks; its persistence suggests underlying hydrocephalus or congenital hypothyroidism. The anterior fontanel varies greatly
in size, but it usually measures approximately 2 × 2 cm. The average
time of closure is 18 months, but the fontanel can close normally as
early as 9 months. A very small or absent anterior fontanel at birth
might indicate craniosynostosis or microcephaly, whereas a very large
fontanel can signify a variety of problems. The fontanel is normally
slightly depressed and pulsatile and is best evaluated by holding the
infant upright while the infant is asleep or feeding. A bulging fontanel
is a potential indicator of increased ICP, but vigorous crying can cause
a protuberant fontanel in a normal infant.
Inspection of the head should include observation of the venous
pattern, because increased ICP and thrombosis of the superior sagittal
sinus can produce marked venous distention. Dysmorphic facial features can indicate a neurodevelopmental aberration. Likewise, cutaneous abnormalities, such as cutis aplasia or abnormal hair whorls, can
suggest an underlying brain malformation or genetic disorder.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3552 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Palpation of a newborn’s skull characteristically reveals molding
of the skull accompanied by overriding sutures—a result of the pressures exerted on the skull during its descent through the pelvis. Marked
overriding of the sutures beyond the early neonatal period is cause for
alarm, because it suggests an underlying brain abnormality. Palpation
additionally might reveal bony bridges between sutures (craniosynostosis), cranial defects, or, in premature infants, softening of the parietal
bones (craniotabes).
Auscultation of the skull is an important adjunct to the neurologic
examination. Cranial bruits may be noted over the anterior fontanel,
temporal region, or orbits and are best heard using the diaphragm of
the stethoscope. Soft symmetric bruits may be discovered in normal
children younger than 4 years of age or in association with a febrile
illness. Demonstration of a loud or localized bruit is usually significant and warrants further investigation because it may be associated
with severe anemia, increased ICP, or arteriovenous malformations of
the middle cerebral artery or vein of Galen. It is important to exclude
murmurs arising from the heart or great vessels, because they may be
transmitted to the cranium.

Cranial Nerves
Olfactory Nerve (Cranial Nerve I)

Anosmia, or loss of smell, most commonly occurs as a transient
abnormality in association with an upper respiratory tract infection
or allergies. Permanent causes of anosmia include head trauma with
damage to the ethmoid bone or shearing of the olfactory nerve fibers
as they cross the cribriform plate, tumors of the frontal lobe, intranasal
drug use, and exposure to toxins (acrylates, methacrylates, cadmium).
Occasionally, a child who recovers from purulent meningitis or develops hydrocephalus has a diminished sense of smell. Rarely, anosmia is
congenital, in which case it can occur as an isolated deficit or as part
of Kallmann syndrome, a familial disorder characterized by hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and congenital anosmia. Although not

a routine component of the examination, smell can be tested reliably
as early as the 32nd week of gestation by presenting a stimulus and
observing for an alerting response or withdrawal, or both. Care should
be taken to use appropriate stimuli, such as coffee or peppermint, as
opposed to strongly aromatic substances (e.g., ammonia inhalants)
that stimulate the trigeminal nerve. Each nostril should be tested individually by pinching shut the opposite side.

Optic Nerve (Cranial Nerve II; see also Part XXVII)

Assessment of the optic disc and retina (see Chapters 659, 670, and 671)
is a critical component of the neurologic examination. Although the retina is best visualized by dilating the pupil, most physicians do not have
ready access to mydriatic agents at the bedside; therefore it may be necessary to consult an ophthalmologist in some cases. Mydriatics should
not be administered to patients whose pupillary responses are being
followed as a marker for impending cerebral herniation or to patients
with glaucoma or cataracts. When mydriatics are used, both eyes should
be dilated, because unilateral papillary fixation and dilation can cause
confusion and worry in later examiners unaware of the pharmacologic
intervention. Examination of an infant’s retina may be facilitated by providing a nipple or soother and by turning the head to one side. The physician gently strokes the patient to maintain arousal while examining the
closer eye. An older child should be placed in the parent’s lap and should
be distracted by bright objects or toys. The color of the optic nerve is
salmon-­pink in a child but may be gray-­white in a newborn, particularly
if the newborn has fair coloring. This normal finding can cause confusion and can lead to the improper diagnosis of optic atrophy.
Disc edema refers to swelling of the optic disc, and papilledema
specifically refers to swelling that is secondary to increased ICP. Papilledema rarely occurs in infancy because the skull sutures can separate to
accommodate the expanding brain. In older children, papilledema may
be graded according to the Frisen scale (Fig. 630.2). Disc edema must
be differentiated from papillitis, or inflammation of the optic nerve.

A

B

C

D

E

F

Fig. 630.2 Stages of papilledema (Frisen scale). A, Stage 0: Normal optic disc. B, Stage 1: Very early papilledema with obscuration of the nasal

border of the disc only, without elevation of the disc borders. C, Stage 2: Early papilledema showing obscuration of all borders, elevation of the nasal
border, and a complete peripapillary halo. D, Stage 3: Moderate papilledema with elevation of all borders, increased diameter of the optic nerve
head, obscuration of vessels at the disc margin, and a peripapillary halo with finger-­like extensions. E, Stage 4: Marked papilledema characterized
by elevation of the entire nerve head and total obscuration of a segment of a major blood vessel on the disc. F, Stage 5: Severe papilledema with
obscuration of all vessels and obliteration of the optic cup. Note also the nerve fiber layer hemorrhages and macular exudate. (A-­C courtesy Dr.
Deborah Friedman; D-­F courtesy Flaum Eye Institute, University of Rochester.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 630 u Neurologic Evaluation
Both conditions manifest with enlargement of the blind spot, but visual
acuity and color vision tend to be spared in early papilledema in contrast to what occurs in optic neuritis.
Retinal hemorrhages occur in 30–40% of all full-­term newborn
infants. The hemorrhages are more common after vaginal delivery than
after cesarean section and are not associated with birth injury or with
neurologic complications. They disappear spontaneously by 1-­2 weeks
of age. The presence of retinal hemorrhages beyond the early neonatal
period should raise a concern for nonaccidental trauma.

Vision

A full description of the age-­appropriate evaluation of vision can be
found in Chapter 659. Evaluation of vision in the premature infant presents unique challenges. At 28 weeks of corrected gestational age, a premature infant blinks in response to a bright light, and at 32 weeks, the
infant maintains eye closure until the light source is removed. The pupil
reacts to light by 29-­32 weeks of corrected gestational age; however,
the pupillary response is often difficult to evaluate, because premature
infants resist eye opening and have poorly pigmented irises. A normal
37-­week infant turns the head and eyes toward a soft light, and a term
infant is able to fix on and follow a target, such as the examiner’s face.

Oculomotor (Cranial Nerve III), Trochlear (Cranial
Nerve IV), and Abducens (Cranial Nerve VI) Nerves

The globe is moved by six extraocular muscles, which are innervated
by the oculomotor, trochlear, and abducens nerves. These muscles and
nerves can be assessed by having the patient follow an interesting toy or
the examiner’s finger in the six cardinal directions of gaze. The physician observes the range and nature (conjugate vs dysconjugate, smooth
vs choppy or saccadic) of the eye movements, particularly noting the
presence and direction of any abnormal eye movements. Premature
infants older than 25 weeks of gestational age and comatose patients
can be evaluated using the oculocephalic (doll’s eye) maneuver, in
which the patient’s head is quickly rotated to evoke reflex eye movements. If the brainstem is intact, rotating the patient’s head to the right
causes the eyes to move to the left and vice versa. Similarly, rapid flexion and extension of the head elicits vertical eye movement.
Dysconjugate gaze can result from extraocular muscle weakness;
cranial nerve (CN) III, IV, or VI palsies; or brainstem lesions that disrupt the medial longitudinal fasciculus. Infants who are younger than 2
months can have a slightly dysconjugate gaze at rest, with one eye horizontally displaced from the other by 1 or 2 mm (strabismus). Vertical
displacement of the eyes requires investigation because it can indicate
trochlear nerve (CN IV) palsy or skew deviation (supranuclear ocular malalignment that is often associated with lesions of the posterior
fossa). Strabismus is discussed further in Chapter 663.
The oculomotor nerve innervates the superior, inferior, and medial
recti, as well as the inferior oblique and levator palpebrae superioris
muscles. Complete paralysis of the oculomotor nerve causes ptosis,
dilation of the pupil, displacement of the eye outward and downward,
and impairment of adduction and elevation. The trochlear nerve supplies the superior oblique muscle, which depresses and internally
rotates the globe during activities such as reading and walking down
stairs. Patients with an isolated paralysis of the trochlear nerve often
have a compensatory head tilt away from the affected side, which helps
to alleviate their diplopia. The abducens nerve innervates the lateral
rectus muscle; its paralysis causes medial deviation of the eye with an
inability to abduct beyond the midline. Patients with increased ICP
often respond positively when questioned about double vision (diplopia) and exhibit incomplete abduction of the eyes on lateral gaze as
a result of partial palsies of nerve VI. This false-­localizing sign occurs
because CN VI has a long intracranial course, making it particularly
susceptible to being stretched. Internuclear ophthalmoplegia, caused
by a lesion in the medial longitudinal fasciculus of the brainstem which
functionally serves the conjugate gaze by connecting CN VI on one
side to CN III on the other, results in paralysis of the medial rectus
function in the adducting eye and nystagmus in the abducting eye.
When there is a subtle eye movement abnormality, the red glass test
may be helpful in localizing the lesion. To perform this test, a red glass

3553

is placed over one of the patient’s eyes and the patient is instructed to
follow a white light in all directions of gaze. The child sees one red/
white light in the direction of normal muscle function but notes a separation of the red and white images that is greatest in the plane of action
of the affected muscle.
In addition to gaze palsies, the examiner might encounter a variety
of adventitious movements. Nystagmus is an involuntary, rapid movement of the eye that may be subclassified as being pendular, in which
the two phases have equal amplitude and velocity, or jerk, in which
there is a fast and a slow phase. Jerk nystagmus can be further characterized by the direction of its fast phase, which may be left-­, right-­, up-­,
or downbeating; rotatory; or mixed. Many patients have a few beats
of nystagmus with extreme lateral gaze (end-­gaze nystagmus), which
is of no consequence. Pathologic horizontal nystagmus is most often
congenital, drug-­induced (e.g., alcohol, anticonvulsants), or a result of
vestibular system dysfunction. By contrast, vertical nystagmus is often
associated with structural abnormalities of the brainstem and cerebellum. Ocular bobbing is characterized by a downward jerk followed by
a slow drift back to primary position and is associated with pontine
lesions. Opsoclonus describes involuntary, chaotic, conjugate oscillations of the eyes, which are often seen in the setting of neuroblastoma
or viral infection.

Trigeminal Nerve (Cranial Nerve V)

The three divisions of the trigeminal nerve—ophthalmic, maxillary,
and mandibular—convey information about facial protopathic (pain,
temperature) and epicritic (vibration, proprioception) sensation.
Each modality should be tested and compared with the contralateral
side. In patients who are uncooperative or comatose, the integrity of
the trigeminal nerve can be assessed by the corneal reflex, elicited by
touching the cornea with a small pledget of cotton and observing for
symmetric eye closure, and nasal tickle, obtained by stimulating the
nasal passage with a cotton swab and observing for symmetric grimace.
An absent reflex may be because of a sensory defect (trigeminal nerve)
or a motor deficit (facial nerve). The motor division of the trigeminal
nerve can be tested by examining the masseter, pterygoid, and temporalis muscles during mastication and by evaluation of the jaw jerk.

Facial Nerve (Cranial Nerve VII)

The facial nerve is a predominantly motor nerve that innervates the
muscles of facial expression—the buccinator, platysma, stapedius, and
stylohyoid muscles—and the posterior belly of the digastric muscle. It
also has a separate division, called the chorda tympani, that contains
sensory, special sensory (taste), and parasympathetic fibers. Because
the portion of the facial nucleus that innervates the upper face receives
bilateral cortical input, lesions of the motor cortex or corticobulbar
tract have little effect on upper face strength. Rather, such lesions manifest with flattening of the contralateral nasolabial fold or drooping of
the corner of the mouth. Conversely, lower motor neuron or facial
nerve lesions tend to involve upper and lower facial muscles equally.
Facial strength can be evaluated by observing the patient’s spontaneous
movements and by asking the patient to mimic a series of facial movements (e.g., smiling, raising the eyebrows, inflating the cheeks). A facial
nerve palsy may be congenital; idiopathic (Bell palsy); or secondary
to trauma, demyelination (Guillain-­Barré syndrome), infection (Lyme
disease, herpes simplex virus, HIV), granulomatous disease, neoplasm,
or meningeal inflammation or infiltration. Facial nerve lesions that
are proximal to the junction with the chorda tympani will result in an
inability to taste substances with the anterior two thirds of the tongue.
If necessary, taste can be tested by placing a solution of saline or glucose on one side of the extended tongue. Normal children can identify
the test substance in <10 seconds. Other findings that may be associated with facial nerve palsy include hyperacusis, resulting from stapedius muscle involvement, and impaired tearing.

Vestibulocochlear Nerve (Cranial Nerve VIII)

The vestibulocochlear nerve has two components within a single
trunk: the vestibular nerve, which innervates the semicircular canals
of the inner ear and is involved with equilibrium, coordination, and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3554 Part XXV u The Nervous System
orientation in space, and the cochlear nerve, which innervates the
cochlea and carries auditory sensory information.
Dysfunction of the vestibular system results in vertigo, the sensation of environmental motion. On examination, patients with vestibular nerve dysfunction typically have nystagmus, in which the
fast component is directed away from the affected nerve. With their
arms outstretched and eyes closed, their limbs tend to drift toward the
injured side. Likewise, if they march in place, they slowly pivot toward
the lesion (Fukuda stepping test). On Romberg and tandem gait testing, they tend to fall toward the abnormal ear. Vestibular function can
be further evaluated with caloric testing. Before testing, the tympanic
membrane should be visualized to ensure that it is intact and unobstructed. In an obtunded or comatose patient, 30-­50 mL of ice water
is then delivered by syringe into the external auditory canal with the
patient’s head elevated 30 degrees. If the brainstem is intact, the eyes
deviate toward the irrigated side. A much smaller quantity of ice water
(2 mL) is used in awake, alert patients to avoid inducing nausea. In normal subjects, introduction of ice water produces eye deviation toward
the stimulated labyrinth followed by nystagmus, with the fast component away from the stimulated labyrinth.
Because hearing is integral to normal language development, the
physician should inquire directly about hearing problems. The parents’
concern is often a reliable indicator of hearing impairment and warrants a formal audiologic assessment with either audiometry or brainstem auditory evoked potential testing (see Chapter 677). Even in the
absence of parents’ concern, formal testing is recommended in all newborns with the goal for all infants to be tested within the first month
of life. Children at risk for hearing problems include those with a family history of early-­life or syndromic deafness or a personal history of
prematurity, severe asphyxia, exposure to ototoxic drugs, hyperbilirubinemia, congenital anomalies of the head or neck, bacterial meningitis, and congenital TORCH (toxoplasmosis, other infections, rubella,
cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex virus) infections. For all other infants
and children, a simple bedside assessment of hearing is usually sufficient. Newborns might have subtle responses to auditory stimuli,
such as changes in breathing, cessation of movement, or opening of the
eyes and/or mouth. If the same stimulus is presented repeatedly, normal neonates cease to respond, a phenomenon known as habituation.
By 3-­4 months of age, infants begin to orient to the source of sound.
Hearing-­impaired toddlers are visually alert and appropriately responsive to physical stimuli but might have more frequent temper tantrums
and abnormal speech and language development.

Glossopharyngeal Nerve (Cranial Nerve IX)

The glossopharyngeal nerve conveys motor fibers to the stylopharyngeus muscle; general sensory fibers from the posterior third of the
tongue, pharynx, tonsil, internal surface of the tympanic membrane,
and skin of the external ear; special sensory (taste) fibers from the posterior third of the tongue; parasympathetic fibers to the parotid gland;
and general visceral sensory fibers from the carotid bodies. The nerve
is tested by stimulating one side of the lateral oropharynx or soft palate
with a tongue blade and observing for symmetric elevation of the palate (gag reflex). An isolated lesion of CN IX is rare because it runs in
close proximity to CN X. Potential causes of injury and/or dysfunction
include birth trauma, ischemia, mass lesions, motor neuron disease,
retropharyngeal abscess, and Guillain-­Barré syndrome.

Vagus Nerve (Cranial Nerve X)

The vagus nerve has 10 terminal branches: meningeal, auricular, pharyngeal, carotid body, superior laryngeal, recurrent laryngeal, cardiac,
pulmonary, esophageal, and gastrointestinal. The pharyngeal, superior
laryngeal, and recurrent laryngeal branches contain motor fibers that
innervate all of the muscles of the pharynx and larynx, with the exception of the stylopharyngeus (CN IX) and tensor veli palatini (CN V)
muscles. Thus unilateral injury of the vagus nerve results in weakness
of the ipsilateral soft palate and a hoarse voice; bilateral lesions can
produce respiratory distress as a result of vocal cord paralysis, as well
as nasal regurgitation of fluids, pooling of secretions, and an immobile, low-­lying soft palate. Isolated lesions to the vagus nerve may be a

complication of thoracotomies or may be seen in neonates with type II
Chiari malformations. If such a lesion is suspected, it is important to
visualize the vocal cords. In addition to motor information, the vagus
nerve carries somatic afferents from the pharynx, larynx, ear canal,
external surface of the tympanic membrane, and meninges of the posterior fossa; visceral afferents; taste fibers from the posterior pharynx;
and preganglionic parasympathetics.

Accessory Nerve (Cranial Nerve XI)

The accessory nerve innervates the sternocleidomastoid (SCM) and
trapezius muscles. The left SCM acts to turn the head to the right side
and vice versa; acting together, the SCMs flex the neck. The trapezius
acts to elevate the shoulder. Lesions to the accessory nerve result in
atrophy and paralysis of the ipsilateral SCM and trapezius muscles,
with resultant depression of the shoulder. Because several cervical
muscles are involved in head rotation, unilateral SCM paresis might
not be evident unless the patient is asked to rotate the head against
resistance. Skull base fractures or lesions, motor neuron disease, myotonic dystrophy, and myasthenia gravis commonly produce atrophy
and weakness of these muscles; congenital torticollis is associated with
SCM hypertrophy.

Hypoglossal Nerve (Cranial Nerve XII)

The hypoglossal nerve innervates the tongue. Examination of the
tongue includes assessment of its bulk and strength, as well as observation for adventitious movements. Malfunction of the hypoglossal
nucleus or nerve produces atrophy, weakness, and fasciculations of the
tongue. If the injury is unilateral, the tongue deviates toward the side
of the injury; if it is bilateral, tongue protrusion is not possible, and the
patient can have difficulty swallowing (dysphagia). Werdnig-­Hoffmann
disease (infantile spinal muscular atrophy, or spinal muscular atrophy
type 1) and congenital anomalies in the region of the foramen magnum
are the principal causes of hypoglossal nerve dysfunction.

Motor Examination

The motor examination includes assessment of muscle bulk, tone, and
strength, as well as observation for involuntary movements that might
indicate central or peripheral nervous system pathology.

Bulk

Decreased muscle bulk (atrophy) may be secondary to disuse or to
diseases of the lower motor neuron, nerve root, peripheral nerve, or
muscle. In most cases, neurogenic atrophy is more severe than myogenic atrophy. Increased muscle bulk (hypertrophy) is usually physiologic (e.g., body builders). Pseudohypertrophy refers to muscle tissue
that has been replaced by fat and connective tissue, giving it a bulky
appearance with a paradoxical reduction in strength, as in Duchenne
muscular dystrophy.

Tone

Muscle tone, which is generated by an unconscious, continuous, partial contraction of muscle, creates resistance to passive movement of a
joint. Tone varies greatly based on a patient’s age and state. At 28 weeks
of gestation, all four extremities are extended and there is little resistance to passive movement. Flexor tone is visible in the lower extremities at 32 weeks and is palpable in the upper extremities at 36 weeks.
A normal term infant’s posture is characterized by flexion of all four
extremities.
There are three key tests for assessing postural tone in neonates: the
traction response, vertical suspension, and horizontal suspension (Fig.
630.3; see Chapters 115 and 122). To evaluate the traction response,
the physician grasps the infant’s hands and gently pulls the infant to
a sitting position. Normally, the infant’s head lags slightly behind the
infant’s body and then falls forward upon reaching the sitting position.
To test vertical suspension, the physician holds the infant by the axillae without gripping the thorax. The infant should remain suspended
with the infant’s lower extremities held in flexion; a hypotonic infant
will slip through the physician’s hands. With horizontal suspension,
the physician holds the infant prone by placing a hand under the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 630 u Neurologic Evaluation

A

B

C

3555

D

Fig. 630.3 Normal tone in a full-­term neonate. A, Flexed resting posture. B, Traction response. C, Vertical suspension. D, Horizontal suspension.
infant’s abdomen. The head should rise and the limbs should flex, but
a hypotonic infant will drape over the physician’s hand, forming a U
shape. Assessing tone in the extremities is accomplished by observing the infant’s resting position and passively manipulating the infant’s
limbs. When the upper extremity of a normal term infant is pulled gently across the chest, the elbow does not quite reach the mid-­sternum
(scarf sign), whereas the elbow of a hypotonic infant extends beyond
the midline with ease. Measurement of the popliteal angle is a useful
method for documenting tone in the lower extremities. The examiner
flexes the hip and extends the knee. Normal term infants allow extension of the knee to approximately 80 degrees. Similarly, tone can be
evaluated by flexing the hip and knee to 90 degrees and then internally
rotating the leg, in which case the heel should not pass the umbilicus.
Abnormalities of tone include spasticity, rigidity, and hypotonia.
Spasticity is characterized by an initial resistance to passive movement,
followed by a sudden release, referred to as the clasp-­knife phenomenon. Because spasticity results from upper motor neuron dysfunction,
it disproportionately affects the upper-­extremity flexors and lower-­
extremity extensors and tends to occur in conjunction with disuse
atrophy, hyperactive deep tendon reflexes, and extensor plantar reflexes
(Babinski sign). In infants, spasticity of the lower extremities results
in scissoring of the legs upon vertical suspension. Older children can
present with prolonged commando crawling or toe-­walking. Rigidity,
seen with lesions of the basal ganglia, is characterized by resistance to
passive movement that is equal in the flexors and extensors regardless
of the velocity of movement (lead pipe). Patients with either spasticity
or rigidity might exhibit opisthotonos, defined as severe hyperextension of the spine caused by hypertonia of the paraspinal muscles (Fig.
630.4), although similar posturing can be seen in patients with Sandifer syndrome (gastroesophageal reflux or hiatal hernia associated with
torsional dystonia). Hypotonia refers to abnormally diminished tone
and is the most common abnormality of tone in neurologically compromised neonates. A hypotonic infant is floppy and often assumes a
frog-­leg posture at rest. Hypotonia can reflect pathology of the cerebral
hemispheres, cerebellum, spinal cord, anterior horn cell, peripheral
nerve, neuromuscular junction, or muscle.

Strength

Older children are usually able to cooperate with formal strength testing, in which case muscle power is graded on a scale of 0-­5 as follows:
0 = no contraction; 1 = flicker or trace of contraction; 2 = active movement with gravity eliminated; 3 = active movement against gravity; 4 =
active movement against gravity and resistance; and 5 = normal power.
An examination of muscle power should include all muscle groups,
including the neck flexors and extensors and the muscles of respiration.
It is important not only to assess individual muscle groups but also to
determine the pattern of weakness (i.e., proximal vs distal; segmental
vs regional). Testing for pronator drift can be helpful in localizing the
lesion in a patient with weakness. This test is accomplished by having
the patient extend his or her arms away from the body with the palms
facing upward and the eyes closed. Together, pronation and downward
drift of an arm indicate a lesion of the contralateral corticospinal tract.
Because infants and young children are not able to participate in formal strength testing, they are best assessed with functional measures.
Proximal and distal strength of the upper extremities can be tested by

Fig. 630.4 Opisthotonos in a brain-­injured infant.
having the child reach overhead for a toy and by watching the child
manipulate small objects. In infants younger than 2 months, the physician can also take advantage of the palmar grasp reflex in assessing
distal power and the Moro reflex in assessing proximal power. Infants
with decreased strength in the lower extremities tend to have diminished spontaneous activity in their legs and are unable to support their
body weight when held upright. Older children may have difficulty
climbing or descending steps, jumping, or hopping. They might also
use their hands to climb up their legs when asked to rise from a prone
position, a maneuver called Gowers sign (Fig. 630.5).

Involuntary Movements

Patients with lower motor neuron or peripheral nervous system lesions
might have fasciculations, which are small, involuntary muscle contractions that result from the spontaneous discharge of a single motor
unit and create the illusion of a bag of worms under the skin. Because
most infants have abundant body fat, muscle fasciculations are best
observed in the tongue in this age-­group.
Most other involuntary movements, including tics, dystonia, chorea,
and athetosis, stem from disorders of the basal ganglia. Tremor seems
to be an exception, as it is thought to be mediated by cerebellothalamocortical pathways. Further detail on the individual movement disorders is provided in Chapter 637.

Sensory Examination

The sensory examination is difficult to perform on an infant or uncooperative child and has a relatively low yield in terms of the information that it provides. A gross assessment of sensory function can be
achieved by distracting the patient with an interesting toy and then
touching the patient with a cotton swab in different locations. Normal
infants and children indicate an awareness of the stimulus by crying,
withdrawing the extremity, or pausing briefly; however, with repeated
testing, they lose interest in the stimulus and begin to ignore the examiner. It is therefore critical that any areas of concern are tested efficiently
and, if necessary, reexamined at an appropriate time.
Fortunately, isolated disorders of the sensory system are less common
in the very young pediatric population than in the adult population, so

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3556 Part XXV u The Nervous System

A

B

C

D

Fig. 630.5 A-­D, Gowers sign in a child with hip girdle weakness because of Duchenne muscular dystrophy. When asked to rise from a prone position, the patient uses his hands to walk up his legs to compensate for proximal lower extremity weakness.

Table 630.2  Timing of Selected Primitive Reflexes
REFLEX

ONSET

FULLY DEVELOPED

DURATION

Palmar grasp

28 wk gestation

32 wk gestation

2-­3 mo postnatal

Rooting

32 wk gestation

36 wk gestation

4-6 mo postnatal

Moro

28-­32 wk gestation

37 wk gestation

5-­6 mo postnatal

Tonic neck

35 wk gestation

1 mo postnatal

6-­7 mo postnatal

Parachute

7-­8 mo postnatal

10-­11 mo postnatal

Remains throughout life

detailed sensory testing is rarely warranted. Furthermore, most patients
who are old enough to voice a sensory complaint are also old enough to
cooperate with formal testing of light touch, pain, temperature, vibration, proprioception, and cortical sensation (e.g., stereognosis, two-­
point discrimination, extinction to double simultaneous stimulation).
A notable exception is when the physician suspects a spinal cord lesion
in an infant or young child and needs to identify a sensory level. In
such situations, observation might suggest a difference in color, temperature, or perspiration, with the skin cool and dry below the level of
injury. Lightly touching the skin above the level can evoke a squirming
movement or physical withdrawal. Other signs of spinal cord injury
include decreased anal sphincter tone and strength and absence of the
superficial abdominal, anal wink, and cremasteric reflexes.

Reflexes
Deep Tendon Reflexes and the Plantar Response

Deep tendon reflexes are readily elicited in most infants and children.
In infants, it is important to position the head in the midline when
assessing reflexes, because turning the head to one side can alter reflex
tone. Reflexes are graded from 0 (absent) to 4+ (markedly hyperactive), with 2+ being normal. Reflexes that are 1+ or 3+ can be normal
as long as they are symmetric. Sustained clonus is always pathologic,
but infants younger than 3 months old can have 5-­10 beats of clonus,
and older children can have 1-­2 beats of clonus, provided that it is
symmetric.
The ankle jerk is hardest to elicit, but it can usually be obtained by
passively dorsiflexing the foot and then tapping on either the Achilles
tendon or the ball of the foot. The knee jerk is evoked by tapping the
patellar tendon. If this reflex is exaggerated, extension of the knee may
be accompanied by contraction of the contralateral adductors (crossed

adductor response). Hypoactive reflexes generally reflect lower motor
neuron or cerebellar dysfunction, whereas hyperactive reflexes are
consistent with upper motor neuron disease, although acute upper
motor neuron injury can result in hypoactive or absent deep tendon
reflexes. The plantar response is obtained by stimulation of the lateral
aspect of the sole of the foot, beginning at the heel and extending to the
base of the toes. The Babinski sign, indicating an upper motor neuron
lesion, is characterized by extension of the great toe and fanning of
the remaining toes. Too vigorous stimulation may produce withdrawal,
which may be misinterpreted as a Babinski sign. Plantar responses have
limited diagnostic utility in neonates because they are mediated by several competing reflexes and can be either flexor or extensor, depending
on how the foot is positioned. Asymmetry of the reflexes or plantar
response is a useful lateralizing sign in infants and children.

Primitive Reflexes

Primitive reflexes appear and disappear at specific times during development (Table 630.2), and their absence or persistence beyond those
times signifies CNS dysfunction. Although many primitive reflexes have
been described, the Moro, grasp, tonic neck, and parachute reflexes are
the most clinically relevant. The Moro reflex is elicited by supporting
the infant in a semierect position and then allowing the infant’s head to
fall backward onto the examiner’s hand. A normal response consists of
symmetric extension and abduction of the fingers and upper extremities, followed by flexion of the upper extremities and an audible cry. An
asymmetric response can signify a fractured clavicle, brachial plexus
injury, or hemiparesis. Absence of the Moro reflex in a term newborn
is ominous, suggesting significant dysfunction of the CNS. The grasp
response is elicited by placing a finger in the open palm of each hand;
by 37 weeks of gestation, the reflex is strong enough that the examiner

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 630 u Neurologic Evaluation
can lift the infant from the bed with gentle traction. The tonic neck
reflex is produced by manually rotating the infant’s head to one side
and observing for the characteristic fencing posture (extension of the
arm on the side to which the face is rotated and flexion of the contralateral arm). An obligatory tonic neck response, in which the infant
becomes stuck in the fencing posture, is always abnormal and implies
a CNS disorder. The parachute reflex, which occurs in slightly older
infants, can be evoked by holding the infant’s trunk and then suddenly
lowering the infant as if he or she were falling. The arms will spontaneously extend to break the infant’s fall, making this reflex a prerequisite
to walking (Fig. 630.6).

Coordination

Ataxia refers to a disturbance in the smooth performance of voluntary
motor acts and is usually the result of cerebellar dysfunction. Lesions
to the cerebellar vermis result in unsteadiness while sitting or standing (truncal ataxia). Affected patients might have a wide-­based gait or
may be unable to perform tandem gait testing. Lesions of the cerebellar hemispheres cause appendicular ataxia, which may be apparent as
the patient reaches for objects and performs finger-­to-­nose and heel-­
to-­shin movements. Other features of cerebellar dysfunction include
errors in judging distance (dysmetria), inability to inhibit a muscular
action (rebound), impaired performance of rapid alternating movements (dysdiadochokinesia), intention tremor, nystagmus, scanning
dysarthria, hypotonia, and decreased deep tendon reflexes. Acute
ataxia suggests an infectious or postinfectious, endocrinologic, toxic,
traumatic, vascular, or psychogenic process, and chronic symptoms
suggest a metabolic, neoplastic, or degenerative process.

Station and Gait

Observation of a child’s station and gait is an important aspect of the
neurologic examination. Normal children can stand with their feet
close together without swaying; however, children who are unsteady
may sway or even fall. On gait testing, the heels should strike either
side of an imaginary line, but children with poor balance tend to walk
with their legs farther apart to create a more stable base. Tandem gait
testing forces patients to have a narrow base, which highlights subtle
balance difficulties.
There are a variety of abnormal gaits, many of which are associated
with a specific underlying etiology. Patients with a spastic gait appear
stiff-­legged like a soldier. They may walk on tiptoe as a result of tightness or contractures of the Achilles tendons, and their legs may scissor
as they walk. A hemiparetic gait is associated with spasticity and circumduction of the leg, as well as decreased arm swing on the affected
side. Cerebellar ataxia results in a wide-­based, reeling gait like that of
a drunk person, whereas sensory ataxia results in a wide-­based steppage gait, in which the patient lifts the legs up higher than usual in the

Fig. 630.6 Infant in the parachute reflex position. This primitive reflex

develops later in infancy (around 6 mo), and its absence can signal delayed walking. It is elicited by holding the infant face down and rapidly
lowering the infant, causing the infant to extend out the arms.

3557

swing phase and then slaps the foot down. A myopathic, or waddling,
gait is associated with hip girdle weakness. Affected children often
develop a compensatory lordosis and have other signs of proximal
muscle weakness, such as difficulty climbing stairs. During gait testing, the examiner might also note hypotonia or weakness of the lower
extremities; extrapyramidal movements, such as dystonia or chorea; or
orthopedic deformities, such as pelvic tilt, genu recurvatum, varus or
valgus deformities of the knee, pes cavus (high arches) or pes planus
(flat feet), and scoliosis.

GENERAL EXAMINATION

Examination of other organ systems is essential because myriad systemic diseases affect the nervous system. Dysmorphic features can
indicate a genetic syndrome (see Chapter 95). Heart murmurs may be
associated with rheumatic fever (Sydenham chorea), cardiac rhabdomyoma (tuberous sclerosis), cyanotic heart disease (cerebral abscess or
thrombosis), and endocarditis (cerebral vascular occlusion). Hepatosplenomegaly can suggest an inborn error of metabolism, storage disease, HIV infection, or malignancy. Cutaneous lesions may be a feature
of a neurocutaneous syndrome (see Chapter 636).

SPECIAL DIAGNOSTIC PROCEDURES
Lumbar Puncture and Cerebrospinal Fluid
Examination

Examination of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and measurement of the
pressure it creates in the subarachnoid space is essential in confirming the diagnosis of meningitis, encephalitis (autoimmune, infectious),
and idiopathic intracranial hypertension (previously referred to as
pseudotumor cerebri), and it is often helpful in assessing subarachnoid
hemorrhage; demyelinating, degenerative, and collagen vascular diseases; and intracranial neoplasms. Having an experienced assistant
who can position, restrain, and comfort the patient is critical to the
success of the procedure.
The patient should be situated in a lateral decubitus or seated position with the neck and legs flexed to enlarge the intervertebral spaces.
As a rule, sick neonates should be maintained in a seated position to
prevent problems with ventilation and perfusion. Regardless of the
position chosen, it is important to make sure that the patient’s shoulders and hips are straight to prevent rotating the spine.
Once the patient is situated, the physician identifies the appropriate
interspace by drawing an imaginary line from the iliac crest downward
perpendicular to the vertebral column. In adults, lumbar punctures are
usually performed in the L3-­L4 or L4-­L5 interspaces. Next, the physician dons a mask, gown, and sterile gloves. The skin is thoroughly
prepared with a cleansing agent, and sterile drapes are applied. The
skin and underlying tissues are anesthetized by injecting a local anesthetic (e.g., 1% lidocaine) at the time of the procedure or by applying a eutectic mixture of lidocaine and prilocaine (EMLA) to the skin
30 minutes before the procedure. A 22-­gauge, 1.5-­to 3.0-­inch, sharp,
beveled spinal needle with a properly fitting stylet is introduced in the
midsagittal plane and directed slightly cephalad. The physician should
pause frequently, remove the stylet, and assess for CSF flow. Although a
pop can occur as the needle penetrates the dura, it is more common to
experience a subtle change in resistance.
Once CSF has been detected, a manometer and three-­way stopcock
can be attached to the spinal needle to obtain an opening pressure. If
the patient was seated as the spinal needle was introduced, the patient
should be moved carefully to a lateral decubitus position with the
head and legs extended before the manometer is attached. In children
between 1 and 18 years of age, the reference range parameter for abnormally elevated opening pressure, determined as the 90th percentile for
all patients in the reference population, is 28 cm of water. The threshold
for an abnormally reduced pressure in the 10th percentile is 11.5 cm of
water. The most common cause of an elevated opening pressure is an
agitated patient. Sedation and a high body mass index can also increase
the opening pressure (see Chapter 645).
Contraindications to performing a lumbar puncture include suspected mass lesion of the brain, especially in the posterior fossa or

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3558 Part XXV u The Nervous System
above the tentorium and causing shift of the midline; suspected mass
lesion of the spinal cord; symptoms and signs of impending cerebral
herniation in a child with probable meningitis; critical illness (on rare
occasions); skin infection at the site of the lumbar puncture; and thrombocytopenia with a platelet count of <20 × 109/L. If optic disc edema or
focal findings suggest a mass lesion, a rapid CT scan of the head should
be obtained before proceeding with lumbar puncture to prevent uncal
or cerebellar herniation as the CSF is removed. In the absence of these
findings, routine head imaging is not warranted. The physician should
also be alert to clinical signs of impending herniation, including alterations in the respiratory pattern (e.g., hyperventilation, Cheyne-­Stokes
respirations, ataxic respirations, respiratory arrest), abnormalities of
pupil size and reactivity, loss of brainstem reflexes, and decorticate or
decerebrate posturing. If any of these signs are present or the child is
so ill that the lumbar puncture might induce cardiorespiratory arrest,
blood cultures should be drawn and supportive care, including antibiotics, should be initiated. Once the patient has stabilized, it may be
possible to perform a lumbar puncture safely.
Normal CSF contains up to 5/mm3 white blood cells, and a newborn can have as many as 15/mm3. Polymorphonuclear cells are always
abnormal in a child, but 1-­2/mm3 may be present in a normal neonate.
An elevated polymorphonuclear count suggests bacterial meningitis
or the early phase of aseptic meningitis (see Chapter 643). CSF lymphocytosis can be seen in aseptic, tuberculous, or fungal meningitis;
demyelinating diseases; brain or spinal cord tumor; immunologic disorders, including collagen vascular diseases; and chemical irritation
(after myelogram, intrathecal methotrexate).
Normal CSF contains no red blood cells; thus their presence indicates a traumatic tap or a subarachnoid hemorrhage. Progressive
clearing of the blood between the first and last samples indicates a
traumatic tap. Bloody CSF should be centrifuged immediately. A
clear supernatant is consistent with a bloody tap, whereas xanthochromia (yellow color that results from the degradation of hemoglobin) suggests a subarachnoid hemorrhage. Xanthochromia may be
absent in bleeds <12 hours old, particularly when laboratories rely on
visual inspection rather than spectroscopy. Xanthochromia can also
occur in the setting of hyperbilirubinemia, carotenemia, and markedly elevated CSF protein.
The normal CSF protein is 10-­40 mg/dL in a child and as high as
120 mg/dL in a neonate. The CSF protein falls to the normal childhood
range by 3 months of age. The CSF protein may be elevated in many
processes, including infectious, immunologic, vascular, and degenerative diseases; blockage of CSF flow; as well as tumors of the brain (primary CNS tumors, systemic tumors metastatic to the CNS, infiltrative
acute lymphoblastic leukemia) and spinal cord. With a traumatic tap,
the CSF protein is increased by approximately 1 mg/dL for every 1,000
red blood cells/mm3. Elevation of CSF immunoglobulin G, which normally represents approximately 10% of the total protein, is observed in
subacute sclerosing panencephalitis, in postinfectious encephalomyelitis, and in some cases of multiple sclerosis. If the diagnosis of multiple
sclerosis is suspected, the CSF should be tested for the presence of oligoclonal bands.
The CSF glucose content is approximately 60% of the blood glucose in a healthy child. To prevent a spuriously elevated blood:CSF
glucose ratio in a case of suspected meningitis, it is advisable to collect the blood glucose before the lumbar puncture when the child is
relatively calm. Hypoglycorrhachia is found in association with diffuse
meningeal disease, particularly bacterial and tubercular meningitis.
Widespread neoplastic involvement of the meninges, subarachnoid
hemorrhage, disorders involving the glucose transporter protein type 1
(e.g., GLUT1 deficiency), fungal meningitis, and, occasionally, aseptic
meningitis can produce low CSF glucose as well.
A Gram stain of the CSF is essential if there is a suspicion for bacterial meningitis; an acid-­fast stain and India ink preparation can be
used to assess for tuberculous and fungal meningitis, respectively.
CSF is then plated on different culture media depending on the
suspected pathogen. When indicated by the clinical presentation, it
can also be helpful to assess for the presence of specific antigens or

polymerase chain reaction studies (e.g., Neisseria meningitidis, Haemophilus influenzae type b, or Streptococcus pneumoniae) or to obtain
antibody or polymerase chain reaction studies (e.g., herpes simplex
virus 1 and 2, West Nile virus, Zika, enteroviruses). In noninfectious
cases, levels of CSF metabolites, such as lactate, amino acids, and
autoimmune encephalitis panel, can provide clues to the underlying
metabolic disease.

Neuroradiologic Procedures

Skull x-­rays have limited diagnostic utility. They can demonstrate
fractures, bony defects, intracranial calcifications, or indirect evidence of increased ICP. Acutely increased ICP causes separation of the
sutures, whereas chronically increased ICP is associated with erosion
of the posterior clinoid processes, enlargement of the sella turcica, and
increased convolutional markings.
Cranial ultrasonography is the imaging method of choice for
detecting intracranial hemorrhage, periventricular leukomalacia, and
hydrocephalus in infants younger than 6 months with patent anterior
fontanels. Ultrasound is less sensitive than either cranial CT scanning
or MRI for detecting hypoxic-­ischemic injury, but the use of color
Doppler or power Doppler sonography, both of which show changes in
regional cerebral blood flow velocity, improve its sensitivity. In general,
ultrasound is not a useful technique in older children, although it can
be helpful intraoperatively when placing shunts, locating small tumors,
and performing needle biopsies.
Cranial CT is a valuable diagnostic tool in the evaluation of many
neurologic emergencies and in some nonemergent conditions. It is a
noninvasive, rapid procedure that can usually be performed without
sedation. CT scans use conventional x-­ray techniques, meaning that
they produce ionizing radiation. Because children younger than 10
years of age are several times more sensitive to radiation than adults, it
is important to consider whether imaging is actually indicated and, if it
is, whether an ultrasound or MRI might be the more appropriate study.
In the emergency setting, a noncontrast CT scan can demonstrate
skull fractures, pneumocephalus, intracranial hemorrhages, hydrocephalus, and impending herniation. If the noncontrast scan reveals
an abnormality and an MRI cannot be performed in a timely fashion,
nonionic contrast should be used to highlight areas of breakdown in
the blood-­brain barrier (e.g., abscesses, tumors) and/or collections of
abnormal blood vessels (e.g., arteriovenous malformations). CT is less
useful for diagnosing acute infarcts in children because radiographic
changes might not be apparent for up to 24 hours. Some subtle signs of
early (<24 hours) infarction include sulcal effacement, blurring of the
gray-­white junction, and the hyperdense middle cerebral artery sign
(increased attenuation in the middle cerebral artery that is often associated with thrombosis). In the routine setting, CT imaging can be used
to demonstrate intracranial calcifications or, with the addition of three-­
dimensional reformatting, to evaluate patients with craniofacial abnormalities or craniosynostosis. Although other pathologic processes may
be visible on CT scan, MR is generally preferred because it provides a
more detailed view of the anatomy without exposing the patient to ionizing radiation (Table 630.3).
Cranial CT angiography is a useful tool for visualizing vascular structures and is accomplished by administering a tight bolus of
iodinated contrast through a large-­bore intravenous catheter and then
acquiring CT images as the contrast passes through the arteries.
Brain MRI is a noninvasive procedure that is well suited for detecting a variety of abnormalities, including those of the posterior fossa
and spinal cord. MR scans are highly susceptible to patient motion
artifact; consequently, many children younger than age 8 years require
sedation to ensure an adequate study. The need for sedation has
decreased in some centers as MRI technology improves and allows
for faster performance of studies and as visual distraction techniques
are better designed to be used by a child while in the MRI scanner.
Because the American Academy of Pediatrics recommends that
infants be kept nothing by mouth (NPO) for 4 hours or longer and
older children for 6 hours or longer before deep sedation, it is often
difficult to obtain an MRI on an infant or young child in the acute

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 630 u Neurologic Evaluation

3559

Table 630.3  Preferred Imaging Procedures in Neurologic Diseases
ISCHEMIC INFARCTION OR TRANSIENT ISCHEMIC ATTACK
CT/CTA (head and neck) ± CT perfusion for patients who are
unstable or are potential candidates for tissue plasminogen
activator or other acute interventions
Otherwise, MRI/MRA (head and neck) with and without gadolinium
and with diffusion-­weighted images
If the examination findings localize to the anterior circulation, carotid
ultrasound should be performed rather than neck CTA or MRA
Obtain an MRV if the infarct does not follow an arterial distribution
CT or MRI can detect infarcts more than 24 hours old, although MRI
is generally preferred to avoid exposure to ionizing radiation
INTRAPARENCHYMAL HEMORRHAGE
CT if <24 hr; MRI if >24 hr
MRI and MRA to assess for underlying vascular malformation, tumor,
and so on
Catheter angiography if MRA is nondiagnostic
ARTERIOVENOUS MALFORMATION
CT for acute hemorrhage; MRI and MRA with and without
gadolinium as early as possible
Catheter angiography if noninvasive imaging is nondiagnostic
CEREBRAL ANEURYSM
CT without contrast for acute subarachnoid hemorrhage
MRA or CTA to identify the aneurysm
Catheter angiography may be necessary in some cases
TCD to detect vasospasm
HYPOXIC-­ISCHEMIC BRAIN INJURY
Ultrasound in infants
If ultrasound is negative or there is a discrepancy between the
clinical course and the sonogram, obtain an MRI
In older children, CT if unstable; otherwise, MRI
MRS can show a lactate peak even in the absence of structural
abnormalities and can be useful for prognostication purposes
METABOLIC DISORDERS
MRI, particularly T2-­weighted and FLAIR images
Diffusion-­weighted images may be useful in distinguishing acute and
chronic changes
MRS, SPECT, and PET may be useful in certain disorders
HYDROCEPHALUS
Ultrasound (in infants), CT with and without contrast, or MR with and
without gadolinium for diagnosis of communicating hydrocephalus
MR with and without gadolinium for diagnosis of noncommunicating
hydrocephalus
Ultrasound (in infants) or CT to follow ventricular size in response to
treatment

HEADACHE
CT with and without contrast or MRI with and without gadolinium if
a structural disorder is suspected (MRI is preferred in nonemergent
situations because it does not involve ionizing radiation and
provides a better view of the parenchyma)
HEAD TRAUMA
CT without contrast initially
MRI after initial assessment and treatment if clinically indicated;
diffusion tensor imaging and/or diffusion kurtosis sequences may
be useful to detect subtle white matter abnormalities
EPILEPSY
MRI with and without gadolinium; thin slices through the mesial
temporal lobes may be helpful if a temporal focus is suspected
PET
Interictal SPECT
BRAIN TUMOR
MRI with and without gadolinium
MRS
PET
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS
MRI with and without gadolinium
Obtain sagittal FLAIR images
MENINGITIS OR ENCEPHALITIS
CT without and with contrast before lumbar puncture if there are
signs of increased ICP on examination
MRI with and without gadolinium after initial assessment and
treatment for patients with complicated meningitis or encephalitis
BRAIN ABSCESS
MRI with and without gadolinium
Diffusion-­weighted images and MRS can help to differentiate
abscess from necrotic tumor
If the patient is unstable, CT with and without contrast followed by
MRI with and without contrast when feasible
MOVEMENT DISORDERS
MRI with and without gadolinium
PET
DaTscan (SPECT scan using ioflupane iodine-­123 as the contrast
agent for detecting dopamine transporters in suspected
parkinsonian syndromes)

CTA, computed tomographic angiography; FLAIR, fluid-­attenuated inversion recovery; ICP, intracranial pressure; MRA, magnetic resonance angiography; MRS, magnetic resonance
spectroscopy; MRV, magnetic resonance venography; PET, positron emission tomography; SPECT, single-­photon emission computed tomography; TCD, transcranial Doppler
ultrasonography.

setting. MRI can be used to evaluate for congenital or acquired brain
lesions, migrational defects, dysmyelination or demyelination, posttraumatic gliosis, neoplasms, cerebral edema, and acute stroke (see
Table 630.3). Paramagnetic MR contrast agents (e.g., gadolinium-­
diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid [DTPA]) are efficacious in identifying areas of disruption in the blood-­brain barrier, such as those
occurring in primary and metastatic brain tumors, meningitis, cerebritis, abscesses, and active demyelination. MR angiography and MR
venography provide detailed images of major intracranial vasculature structures and assist in the diagnosis of conditions such as stroke,
vascular malformations, and cerebral venous sinus thrombosis. MR
angiography is the procedure of choice for infants and young children
because of the lack of ionizing radiation and contrast; however, CT
angiography may be preferable in older children because it is faster
and can eliminate the need for sedation; it is particularly useful for
looking at blood vessels in the neck, where there is less interference
from bone artifact than in the skull-­encased brain.

Functional MRI is a noninvasive technique used to map neuronal
activity during specific cognitive states and/or sensorimotor functions.
Data are usually based on blood oxygenation, although they can also be
based on local cerebral blood volume or flow. Functional MRI is useful for presurgical localization of critical brain functions and has several advantages over other functional imaging techniques. Specifically,
functional MRI produces high-­resolution images without exposure to
ionizing radiation or contrast, and it allows coregistration of functional
and structural images.
Proton MR spectroscopy (MRS) is a molecular imaging technique in which the unique neurochemical profile of a preselected
brain region is displayed in the form of a spectrum. Many metabolites can be detected, the most common of which are N-­acetylaspartate,
creatine and phosphocreatine, choline, myoinositol, and lactate.
Changes in the spectral pattern of a given area can yield clues to the
underlying pathology, making MRS useful in the diagnosis of inborn
errors of metabolism, as well as the preoperative and posttherapeutic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3560 Part XXV u The Nervous System
assessment of intracranial tumors. MRS can also detect areas of cortical
dysplasia in patients with epilepsy because these patients have low N-­
acetylaspartate:creatine ratios. Finally, MRS may be useful in detecting
hypoxic-­ischemic injury in newborns in the first day of life because the
lactate peak enlarges and the N-­acetylaspartate peak diminishes before
MRI sequences become abnormal.
Catheter angiography is the gold standard for diagnosing vascular
disorders of the CNS, such as arteriovenous malformations, aneurysms,
arterial occlusions, and vasculitis. A four-­vessel study is accomplished
by introducing a catheter into the femoral artery and then injecting
contrast media into each of the internal carotid and vertebral arteries.
Because catheter angiography is invasive and requires general anesthesia, it is typically reserved for treatment planning of endovascular or
open procedures and for cases in which noninvasive imaging results
are not diagnostic.
Positron emission tomography (PET) provides unique information on brain metabolism and perfusion by measuring blood flow,
oxygen uptake, and/or glucose consumption. PET is an expensive
technique that is most often used in the context of epilepsy surgery
programs. Single-­photon emission CT using 99mTc hexamethylpropyleneamine oxime is a sensitive and inexpensive technique to study
regional cerebral blood flow. Single-­photon emission CT is particularly
useful in assessing for vasculitis, herpes encephalitis, dysplastic cortex, and recurrent brain tumors. PET-­MRI is only available in a few
pediatric centers in the United States; it provides better resolution and
tissue definition than single-­photon emission CT. This emerging clinical modality is of particular use in epilepsy surgery evaluation and
neuro-­oncology.

Electroencephalography

An electroencephalogram (EEG) provides a continuous recording of electrical activity between reference electrodes placed on the
scalp. Although the genesis of the electrical activity is not certain,
it likely originates from postsynaptic potentials in the dendrites of
cortical neurons. Even with amplification of the electrical activity, not
all potentials are recorded because there is a buffering effect of the
scalp, muscles, bone, vessels, and subarachnoid fluid. EEG waves are
classified according to their frequency as delta (1-­3 Hz), theta (4-­7
Hz), alpha (8-­12 Hz), and beta (13-­20 Hz). These waves are altered
by many factors, including age, level of alertness, eye closure, drugs,
and disease states.
The normal waking EEG is characterized by the posterior dominant
rhythm—a sinusoidal, 8-­to 12-­Hz rhythm that is most prominent
over the occipital region in a state of relaxed wakefulness with the eyes
closed. This rhythm first becomes apparent at 3-­4 months of age, and
most children have achieved the adult frequency of 8-­12 Hz by age 8
years.
Normal sleep is divided into three stages of non–rapid eye movement sleep—designated N1, N2, and N3—and rapid eye movement
sleep. N1 corresponds to drowsiness, and N3 represents deep, restorative, slow-­wave sleep. Rapid eye movement sleep is rarely captured
during a routine EEG but may be seen on an overnight recording. The
American Electroencephalography Society Guideline and Technical
Standards states that “sleep recordings should be obtained whenever
possible”; however, it appears that sleep deprivation—not sleep during the EEG—is what increases the yield of the study, particularly in
children with one or more clinically diagnosed seizures and in children
older than 3 years of age.
EEG abnormalities can be divided into two general categories: epileptiform discharges and slowing. Epileptiform discharges are paroxysmal spikes or sharp waves, often followed by slow waves, which
interrupt the background activity. They may be focal, multifocal, or
generalized. Focal discharges are often associated with cerebral dysgenesis or irritative lesions, such as cysts, slow-­growing tumors, or
glial scar tissue; generalized discharges typically occur in children with
structurally normal brains. Generalized discharges can occur as an

epilepsy trait in children who have never had a seizure and, by themselves, are not an indication for treatment. Epileptiform activity may
be enhanced by activation procedures, including hyperventilation and
photic stimulation.
As with epileptiform discharges, slowing can be either focal or
diffuse. Focal slowing should raise a concern for an underlying
functional or structural abnormality, such as an infarct, hematoma, or tumor. Diffuse slowing is the hallmark of encephalopathy
and is usually secondary to a widespread disease process or toxic-­
metabolic insult.
Long-­term video EEG monitoring provides a precise characterization of seizure types, which allows specific medical or surgical management. It facilitates more accurate differentiation of epileptic seizures
from paroxysmal events that mimic epilepsy, including recurrent psychogenic seizure-­like attacks. Long-­term EEG monitoring can also be
useful during medication adjustments.

Evoked Potentials

An evoked potential is an electrical signal recorded from the CNS
after the presentation of a specific visual, auditory, or sensory
stimulus. Stimulation of the visual system by a flash or patterned
stimulus, such as a black-­and-­white checkerboard, produces visual
evoked potentials (VEPs), which are recorded over the occiput and
averaged in a computer. Abnormal VEPs can result from lesions to
the visual pathway anywhere from the retina to the visual cortex.
Many demyelinating disorders and neurodegenerative diseases,
such as Tay-­Sachs, Krabbe, or Pelizaeus-­Merzbacher disease, or
neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses show characteristic VEP abnormalities. Flash VEPs can also be helpful in evaluating infants who have
sustained an anoxic injury; however, detection of an evoked potential does not necessarily mean that the infant will have functional
vision.
Brainstem auditory evoked responses (BAERs) provide an objective measure of hearing and are particularly useful in neonates and
in children who have failed, or are uncooperative with, audiometric
testing. BAERs are abnormal in many neurodegenerative diseases
of childhood and are an important tool in evaluating patients with
suspected tumors of the cerebellopontine angle. BAERs can be helpful in assessing brainstem function in comatose patients because the
waveforms are unaffected by drugs or by the level of consciousness;
however, they are not accurate in predicting neurologic recovery and
outcome.
Somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEPs) are obtained by stimulating a peripheral nerve (peroneal, median) and then recording the
electrical response over the cervical region and contralateral parietal
somatosensory cortex. SSEPs determine the functional integrity of the
dorsal column-­medial lemniscal system and are useful in monitoring
spinal cord function during operative procedures for scoliosis, aortic
coarctation, and myelomeningocele repair. SSEPs are abnormal in
many neurodegenerative disorders and are the most accurate evoked
potential in the assessment of neurologic outcome after a severe CNS
insult.

Specific and General Genetic and Metabolic Testing

Children with intellectual disability or developmental delay are often
evaluated with metabolic and/or genetic testing. Newborn screening
study results should be rechecked before new studies are done. Specific
accompanying features of the child’s history and physical examination
may point to a particular disorder or group of disorders, allowing for
specific genetic or metabolic testing or for chromosomal studies to be
fruitful. Whole exome sequencing is often used in situations in which
these studies are negative or there are no distinguishing features of the
child’s history or physical examination that point to a particular subgroup of diagnoses.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 631 u Congenital Anomalies of the Central Nervous System

Chapter 631

Congenital Anomalies
of the Central Nervous
System
Sara K. Trowbridge, Edward Yang, and
Christopher J. Yuskaitis

631.1 Neural Tube Defects
Sara K. Trowbridge, Edward Yang, and
Christopher J. Yuskaitis
Neural tube defects (NTDs) account for the largest proportion of
congenital anomalies of the CNS and result from failure of the
neural tube to close properly during development. The etiology
of NTDs appears to be multifactorial and remains incompletely
understood. There is evidence for various environmental risk
factors, including hyperthermia, teratogens (e.g., valproic acid,
dolutegravir), maternal malnutrition, suboptimal folate levels, and
maternal obesity or diabetes. Genetic determinants also play a role;
studies have revealed relatively few monogenic causes and suggest
a polygenic mode of inheritance. Genes associated with NTDs are
also linked to known environmental risk factors (maternal obesity/
diabetes and folate metabolism). NTDs vary widely in type and
severity, depending on when and how the developmental process
is disrupted.
The human nervous system originates from the primitive ectoderm,
which, along with the endoderm and mesoderm, form the three primary germ layers (Fig. 631.1). During primary neurulation (3-­4 weeks
postgestation), the dorsal neural ectoderm differentiates into the neural plate. The neural plate then begins to invaginate as the edges fold
upward, forming the neural tube, the structure that will ultimately give
rise to the brain and spinal cord. Initial closure of the neural tube is
accomplished in the area corresponding to the future junction of the
spinal cord and medulla and moves rapidly both caudally and rostrally.
As the neural tube is closing, a conglomerate of cells from the dorsal
tube differentiates into the neural crest, which forms the peripheral
nervous system, leptomeninges, and Schwann cells. The surrounding
mesoderm gives rise to the dura and vertebrae. Defects in primary neurulation lead to open NTDs, in which neural tissue is exposed. Failure
of the neural tube to close allows excretion of fetal substances (e.g., α-­
fetoprotein [AFP], acetylcholinesterase) into the amniotic fluid. Fetal
ultrasonography has a higher sensitivity to detect NTDs and has largely
replaced prenatal screening of maternal serum for AFP in the 16th to
18th wk of gestation; both can be used to identify pregnancies at risk
for fetuses with NTDs in utero. The type of open NTD depends on
the location of the defect. Anterior NTDs affect the brain (anencephaly, encephalocele), whereas posterior lesions affect the spinal cord
(myelomeningocele).
Secondary neurulation occurs after completion of primary neurulation during weeks 5-­6 of gestation and refers to the formation of the
caudal neural tube. Defects in secondary neurulation are thought to
underlie closed NTDs (occult spinal dysraphism), in which the neural
tissue is covered by skin and not exposed. Relative to the severity of
open NTDs, closed NTDs usually present with relatively mild, if any,
neurologic deficits.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

3561

631.2 Myelomeningocele
Sara K. Trowbridge, Edward Yang, and
Christopher J. Yuskaitis
Myelomeningocele is the most common NTD and results from incomplete closure of the posterior neural tube, leading to protrusion of neural tissue through a defect in the vertebra. This is also known as an open
NTD because the neural tissue is exposed to the environment.

ETIOLOGY

The etiology of myelomeningocele remains incompletely understood,
but as with all neural tube closure defects, a genetic predisposition
exists. The risk of recurrence after one affected child is 3–4% and
increases to 10% with two prior affected children. Both epidemiologic
evidence and the familial aggregation studies indicate polygenic risk
factors contribute to the etiology of NTDs.
Nutritional and environmental factors have a role in the etiology of
myelomeningocele as well. In particular, folate is intricately involved in
the prevention and etiology of NTDs. Folate coenzymes are involved
in DNA synthesis, purine synthesis, and amino acid interconversion—
specifically, the conversion of homocysteine to methionine. Pathogenic
variants in the genes encoding the enzymes involved in homocysteine
metabolism may play a role in the pathogenesis of meningomyelocele. These enzymes include 5,10-­methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (encoded by MTHFR), cystathionine β-­synthase, and methionine
synthase. An association between a thermolabile variant of MTHFR
and mothers of children with NTDs might account for up to 15% of
preventable NTDs.

PREVENTION

See also Chapter 67.6.
Maternal periconceptional use of folic acid supplementation reduces
the incidence of NTDs in pregnancies at risk by at least 50%. The US
Public Health Service recommends that all women of childbearing age who can become pregnant take 0.4-­0.8 mg of folic acid daily.
To be effective, folic acid supplementation should be initiated before
conception and continued until at least the 12th week of gestation,
when neurulation is complete. If a pregnancy is planned in high-­risk
women (previously affected child), supplementation should be started
with 4 mg of folic acid daily, beginning 1 month before the time of the
planned conception.
The modern diet provides about half the daily requirement of folic
acid. To increase folic acid intake, fortification of flour, pasta, rice, and
cornmeal with 0.15 mg folic acid per 100 g was mandated in the United
States and Canada in 1998. Although this decreased the incidence of
NTDs, the added folic acid is insufficient to maximize the prevention
of preventable NTDs, and it is believed that many women may still have
suboptimal folate levels, estimated as a red blood cell folate level less
than 900-­1,000 nmol/L. Therefore informative educational programs
and folic acid vitamin supplementation remain essential for women
planning a pregnancy and possibly for all women of childbearing age.
In addition, certain drugs, including drugs that antagonize folic acid,
such as trimethoprim and some anticonvulsants (valproic acid, carbamazepine, phenytoin, phenobarbital, and primidone), increase the
risk of myelomeningocele. The anticonvulsant valproic acid causes
NTDs in approximately 1–2% of pregnancies when administered during pregnancy, prompting some epilepsy clinicians to recommend that
all female patients of childbearing potential who take anticonvulsant
medications also receive folic acid supplements.
Diagnosis is usually made prenatally by fetal ultrasonography (see
Chapter 117.7). Measurement of maternal serum AFP is an alternative
screening test, although it has been shown to have a lower sensitivity than second-­trimester ultrasonography. Early diagnosis allows time
for prenatal counseling, further testing, and early treatment options,
including fetal surgery. When a prenatal diagnosis is made, it is helpful to look for other associated anomalies. Genetic testing, particularly

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3562 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Surface ectoderm

Neural groove
Neural fold
Neural plate

Neural
groove

Intraembryonic Notochordal
plate
mesoderm
Yolk sac

A

Rostral
neuropore
Neural groove
Somites
Neural crest
Somite

B

Notochord
Caudal
neuropore

Developing
epidermis

Neural tube

C

Developing
spinal ganglion

D

Neural canal
Mantle zone
Central canal
Ventricular zone

Marginal zone

E
Fig. 631.1 Diagrammatic illustration of the developing nervous sys-

tem. A, Transverse sections of the neural plate during the third wk. B,
Formation of the neural groove and the neural crest. C, The neural tube
is developed. D, Longitudinal drawing showing the initial closure of the
neural tube in the central region. E, Cross-­sectional drawing of the embryonic neural tube (primitive spinal cord).

chromosomal microarray, can be considered because chromosomal
abnormalities are found at higher rates in fetuses with NTDs, particularly in the setting of other associated anomalies. Current cell-­free
fetal DNA prenatal tests only detect trisomies and sex aneuploidies as
screening tests and are not diagnostic and do not detect NTDs.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Neurologic deficits are hypothesized to be caused in part by neurodegeneration of the exposed area of the spinal cord secondary to contact
with amniotic fluid in utero. The extent and degree of the neurologic
deficit depend largely on the location of the myelomeningocele and any
associated intracranial abnormalities.

Although a myelomeningocele may be located anywhere along the
neuraxis, the lumbosacral region accounts for ∼75% of the cases. The
majority of patients with myelomeningocele have bowel and bladder
incontinence. Ambulation and motor control over the lower extremities depend greatly on the level of the lesion. Generally, patients with
a lesion in the low sacral region are ambulatory, in contrast to patients
with lesions above L2, who are usually nonambulatory; those with
intermediate lesions may walk with assistive devices (crutches, braces).
Cervical myelomeningoceles are rare and differ in their anatomy from
other myelomeningoceles because the spinal cord structure is usually
close to normal and the neural tissue itself is covered by skin (i.e., a
closed NTD). Therefore patients with these lesions generally have
a more favorable prognosis, although they can have bowel/bladder
dysfunction.
On exam, the myelomeningocele is generally readily apparent as a
saclike cystic structure covered by a thin layer of partially epithelialized tissue or an exposed flat neural placode without overlying tissues
(Fig. 631.2C). When a cyst or membrane is present, remnants of neural
tissue are visible beneath the membrane, which occasionally ruptures
and leaks CSF.
Examination of the infant generally shows a flaccid paralysis of the
lower extremities, an absence of deep tendon reflexes, a lack of response
to touch and pain, and a high incidence of lower-­extremity deformities
(clubfeet, ankle and/or knee contractures, and subluxation of the hips).
Some children have constant urinary dribbling and a relaxed anal
sphincter. Other children do not leak urine and in fact have a high-­
pressure bladder and sphincter dyssynergy. Myelomeningocele above
the midlumbar region tends to produce lower motor neuron signs
because of abnormalities and disruption of the conus medullaris and
higher spinal cord structures.
Most children with a myelomeningocele also have displacement of
the cerebellum and brainstem down through the foramen magnum,
which is termed a Chiari II malformation (see Fig. 631.2A). Because
this malformation can lead to obstruction of CSF outflow, hydrocephalus is a common complication, particularly if surgical repair is
not pursued early. Therefore there should be a low threshold for consideration of hydrocephalus, which can present with classic signs of
increased intracranial pressure (ICP), including a bulging anterior fontanel, dilated scalp veins, setting-­sun appearance of the eyes, irritability, and vomiting in association with an increased head circumference.
Older children may also have headache, emesis, and lethargy. Additionally, approximately 15% of infants with hydrocephalus and Chiari
II malformation develop symptoms of hindbrain (brainstem) dysfunction, including difficulty feeding, choking, stridor, apnea, vocal cord
paralysis, pooling of secretions, and spasticity of the upper extremities,
which, if untreated, can lead to death. This Chiari crisis is caused by
downward herniation of the medulla and cerebellar tonsils through the
foramen magnum, as well as endogenous malformations in the cerebellum and brainstem.
Other CNS anomalies are associated with myelomeningocele,
including cortical dysplasias, polymicrogyria, callosal abnormalities,
and cerebellar abnormalities. Long-­term complications include tethered cord, usually secondary to scar tissue at the surgical repair site,
and hydromyelia, which is CSF buildup in the central canal of the spinal cord caused by worsening hydrocephalus.

TREATMENT (SEE ALSO CHAPTER 754)

Management and supervision of a child and family with a myelomeningocele require a multidisciplinary team approach, including surgeons, other physicians, and therapists, with one individual (often a
pediatrician) acting as the advocate and coordinator of the treatment
program.
Surgery to close the lesion is usually performed prenatally or within
the first 72 hours of life (see Chapters 117 and 118). After repair of a
myelomeningocele (especially postnatal repair), most infants require a
shunting procedure for hydrocephalus. If symptoms or signs of hindbrain dysfunction appear, early surgical decompression of the posterior fossa is indicated. Clubfeet can require taping or casting. The

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 631 u Congenital Anomalies of the Central Nervous System

3563

B

A

B

*

*

C

Fig. 631.2 Typical MRI imaging and physical exam findings of a lumbosacral myelomeningocele. A, Single-­shot sagittal T2-­weighted image of a
fetus at 28 wk gestation demonstrates a lumbosacral spinal defect with protruding myelomeningocele sac (asterisk) and herniation of the brainstem/
cerebellum into the upper spinal canal, a Chiari II malformation (arrow). B, Single-­shot axial T2-­weighted images of the same fetus at the level of the
myelomeningocele demonstrates a neural placode (arrow) at the base of the myelomeningocele sac (asterisk). Urinary bladder marked with B. C, A
lumbar myelomeningocele is covered by a thin layer of skin.

Management of Myelomeningocele Study (MoMS) has demonstrated
the success of in utero surgical closure (see Chapters 117.7 and 118)
with a lower incidence of hindbrain abnormalities and hydrocephalus (fewer shunts). Long-­term follow-­up of prenatal treatment into the
school-­age years demonstrates improved motor outcomes, although
there are no differences in cognitive functioning. This suggests that
some deficits may be progressive in utero and that prenatal closure
might prevent the development of further loss of function.
Careful evaluation and reassessment of the genitourinary system is
an important component of management. Teaching the parents and,
ultimately, the patient, to regularly catheterize a neurogenic bladder is
a crucial step in maintaining a low residual volume and bladder pressure that prevents urinary tract infections and reflux, which can lead to
pyelonephritis, hydronephrosis, and bladder damage. Latex-­free catheters and gloves must be used to prevent development of latex allergy.
Periodic urine cultures and assessment of renal function, including
serum electrolytes and creatinine as well as renal scans, vesiculourethrograms, renal ultrasonograms, and cystometrograms, are obtained
according to the risk status and progress of the patient and the results of
the physical examination. This approach to urinary tract management
has greatly reduced the need for urologic diversionary procedures and
has decreased the morbidity and mortality associated with progressive
renal disease in these patients. Some children can become continent
with bladder augmentation at a later age.
Incontinence of fecal matter is common and distressing to patients
and families; occasionally, fecal impaction and/or megacolon may
develop. Many children can be bowel-­trained with a regimen of timed
enemas or suppositories that allows evacuation at a predetermined
time once or twice a day. Special attention to low anorectal tone and
enema administration and retention is often required. Appendicostomy for antegrade enemas may also be helpful.
Functional ambulation may be possible, depending on the level of
the lesion and on intact function of the iliopsoas muscles (see Chapter 754). Most children with a sacral or lumbosacral lesion obtain
functional ambulation; approximately half the children with higher
defects ambulate with the use of braces, other orthotic devices, and
canes. Ambulation is often more difficult as adolescence approaches
and when body mass increases. Deterioration of ambulatory function,
particularly during earlier years, should prompt referral for evaluation of
tethered spinal cord, shunt malfunction, hydromyelia, and other neurosurgical issues.

PROGNOSIS

For a child who is born with a myelomeningocele and who is treated
aggressively, the mortality rate is 10–15%, and most deaths occur before
age 4 years, often the result of hydrocephalus, infections, and cardiac/
respiratory complications. However, life-­
threatening complications

occur at all ages, and renal dysfunction is one of the most important
determinants of mortality. At least 70% of individuals (nonsyndromic,
no associated anomalies) have no intellectual disability, but learning
problems and seizure disorders are more common than in the general population. Previous episodes of meningitis (shunt infections) or
ventriculitis may adversely affect intellectual and cognitive function.
Because myelomeningocele is a chronic disabling condition, periodic
and consistent multidisciplinary follow-­up is required for life.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

631.3 Occult Spinal Dysraphism
Sara K. Trowbridge, Edward Yang, and
Christopher J. Yuskaitis
Occult spinal dysraphisms, often called spina bifida occulta, are a closed
NTD that consist of a midline defect of the vertebral bodies without
protrusion of the spinal cord or meninges. The most common type only
affects the vertebra, which are often asymptomatic and lack neurologic
signs. Other clinically more significant forms of closed spinal cord malformations can be associated with developmental abnormalities of the
spinal cord, including syringomyelia, diastematomyelia, lipoma, fatty
filum, dermal sinus, and/or a tethered cord. In most of these cases,
there are overlying cutaneous manifestations such as a hemangioma,
discoloration of the skin, pit, lump, dermal sinus, or hairy patch (Figs.
631.3 and 631.4). A spine x-­ray in simple spina bifida occulta shows a
defect in closure of the posterior vertebral arches and laminae, typically
involving L5 and S1; there is no abnormality of the meninges, spinal
cord, or nerve roots. However, a spine x-­ray in cases with spinal cord
involvement might show bone defects or may be normal. All cases of
occult spinal dysraphism are best investigated with MRI (Fig. 631.5 and
see Fig. 631.4). Initial screening in the neonate may include ultrasonography, but MRI is more accurate at any age.
A meningocele is formed when the meninges herniate through a
defect in the posterior vertebral arches or the anterior sacrum. The spinal cord is usually normal and assumes a normal position in the spinal
canal; therefore neurologic outcome is often normal. However, there
may be tethering of the cord, syringomyelia, or diastematomyelia, so
careful neurologic examination and follow-­up are necessary. Orthopedic and urologic examination should also be considered. In asymptomatic children with normal neurologic findings and full-­thickness
skin covering the meningocele, surgery may be delayed. Given the high
rate of association between meningocele and tethered cord syndrome,
exploration of the spinal canal is necessary to potentially release the
associated tethered cord.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3564 Part XXV u The Nervous System

A

C

B

D

Fig. 631.3 Clinical aspects of congenital median lumbosacral cutaneous lesions. A, Midline sacral hemangioma in a patient with an occult lipo-

myelomeningocele. B, Capillary malformation with a subtle patch of hypertrichosis in a patient with a dermal sinus. C, Human tail with underlying
lipoma in an infant with lipomyelomeningocele. D, Midline area of hypertrichosis (faun tail) overlying a patch of hyperpigmentation. (A-­C from Kos L,
Drolet BA. Developmental abnormalities. In: Eichenfield LF, Frieden IJ, Esterly NB, eds. Neonatal Dermatology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders;
2008; D from Tay VS, Kornberg A, Cook M. Spine and spinal cord: developmental disorders. In: Schapira AH, ed. Neurology and Clinical Neuroscience. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2007, Fig. 38-­11C.)

631.4 Encephalocele
Sara K. Trowbridge, Edward Yang, and
Christopher J. Yuskaitis

A

B

C

D

Fig. 631.4 A, Lumbosacral ulcerative plaque with surrounding red vas-

cular rim was noted on initial examination. B, Midline sagittal contrast-­
enhanced, T1-­weighted, fat-­saturated image of the lumbosacral spine
at presentation reveals low-­lying conus at the L4 vertebral level suggestive of tethered cord. C, Recurrence of lumbosacral hemangioma
after discontinuation of oral propranolol. D, Midline sagittal contrast-­
enhanced, T1-­weighted, fat-­saturated image of the lumbosacral spine
at 6 mo of age shows new nodular enhancing lesion at the lower end of
the conus (arrow) compatible with intrathecal hemangioma. In addition,
there is a large hemangioma in the epidural space in the sacral spinal
canal (asterisks) with presacral extension (arrowheads). (From Yu J, Maheshwari M, Foy AB, et al. Neonatal lumbosacral ulceration masking
lumbosacral and intraspinal hemangiomas associated with occult spinal
dysraphism. J Pediat. 2016;175:211–215.)

A congenital dermal sinus is a tract between the skin and the spinal
cord, sometimes indicated at the skin surface by protruding hairs, a
hairy patch, or a vascular nevus. Dermal sinuses occur in the midline at
the sites where meningoceles or encephaloceles can occur: the lumbosacral region or occiput, respectively, and occasionally in the cervical
or thoracic area. Dermal sinus tracts can pass through the dura, acting
as a conduit for the spread of infection. Recurrent meningitis of occult
origin should prompt careful examination for a small sinus tract in the
posterior midline region, including the back of the head. Lumbosacral sinuses are usually above the gluteal fold and are directed cephalad.
Tethered spinal cord syndrome may also be an associated problem.
Diastematomyelia is when the spinal cord is split, or bifid, and commonly has bony abnormalities that require surgical intervention along
with untethering of the spinal cord.
An approach to imaging of the spine in patients with cutaneous
lesions is noted in Table 631.1.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Two major forms of dysraphism affect the skull, resulting in protrusion
of tissue through a bony midline defect, called cranium bifidum. A
cranial meningocele consists of a CSF-­filled meningeal sac only. Cranial
encephalocele contains the sac plus cerebral cortex, cerebellum, or portions of the brainstem (Fig. 631.6). These abnormalities are one tenth
as common as neural tube closure defects involving the spine. Microscopic examination of the neural tissue within an encephalocele often
reveals abnormalities, but not always, which has led to speculation that
the primary problem is not abnormal neurulation, but rather abnormal mesodermal development leading to skull anomalies. The cranial
defect occurs most commonly in the occipital region at or below the
inion. However, in certain parts of the world, frontal or nasofrontal
encephaloceles (transethmoidal, sphenoethmoidal, sphenomaxillary,
sphenoorbital, transsphenoidal) are more common. Some frontal
lesions are associated with a cleft lip and palate.
Cranial encephalocele is often part of a larger syndrome. One of
the more commonly associated genetic syndromes is Meckel-­Gruber
syndrome, a rare autosomal recessive condition caused by pathogenic
variants in multiple genes involved in cilia function. This syndrome is
characterized by an occipital encephalocele, cleft lip or palate, microcephaly, microphthalmia, abnormal genitalia, polycystic kidneys, and
polydactyly. Other associated syndromes include muscular dystrophy–dystroglycanopathy type A1 (Walker-­Warburg syndrome, due to
pathogenic variants in POMT) and Knobloch syndrome (due to pathogenic variants in COL18A).
Determination of maternal serum AFP levels and ultrasound measurement of the biparietal diameter, as well as identification of the
encephalocele itself, can diagnose encephaloceles in utero. Fetal MRI
can help define the extent of associated CNS anomalies and the degree
of brain herniated into the encephalocele.
Infants with a cranial encephalocele are at increased risk for developing hydrocephalus because of aqueductal stenosis, Chiari malformation, or Dandy-­Walker syndrome. Examination might show a
small sac with a pedunculated stalk or a large cystlike structure that can
exceed the size of the cranium. The lesion may be completely covered
with skin, but areas of denuded lesion can occur and require urgent
surgical management. Transillumination of the sac can indicate the
presence of neural tissue. A plain x-­ray of the skull and cervical spine is
indicated to define the anatomy of the cranium and vertebrae. Ultrasonography is most helpful in determining the contents of the sac. MRI
or CT further helps define the spectrum of the lesion. Children with a
cranial meningocele generally have a good prognosis, whereas patients
with an encephalocele are at risk for vision problems, microcephaly,
intellectual disability, and seizures. Generally, children with neural

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 631 u Congenital Anomalies of the Central Nervous System

3565

*

B

A

C

D

Fig. 631.5 Clinical features and imaging findings associated with occult spinal dysraphism. A, Lumbosacral lipoma. The subcutaneous lipoma is in

continuity with the spinal cord via a defect in the underlying muscles, bone, and dura. B, Sagittal T1-­weighted image shows a huge intradural lipoma
merging with the conus medullaris superiorly. C, Lipoma and central dermal sinus. D, A sagittal T2-­weighted MRI of the lumbar spine demonstrates a
dermal sinus (black arrow) looping underneath the lowest lamina before ascending to the low-­lying conus medullaris, which it tethers. The intradural
portion of the sinus tract (white arrow) is encircled by intradural lipoma (asterisk). (A from Thompson DNP. Spinal dysraphic anomalies: classification,
presentation and management. Paed Child Health. 2014;24:431–438. Fig. 4; B from Rossi A, Biancheri R, Cama A, et al. Imaging in spine and spinal
cord malformations. Eur J Radiol. 2004;50[2]:177–200, Fig. 9a; C, From Jaiswal AK, Garg A, Mahapatra AK. Spinal ossifying lipoma. J Clin Neurosci.
2005;12:714–717, Fig. 1.)

Table 631.1  Cutaneous Lesions Associated with Occult
Spinal Dysraphism
IMAGING INDICATED
Subcutaneous mass or lipoma
Hairy patch
Dermal sinus or cyst
Atypical dimples (deep, >5 mm, >25 mm from anal verge)
Vascular lesion (e.g., hemangioma or telangiectasia)
Skin appendages or polypoid lesions (e.g., skin tags, tail-­like
appendages)
Scarlike lesions (aplasia cutis)
IMAGING UNCERTAIN
Hyperpigmented patches
Deviation of the gluteal fold
IMAGING NOT REQUIRED
Simple dimples (<5 mm, <25 mm from anal verge)
Coccygeal pits
From Williams H. Spinal sinuses, dimples, pits and patches: what lies beneath? Arch Dis
Child Educ Pract Ed. 2006;91:ep75–80.

tissue within the sac and associated hydrocephalus have the least favorable prognosis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

631.5 Anencephaly
Sara K. Trowbridge, Edward Yang, and
Christopher J. Yuskaitis
An anencephalic infant presents with a large defect of the calvarium,
meninges, and scalp associated with a rudimentary brain. Anencephaly
is a result of failure of closure of the rostral neuropore, the opening
of the anterior neural tube. The opened neural tube leads to failure of
the development of the skull vault. The embryologic precursor stages
of anencephaly start with acrania (absence of the skull), followed by
exencephaly (cerebral tissue protruding without an overlying skull),
and ultimately the cerebral tissue degenerates because of prolonged
exposure to the amniotic fluid.
In anencephaly, the cerebral hemispheres and cerebellum are usually absent, and only a residue of the brainstem can be identified

Fig. 631.6 Occipital encephalocele. Sagittal T2-­weighted MRI of a

newborn with prenatally diagnosed cephalocele demonstrates encephalomalacic brain protruding through an occipital skull defect with
entrapped CSF in the cephalocele sac representing a mixture of subarachnoid (deep) and subdural (superficial) fluid. Note that the intracranial subarachnoid spaces (e.g., basal cistern) are contracted because of
the large extracranial CSF reservoir.

(Fig. 631.7). The pituitary gland is hypoplastic, and the spinal cord
pyramidal tracts are missing because of the absence of the cerebral cortex. Additional anomalies, including folding of the ears, cleft palate,
and congenital heart defects, occur in 10–20% of cases. Most anencephalic infants are stillborn or die within several days of birth.
The incidence of anencephaly in the United States has been decreasing since the 1990s and approximates 0.2-­0.3 in 1,000 live births; this
varies across the world. As with myelomeningoceles, the recurrence
risk is approximately 4% and increases to 10% if a couple has had two
previously affected pregnancies. Environmental factors in addition
to genetics are implicated as a cause of anencephaly, including low
socioeconomic status, nutritional and vitamin deficiencies, as well as
certain exposures. It is very likely that several noxious stimuli interact on a genetically susceptible host to produce anencephaly. Approximately 50% of cases of anencephaly have associated polyhydramnios.
Couples who have had an anencephalic infant should have successive

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3566 Part XXV u The Nervous System
migration and organization may also present with associated abnormalities in brain size, but this is not always present. These disorders often
present clinically with either seizures and/or developmental delays and
are best diagnosed by identification of the specific cortical malformation
by brain MRI. Although many brain malformations can be apparent
from early in life (even on fetal MRI), some more subtle malformations
(e.g., focal cortical dysplasias) may not be clearly visible until myelination is largely completed (around 2 years of age). Genetic testing is
indicated given the increasing number of identifiable genetic causes of
brain malformations (Table 631.2). Somatic variants have been found
to cause some disorders of migration/organization. Somatic variants
are genetic changes that occur after conception and do not affect the
germ cells. Mosaicism from somatic variants is often not detected by
standard clinical genetic testing.

MICROCEPHALY

Microcephaly is defined as a head circumference that measures more
than 2-­3 standard deviations (SD) below the mean for age and sex.
Microcephaly may be subdivided into two main groups: primary
(genetic) microcephaly, thought to be caused by defects in neuronal
proliferation, and secondary (nongenetic) microcephaly, generally
associated with destructive events after initial neuronal proliferation
(e.g., hypoxic-­ischemic injury, infection). A precise diagnosis is important for genetic counseling and for prediction of future pregnancies.

ETIOLOGY

Fig. 631.7 Anencephaly. On this sagittal MR image of an

18-­wk-­gestational-­age fetus, there is abrupt truncation of the neuraxis
above the brainstem (arrow), no cerebral tissue, and an open skull defect exposed to amniotic fluid consistent with anencephaly.

pregnancies monitored, including with amniocentesis, determination
of AFP levels, and ultrasound examination, between the 14th and 16th
weeks of gestation. Prenatal folic acid supplementation decreases the
risk of this condition.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

631.6 Malformations of Cortical
Development
Sara K. Trowbridge, Edward Yang, and
Christopher J. Yuskaitis
Disorders of neuronal proliferation, migration, and organization can
cause a spectrum of abnormalities of CNS structure and/or function.
Often these present with developmental delays/intellectual disability
and/or epilepsy; less severe cases may be detected as incidental findings on a brain MRI.
The major period for neuronal proliferation in the developing
human brain occurs between 8 and 15 weeks of gestation. Neural progenitor cells and radial glial cells (which generate both neurons and
glial cells) proliferate in the ventricular and subventricular zones. The
radial glial cells then play a critical role in the control of neuronal
migration, as they form the radial glial fiber system that guides cortical
projection neurons to their proper sites. Migrating neurons attach to
the radial glial fiber and disembark at predetermined sites to form the
precisely designed six-­layered cerebral cortex by 28 weeks of gestation.
Another important mechanism is the tangential migration of progenitor neurons destined to become cortical interneurons. The severity and
the extent of a disorder of neuronal proliferation, migration, and/or
organization depend on numerous factors, including the timing of a
particular insult and a host of environmental and genetic contributors.
Disorders of neuronal proliferation generally present with abnormal brain size (microcephaly, megalencephaly). Disorders of neuronal

Primary microcephaly refers to a group of conditions that follow a
mendelian pattern of inheritance or are associated with a specific
genetic syndrome and is generally thought to be secondary to a disruption in neuronal proliferation. Affected infants are usually identified
prenatally or at birth because of a small head circumference. Microcephaly vera refers to a group of autosomal recessive disorders characterized by isolated microcephaly, with 16 genetic loci implicated to
date. Many of the causative genes at those loci have been identified,
including several involved in normal mitosis (e.g., CDK5RAP2, ASPM,
CENPJ). The genetic causes of microcephaly also include autosomal
dominant and X-­linked recessive disorders, as well as a series of chromosomal syndromes (Table 631.3); some of these are associated with
other malformations of cortical development. Secondary microcephaly can result from a number of noxious agents that affect early neurodevelopment; these include irradiation, maternal alcohol or cocaine
use, maternal hyperphenylalaninemia, and infections (rubella, cytomegalovirus, HIV, Zika virus).
Acquired microcephaly, which develops postnatally, can be seen as
a result of parenchymal injury (e.g., hypoxic ischemic injury), as well
as various genetic conditions, including Rett, Seckel, and Angelman
syndromes and developmental epileptic encephalopathy syndromes.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND DIAGNOSIS

A thorough family history should be taken, seeking additional cases
of microcephaly or disorders affecting the nervous system. It is important to measure a patient’s head circumference at birth to diagnose
microcephaly as early as possible. A very small head circumference
implies a process that began early in embryonic or fetal development.
An insult to the brain that occurs later in life, particularly beyond the
age of 2 years, is less likely to produce severe microcephaly. Serial head
circumference measurements are more meaningful than a single measurement, particularly when the measurement is borderline or if the
microcephaly is progressive. The head circumference of each parent
and any siblings should be recorded. The timing and progression of
microcephaly, along with familial measurements, may help narrow the
differential diagnosis.
Laboratory investigation of a microcephalic child is determined by
the history and physical examination. If the cause of the microcephaly
is unknown, the mother’s serum phenylalanine level should be determined. High phenylalanine serum levels in an asymptomatic mother
can produce marked brain damage in an otherwise normal nonphenylketonuric infant. Newborn screening in the United States will
detect most of these cases. Array comparative genomic hybridization

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 631 u Congenital Anomalies of the Central Nervous System

3567

Table 631.2  Malformations of Cortical Development
CLASSIFICATION

CLINICAL FINDING

GENETIC/METABOLIC ETIOLOGY

Disorders primarily of
neuronal proliferation

Microcephaly

Primary microcephaly (MCPH 1-­18)*: MCPH1, WDR62, CDK5RAP2, CASC5, ASPM,
CENPJ, STIL, CEP135, CEP152, ZNF335, PHC1, CDK6, CENPE, SASS6, MFSD2A,
ANKLE2, CIT, WDFY3
Syndromic microcephaly
Acquired microcephaly

Macrocephaly†

Metabolic:
• Organic acid disorders (e.g., glutaric aciduria – GCDH)
• Lysosomal storage disorders (e.g., Tay-­Sachs disease – HEXA)
• Leukoencephalopathies (e.g., Alexander disease – GFAP)
Somatic overgrowth: NSD1, GPC3, GPC4, FMR1, EZH2, PTEN
Neurocutaneous: NF1, NF2, TSC1, TSC2
More than 300 listed conditions in OMIM

Disorders primarily of
neuronal migration

Lissencephaly-­pachygyria
spectrum

Isolated: PAFAH1B1 (LIS1)
Miller-­Dieker syndrome: 17p13.3 deletion (PAFAH1B1, YWHAE)
Subcortical band heterotopia: DCX (female)
X-­linked: DCX (male), ARX
Tubulinopathies: TUBA1A, TUBB2A, TUBB2B
Cobblestone: POMT1, POMT2, POMGNT1, FKTN, FKRP, LARGE
More than 50 listed conditions in OMIM (e.g., RELN, VDLR)

Neuronal heterotopias

Isolated periventricular nodular heterotopias: FLNA (female)
Also seen in association with other malformations, more than 10 listed conditions in
OMIM

Disorders primarily of
neuronal organization

Polymicrogyria

Over 200 listed conditions in OMIM (also see Table 631.4)

Schizencephaly

In utero injury/infection

Mixed disorders

Hemimegalencephaly

AKT1, AKT3, DEPDC5, MTOR, PIK3CA, PIK3R2, PTEN, TSC1, TSC2

Focal cortical dysplasia

DEPDC5, MTOR, NPRL2, NPRL3, PIK3CA, TSC1, TSC2

For most cases, unclear genetic etiology; few cases associated with COL4A1, SHH, SIX3

*See Jayaraman D, Bae BI, Walsh CA. The genetics of primary microcephaly. Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet. 2018;19:177–200 for comprehensive review.
†See Winden KD, Yuskaitis CJ, Poduri A. Megalencephaly and macrocephaly. Semin Neurol. 2015;35(3):277–287 for comprehensive review.

(chromosome microarray) study and/or karyotype is obtained if a chromosomal syndrome is suspected or if the child has abnormal facies, short
stature, or any additional congenital anomalies. Whole exome sequencing or gene panel testing should also be considered, as pathogenic genetic
variants can also cause primary microcephaly and syndromic microcephaly. MRI is useful in identifying any associated structural abnormalities of the brain, such as lissencephaly, pachygyria, and polymicrogyria.
CT scanning is useful to detect intracerebral calcification. Additional
studies include a fasting plasma and urine amino acid and organic acid
analysis; serum ammonia determination; toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, and herpes simplex (TORCH) titers; HIV testing of the
mother and child; and a urine sample for the culture of cytomegalovirus. Zika virus–specific testing is also indicated when the infant is
born in a high-­risk environment or if a parent has a history of travel to
endemic areas.

MACROCEPHALY AND MEGALENCEPHALY

Megalencephaly is an anatomic disorder of brain growth defined as a
brain weight:volume ratio of more than the 98th percentile for age (or
≥2 SD above the mean) that is usually accompanied by macrocephaly
(an occipitofrontal circumference >98th percentile). Macrocephaly can
also be secondary to enlarged skull bones, hydrocephalus/ventriculomegaly, and enlarged extraaxial spaces.
Megalencephaly can be categorized as anatomic or metabolic.
Although metabolic diseases can present with microcephaly as well,
there are certain syndromes (e.g., Alexander disease, Canavan disease,

megalencephalic leukoencephalopathy with subcortical cysts) that
classically present with macrocephaly and should be considered in the
differential diagnosis.
The most common cause of anatomic megalencephaly is benign
familial macrocephaly. This condition is easily diagnosed by a careful
family history and measurement of the parents’ head circumferences
(occipitofrontal circumferences). Other common megalencephaly-­
associated macrocephaly syndromes include syndromes with prenatal
and/or postnatal somatic overgrowth, such as Sotos (NSD1), Simpson-­
Golabi-­Behmel (GPC3 and GPC4), fragile X (FMR1), Weaver (EZH2),
and macrocephaly–cutis marmorata telangiectatica congenita syndromes. Multiple somatic overgrowth syndromes are associated with
macrocephaly and pathogenic variants in PTEN, including Bannayan-­
Ruvalcaba-­Riley, Cowden, and Proteus-­like syndromes. PTEN has also
been commonly implicated in patients with autism spectrum disorder
and macrocephaly.
Additionally, many of the neurocutaneous syndromes, including neurofibromatosis (NF1 and NF2), Sturge-­Weber syndrome, and
tuberous sclerosis, can present with macrocephaly. Tuberous sclerosis results from pathogenic variants in TSC1 or TSC2, encoding the
proteins hamartin and tuberin, which act in the mammalian target of
rapamycin (mTOR) signaling pathway, a pathway known to be critical
to regulating cell growth and proliferation. Indeed, variants in many
genes in the mTOR signaling pathway have emerged as important
causes of cortical malformations (Fig. 631.8) (see Hemimegalencephaly and Focal Cortical Dysplasia).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3568 Part XXV u The Nervous System
HEMIMEGALENCEPAHLY

Table 631.3  Causes of Microcephaly
PRIMARY MICROCEPHALY
Isolated
Microcephaly vera (autosomal recessive
microcephaly
microcephaly)
Autosomal dominant microcephaly
X-­linked microcephaly
Syndromic
microcephaly

Chromosomal abnormalities
• Trisomy 13
• Trisomy 18
• Trisomy 21
Chromosomal deletions
• 4p deletion (Wolf-­Hirschhorn syndrome)
• 5p deletion (Cri-­du-­chat syndrome)
• 7q11.23 deletion (Williams syndrome)
• 17p13.3 deletion (Miller-­Dieker syndrome)
Over 1000 other syndromes listed in OMIM,
including:
• Feingold syndrome (MYCN, MIR17HG)
• Cornelia de Lange syndrome (NIPBL,
SMC1A, SMC3, RAD21, HDAC8)
• Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz syndrome (DHCR7)
• Rubinstein-­Taybi syndrome (CREBBP, EP300)

ACQUIRED MICROCEPHALY
Genetic acquired
Rett syndrome (MECP2)
microcephaly
Angelman syndrome (UBE3A)
Developmental epileptic encephalopathies
Intrauterine
infection

Toxoplasmosis
Cytomegalovirus
Rubella
Zika virus

Teratogens

Alcohol
Hydantoin
Radiation

Other exposures/
injury

Maternal hyperphenylalaninemia
Maternal diabetes mellitus
Hypoxic-­ischemic injury

Adapted from Abuelo D. Microcephaly syndromes. Semin Pediatr Neurol.
2007;14(3):118–127.

Hemimegalencephaly, or unilateral macrocephaly, appears to result
from a more focal aberrancy in neuronal proliferation during development, which also results in abnormal neuronal migration and
organization (see Fig. 631.8). These patients generally present with
early-­onset refractory epilepsy and developmental delays. Various syndromes are associated with hemimegalencephaly, including epidermal
nevus syndrome, Proteus syndrome, and hypomelanosis of Ito. As with
other malformations of cortical development (see Macrocephaly and
Megalencephaly and Focal Cortical Dysplasias), the mTOR signaling
pathway appears to play a critical role in the pathogenesis of hemimegalencephaly, with many cases resulting from variants in genes
involved in this pathway, including AKT1 in Proteus syndrome.

FOCAL CORTICAL DYSPLASIAS

Focal cortical dysplasias consist of abnormal cortical lamination in
a discrete area of cortex and are thought to be disorders of neuronal
proliferation, migration, and organization. These can be difficult to
detect, particularly in younger children with immature myelination.
Therefore high-­resolution, thin-­section MRI can be useful, particularly
in patients with refractory epilepsy undergoing consideration for surgery (see Fig. 631.8). Increasingly, germline and somatic pathogenic
variants in genes involved in the mTOR pathway (DEPDC5, NPRL2,
NPRL3, AKT3, others) have been implicated in the pathogenesis of
focal cortical dysplasias.

LISSENCEPHALY-­PACHYGYRIA

Lissencephaly, or agyria, is a rare disorder that is characterized by the
absence of cerebral convolutions and a poorly formed sylvian fissure,
giving the appearance of a 3-­to 4-­month-­old fetal brain. The condition
is probably a result of faulty neuronal migration during early embryonic life. The cortical layering of a lissencephalic brain is disrupted
and results in a two-­to four-­layered cortex, rather than the usual six-­
layered one. A unique form of lissencephaly is subcortical band heterotopia, or double-­cortex syndrome, in which a thick band of gray matter
is located deep to the cortex, which may appear normal. Pachygyria is
on the milder end of the lissencephaly spectrum, with some gyri present, although these are abnormal and markedly reduced in number.
Infants with lissencephaly-­
pachygyria present with failure to
thrive, progressive microcephaly, marked developmental delay, and

*

A

B

C

Fig. 631.8 Spectrum of mTOR-­related cortical malformations on brain MRI. A, An axial T2-­weighted image of a 4-­mo-­old female with hemimega-

lencephaly caused by a somatic mTOR variant demonstrates diffuse enlargement of the left hemisphere, cortical thickening, and white matter T2
hypointensity consistent with some combination of accelerated myelination and heterotopic neurons. B, Axial FLAIR imaging of a 6-­yr-­old female
with intractable epilepsy demonstrates a transmantle region of signal abnormality (arrow), which fans out as it extends centrifugally from the periventricular white matter to the cortex, a typical appearance of focal cortical dysplasia type IIB. C, By comparison, an axial FLAIR image of a 4-­yr-­old
male with tuberous sclerosis demonstrates a multiplicity of transmantle signs consistent with tubers (largest right occipital focus denoted by an
arrow) as well as subependymal nodules lining the lateral ventricles and a subependymal giant cell tumor at the left caudothalamic groove (asterisk).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 631 u Congenital Anomalies of the Central Nervous System
often refractory epilepsy. Various genetic causes of lissencephaly have
been identified, including pathogenic variants in PAFAH1B1 (LIS1)
on chromosome 17p13.3 (Fig. 631.9); larger deletions at this locus
(encompassing the YWHAE gene in addition to the PAFAH1B1 gene)
are linked to Miller-­Dieker syndrome, characterized by lissencephaly and other features, including distinctive facies (a prominent forehead, bitemporal hollowing, anteverted nostrils, a prominent upper
lip, and micrognathia), and cardiac and genital anomalies. DCX is on
the X chromosome, with genetic disruption leading to lissencephaly
in males and subcortical band heterotopia in females (see Fig. 631.9).
Pathogenic variants in ARX are a rarer cause of X-­linked lissencephaly in males. The tubulinopathies (related to variants in TUBA1A,
TUBB2A, TUBB2B, and others) are another important cause of lissencephaly. Certain disorders (e.g., Walker-­
Warburg syndrome,
Fukuyama congenial muscular dystrophy, and muscle-­
eye-­
brain
disease) present with a cobblestone lissencephaly, an overmigration
disorder, with a bumpy cortical surface composed of groups of heterotopic neurons and altered myelination (see Fig. 631.9).

When the clefts are bilateral, many patients are severely intellectually challenged, with seizures that are difficult to control and
microcephaly with spastic quadriparesis. Some cases of bilateral
schizencephaly are associated with septo-­optic dysplasia and
endocrinologic disorders. Unilateral schizencephaly is a common
cause of congenital hemiparesis. Schizencephaly is associated with
fetal cytomegalovirus infection. It can also be secondary to in utero
vascular injury, sometimes in the setting of pathogenic variants
in COL4A1, a gene associated with increased risk of intracranial
hemorrhage. Some reports have suggested the involvement of the
sonic hedgehog signaling pathway, but most cases remain without a
clearly defined genetic etiology.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

631.7 Disorders with Midline Defects
Sara K. Trowbridge, Edward Yang, and
Christopher J. Yuskaitis

NEURONAL HETEROTOPIAS

Subtypes of neuronal heterotopias include periventricular nodular
heterotopias, subcortical heterotopia (including band type), and
marginal glioneuronal heterotopias. Intractable seizures are a common
feature. Several genes have been identified that are a cause of these
conditions, including most commonly the X-­linked FLNA gene, which
causes bilateral periventricular nodular heterotopia in affected females
(Fig. 631.10).

POLYMICROGYRIA AND SCHIZENCEPHALY

Polymicrogyria is characterized by an augmentation of small convolutions separated by shallow enlarged sulci (Fig. 631.11). Polymicrogyria is commonly seen in the temporal lobes in the perisylvian
region. Pathogenic variants in numerous genes have been associated
with polymicrogyria, as noted in Table 631.4. Epilepsy, including drug-­
resistant forms, and oromotor discoordination are common features.
Schizencephaly is the presence of unilateral or bilateral clefts within
the cerebral hemispheres caused by an abnormality of morphogenesis
(see Fig. 631.11). The cleft may be fused or unfused and, if unilateral
and large, may be confused with a porencephalic cyst. Not infrequently,
the borders of the cleft are surrounded by abnormal brain, particularly
polymicrogyria.

A

B

3569

HOLOPROSENCEPHALY

Holoprosencephaly encompasses a group of developmental disorders that result from defective prosencephalic cleavage. These disorders span a spectrum of severity and are classified into three groups,
alobar, semilobar, and lobar, depending on the degree of the cleavage abnormality (Fig. 631.12). Alobar holoprosencephaly is the
most severe form, with complete fusion of the cerebral hemispheres
and deep nuclei and complete absence of the corpus callosum and
olfactory bulbs and tracts. Semilobar holoprosencephaly presents
with fusion of the anterior cerebral hemispheres and absence of
the anterior corpus callosum. Lobar holoprosencephaly, the least
severe form, generally presents with full separation between the
cerebral hemispheres, partial or full separation between the deeper
nuclei, and full development of the posterior corpus callosum, with
some underdevelopment of the anterior corpus callosum. A fourth
type, the middle interhemispheric variant, or syntelencephaly,
involves a segmental area of nonseparation of the posterior frontal
and parietal lobes. Facial abnormalities, including cyclopia, synophthalmia, cebocephaly, single nostril, choanal atresia, solitary

C

D

Fig. 631.9 Pachygyria and subcortical band heterotopia spectrum on brain MRI. A, An axial T1-­weighted image of an 18-­mo-­old male demon-

strates thickening of the cortex and attenuation of gyration, hallmarks of pachygyria. In this patient with a pathogenic DCX variant, there is greater
severity of the pachygyria anteriorly, which is typically the case for pachygyria caused by mutations in this gene. B, By contrast, an axial T1-­weighted
sequence of a 10-­yr-­old female demonstrates a normal-­thickness cortical ribbon with a subjacent layer of gray matter signal, consistent with subcortical band heterotopia. This patient also has a pathogenic DCX variant but has an attenuated phenotype because of X-­linked inactivation and mosaic
expression of the disease-­causing variant. C, An axial T2-­weighted image of a 4-­yr-­old female demonstrates marked cortical thickening and severe
posterior predominant agyria (lissencephaly), the latter being a classic manifestation of the patient’s LIS1 variant. D, An axial T2-­weighted image
of cobblestone malformation (previously called type II lissencephaly) from a 3-­mo-­old female with infantile spasms, occipital cephalocele, developmental delay, and elevated creatine kinase levels. Note the centrifugal streaks of gray matter extending to a smooth thickened cortex. Although
superficially reminiscent of lissencephaly like that in the prior case, a key distinguishing feature is the nodularity of the gray-­white matter interface
and the centrifugal islands of gray matter (e.g., arrowed right occipital foci). The islands of gray matter represent migration of neurons through the
pial limiting membrane into the subarachnoid space, a typical feature of cobblestone malformation.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3570 Part XXV u The Nervous System
central incisor tooth, and premaxillary agenesis, are common in
severe cases, because the prechordal mesoderm that induces the
ventral prosencephalon is also responsible for induction of the
median facial structures. Milder facial abnormalities, such as ocular
hypotelorism, can be seen in milder forms.
Affected children with the severe alobar type have a high mortality
rate within the first year of life, but some can live for years. Mortality
and morbidity with milder types are more variable, with neurologic
symptoms generally correlating with the severity of the underlying abnormality. In addition to neurologic symptoms, patients with
impaired hypothalamic cleavage can also have various endocrinopathies. The incidence of holoprosencephaly is 1 in 10,000 live births.
A prenatal diagnosis can be confirmed by ultrasonography after the
10th week of gestation for more severe types, but fetal MRI at later
gestational ages gives far greater anatomic, and therefore diagnostic,
precision.
Genetic and environmental factors both play a role in the development of holoprosencephaly. Chromosomal abnormalities account
for approximately 60% of all cases, of which trisomy 13 is the most
common. Other associated chromosomal abnormalities include trisomy 18 and deletions or trisomies of chromosomes 2, 3, 7, and 21.
Diagnosis with a chromosomal abnormality in the setting of holoprosencephaly is a negative prognostic factor, with most patients
not surviving past the first year of life. Monogenic syndromic
causes include CHARGE syndrome (CHD), Pallister-­Hall (GLI3),
Rubenstein-­Taybi (CREB-­BP), and Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz (DHCR7)
syndromes. Genetic variants, particularly in the sonic hedgehog
signaling pathway (SHH, SIX3), have also been implicated in nonsyndromic holoprosencephaly. Environmental factors, particularly
maternal diabetes, are risk factors for holoprosencephaly.

Fig. 631.10 Periventricular nodular heterotopia. An axial T1-­weighted
brain MR image of a 16-­yr-­old female with valvular heart disease and
joint laxity demonstrates confluent subependymal nodules of gray matter signal consistent with periventricular nodular heterotopia (marked
with dashed oval). The patient was ultimately found to have a pathogenic FLNA variant.

A

B

C

D

*
E

F

G

H

Fig. 631.11 Polymicrogyria spectrum by brain MRI. Axial (A) and sagittal (B) T1-­weighted images of a 17-­yr-­old male with 22q11 deletion syn-

drome demonstrate diffusely increased gyral frequency and a bumpy surface contour of the cerebral cortex consistent with polymicrogyria, with
some sparing of the frontal poles and occipital lobes. Axial (C) and sagittal (D) T1-­weighted images of a 23-­yr-­old male demonstrate a unilateral
area of right perisylvian polymicrogyria (dashed ovals) with reduced underlying white matter volume. Axial T2-­weighted (E) and sagittal T1-­weighted
(F) sequences demonstrate diffuse polymicrogyria in a 28-­mo-­old with hearing loss, developmental delay, and congenital cytomegalovirus (CMV)
exposure. Although the calcifications associated with TORCH infections are frequently not evident on MRI, clues to CMV as the etiology for polymicrogyria include microcephaly on clinical evaluation and subependymal cysts, the latter evident in this patient at the classic temporal horn location
(asterisk) where it is separated from the remaining ventricular system by a thin membrane (arrow, F). Axial (G) and sagittal (H) T1-­weighted images
of a 17-­yr-­old male demonstrate an absent septum pellucidum and an apposed gray matter lined cleft through the left frontal lobe consistent with
closed-­lip schizencephaly (arrow, G). As is invariably the case in schizencephaly, the schizencephalic cleft is marginated by polymicrogyria (ovals, G
and H).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 631 u Congenital Anomalies of the Central Nervous System

3571

Table 631.4  Genes Associated with Polymicrogyria
HEAD SIZE2

PATHWAY/
PATHOLOGY

GENE1

MAC

mTORopathies

AKT3

x

CCND2

x

MTOR

x

DEPDC5

x

MIC

PI4KA

Tubulinopathies

N/MS

x

PIK3CA

x

PIK3R2

x

PTEN

x

DYNC1H1

BRAIN FINDINGS

DISORDER NAME

MOI

Bilateral perisylvian PMG

MPPH syndrome

AD

Smith-­Kingsmore syndrome

AD

Diffuse, focal, or multifocal
PMG (less common than
FCD)

AD

Perisylvian PMG

AR

Bilateral perisylvian PMG

x

KIF5C

MCAP syndrome

See footnote 4

MPPH syndrome

AD

Diffuse, focal, or multifocal
PMG

AD

x

Frontal or diffuse PMG

AD

x

Perisylvian PMG

AD

x

Diffuse, focal, or multifocal
PMG; bilateral, asymmetric,
perisylvian PMG

TUBA1A

x

Lissencephaly 3

AD

TUBB

x

PMG

AD

TUBB2A

x

AD

TUBB2B

x

x

Bilateral, asymmetric, anterior
predominant PMG

TUBB3

x

x

Frontoparietal PMG

AD

Cobblestone
dysplasia –
alpha
dystroglycan-­
opathies

FKTN

x

Diffuse (cerebral and
cerebellar) PMG

AR

POMGNT1

x

PMG

AR

POMT2

x

PMG

AR

Cobblestone
dysplasia – other
(laminopathies
and congenital
disorders of
glycosylation)

ADGRG1 (GPR56)

x

Bilateral frontoparietal PMG

AR

x

Diffuse cobblestone cortex;
PMG A > P

AR

x

Frontoparietal PMG

Autosomal recessive cutis
laxa type 2A

AR

x

Occipital PMG; white-­matter
signal abnormalities

Muscular dystrophy,
congenital
merosin-­deficient, 1A

AR

x

Porencephaly; cobblestone
lissencephaly P > A

Lissencephaly 5

AR

x

Occipital PMG

AR

Perisylvian or diffuse PMG

AR

COL3A1

x

ATP6V0A2

x

LAMA2

LAMB1

x

LAMC3
SNAP29
SRD5A3

x
x

Frontal PMG

SRD5A3-­CDG (CDG-­Iq)

AR
Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3572 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 631.4  Genes Associated with Polymicrogyria—cont’d
HEAD SIZE2

PATHWAY/
PATHOLOGY

GENE1

Other

BICD2

MAC

MIC

COL18A1
DDX3X

EML1

x

Perisylvian PMG

x

Frontal PMG

Knobloch syndrome 1

AR

x

Frontoparietal or diffuse PMG

DDX3X-­related
neurodevelopmental
disorder

XL

x
x

FIG4
GPSM2

BRAIN FINDINGS

x

x

EOMES (TBR2)
EZH2

N/MS

x

x
x

GRIN2B

x

KIFBP (KIAA1279)

x

x

NDE1

x

NEDD4L

x

OCLN
OFD1

PAX6

Metabolic
disorders

Bilateral perisylvian or diffuse
PMG

AR

x
x

x

Weaver syndrome

Bilateral or temporo-­occipital
PMG

AR
Chudley-­McCollough
syndrome

x

x

RAB3GAP1

x

x

RAB3GAP2

x

x

RTTN

x

AR
AD

Diffuse PMG

AD
Goldberg-­Shprintzen
syndrome

AR

Perisylvian PMG; PNH

AD

Diffuse PMG

AR

Bilateral perisylvian PMG;
PNH

AD

Bandlike calcifications with
diffuse PMG

Pseudo-­TORCH syndrome 1

AR

Frontal and parietal PMG

Joubert syndrome (XLR);
orofaciodigital syndrome
1 (XLD)

XL

Variable temporal PMG

RAB18

AD

Extensive bilateral PMG

Diffuse PMG

MAP1B

AD

AR

Parasagittal PMG; ACC

GRIN1

MOI

Ribbon-­like heterotopia with
overlying PMG; ACC

Bilateral perisylvian PMG
x

DISORDER NAME

Diffuse or frontal PMG

AR
RAB18 deficiency3

Variable diffuse, asymmetric
PMG

AR

AR

TBC1D20

x

Diffuse or bilateral frontal
PMG

RAB18 deficiency3

AR

TCTN1

x

Frontal PMG

Joubert syndrome

AR

TMEM216

x

Variable PMG

Meckel-­Gruber syndrome,
Joubert syndrome

AR

WDR62

x

± Diffuse or asymmetric PMG

FH

x

Variable PMG

Fumeric aciduria

AR

PEX genes

x

Perisylvian PMG

Zellweger spectrum
disorders

AR

x

AR

1Genes are in alphabetic order.
2Head size:

N/MS = normal/mildly small (i.e., head circumference >3 SD and <97%)
MIC = severe microcephaly (i.e., birth head circumference <3 SD or earliest HC <4 SD)
MAC = macrocephaly (i.e., head circumference >97%)
3RAB18 deficiency is a spectrum that includes Warburg microsyndrome (at the severe end) and Martsolf syndrome (at the mild end). Additional findings are eye involvement (bilateral
congenital cataracts, microphthalmia, and microcornea); severe-­to-­profound intellectual disability; and hypogonadism.
4De novo germline pathogenic variants in PIK3CA are reported; however, most affected individuals with MCAP reported had somatic mosaicism for pathogenic variants in PIK3CA,
suggesting that the mutation occurred post fertilization in one cell of the multicellular embryo.https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/glossary/def-­item/de-­novo/
A, Anterior; ACC, absence of the corpus callosum; AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; CDG, congenital disorder of glycosylation; FCD, focal cortical dysplasia; MCAP,
megalencephaly-­capillary malformation-­PMG; MOI, mode of inheritance; MPPH, megalencephaly-­polymicrogyria-­polydactyly-­hydrocephalus; P, posterior; PNH, periventricular
nodular heterotopia; XL, X-­linked; XLD, X-­linked dominant; XLR, X-­linked recessive
Adapted from Stutterd CA, Dobyns WB, Jansen A, et al. Polymicrogyria overview. In: Adam MP, Ardinger HH, Pagon RA, et al., eds. GeneReviews. Seattle, WA: University of
Washington; 2005.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 631 u Congenital Anomalies of the Central Nervous System

3573

C
AC

A

C

E

*

*

*

C
AC

B

D

F

Fig. 631.12 Gradations of severity in holoprosencephaly. Holoprosencephaly results from incomplete cleavage of the cerebral hemispheres early

in embryogenesis. As illustrated in these pairs of brain MRI sagittal T1-­weighted (A, C, and E) and axial T2-­weighted images (B, D, and F), severity ranges from mildly affected patients with lobar holoprosencephaly (A, B), to more severely affected patients with semilobar holoprosencephaly
(C, D), to the most severely affected patients with alobar holoprosencephaly (E, F). More mildly affected holoprosencephaly patients have greater
separation of the cerebral hemispheres, particularly anteriorly and ventrally (e.g., less deep gray matter structure fusion marked with asterisks in B,
D, and F). Milder holoprosencephaly also demonstrates greater formation of the corpus callosum (arrows in A, C) which is absent in alobar holoprosencephaly (E). Unlike alobar holoprosencephaly, which typically demonstrates a monoventricle with or without a dorsal cyst (C in E, F), semilobar
and lobar holoprosencephaly demonstrate partial to complete formation of the lateral ventricles (e.g., frontal/temporal horns). The shown case of
semilobar holoprosencephaly (C, D) has an arachnoid cyst (AC), but it is not in communication with the ventricular system.

AGENESIS OF THE CORPUS CALLOSUM

Agenesis of the corpus callosum consists of a heterogeneous group of
disorders that result from defective midline prosencephalic development. These disorders vary in clinical presentation from patients with
severe intellectual deficits and neurologic abnormalities to the asymptomatic and normally intelligent patient (Fig. 631.13). In addition,
patients may experience hypethermia or hypothermia and hyperhidrosis (Shapiro syndrome).
When agenesis of the corpus callosum is an isolated phenomenon,
the patient may be asymptomatic. When it is accompanied by associated brain anomalies, such as heterotopias, polymicrogyria, and pachygyria (broad, wide gyri), and/or other syndromic or genetic disorders,
patients often have significant neurologic abnormalities, including intellectual disability, microcephaly, hemiparesis or diplegia, and seizures.
The anatomic features of agenesis of the corpus callosum are best
depicted on MRI and include widely separated frontal horns with an
abnormally high position of the third ventricle between the lateral ventricles. MRI precisely outlines the extent of the corpus callosum defect.
Colpocephaly refers to an abnormal enlargement of the occipital horns
of the ventricular system and can be identified as early as the fetal period.
It is often associated with agenesis of the corpus callosum, but it can occur
in isolation. There are numerous genetic causes of agenesis of the corpus
callosum, including chromosomal abnormalities, syndromic genetic disorders, and nonsyndromic monogenetic disorders (Table 631.5).
Aicardi syndrome is one syndrome that presents with partial or complete agenesis of the corpus callosum, as well as other brain abnormalities

(e.g., cortical dysplasias, periventricular nodular heterotopias, intracranial cysts) and distinctive chorioretinal lacunae. Patients are almost all
female, suggesting that the genetic abnormality is X-­linked dominant.
Seizures, including infantile spasms, are common and are typically resistant to anticonvulsants. An electroencephalogram shows independent
activity recorded from both hemispheres as a result of the absent corpus
callosum and often shows hemihypsarrhythmia. All patients have severe
intellectual disability and can have abnormal vertebrae that may be fused
or only partially developed (hemivertebra).

ABSENCE OF THE SEPTUM PELLUCIDUM

Absence of the septum pellucidum is another developmental midline
defect that is almost always associated with other brain anomalies,
particularly schizencephaly, although it can also be seen with holoprosencephaly, agenesis of the corpus callosum, and septo-­optic dysplasia. It can also result through destruction of the septum pellucidum,
secondary to hydrocephalus or ischemic injury. Therefore the clinical
presentation of patients with absence of the septum pellucidum largely
depends on the etiology, associated brain anomalies, and any underlying chromosomal and/or genetic diagnosis. Cavum septum pellucidum
refers to the cavity between the two septal leaflets; although this is normal in the fetal brain, the septal leaflets generally fuse during development. A persistent cavum septum pellucidum is generally considered
to be a normal variant (Fig. 631.14).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3574 Part XXV u The Nervous System

*

A

B

C

Fig. 631.13 Complete corpus callosum (callosal) agenesis by brain MRI. A, Sagittal T1-­weighted sequence of a newborn with callosal agenesis

demonstrates lack of a normal corpus callosum (dashed arrows along expected course) with multiple sulci radiating without interruption from the
third ventricle (asterisk). B, An axial T2-­weighted image of this patient demonstrates a parallel rather than curved course of the lateral ventricles
(missing callosal genu and rostrum denoted by dashed arrows). C, Redirection of white matter tracts (Probst bundles) can be directly visualized in
callosal agenesis using colored fractional anisotropy maps, where green denotes anteroposterior fiber tracts running parallel to the lateral ventricles
rather than crossing the midline.

Table 631.5  Disorders Associated with Agenesis of the Corpus Callosum*
DISORDER

SALIENT FEATURES

WITH IDENTIFIED GENES†
Andermann syndrome (KCC3)

ACC, progressive neuropathy, and dementia

Donnai-­Barrow syndrome (LRP2)

Diaphragmatic hernia, exomphalos, ACC, deafness

Frontonasal dysplasia (ALX1)

ACC, bilateral extreme microphthalmia, bilateral oblique facial cleft

XLAG (ARX)

Lissencephaly, ACC, intractable epilepsy

Microcephaly (TBR2)

ACC, polymicrogyria

Microcephaly with simplified gyral pattern and ACC (WDR62)

ACC, other brain malformations

Mowat-­Wilson syndrome (ZFHX1B)

Hirschsprung disease, ACC

Pyridoxine-­dependent epilepsy (ALDH7A1)

ACC, seizures, other brain malformations

Pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency (PDHA1, PDHB, PDHX)

ACC with other brain changes

ACC with fatal lactic acidosis (MRPS16)

Complexes I and IV deficiency, ACC, brain malformations

HSAS/MASA syndromes (L1CAM)

Hydrocephalus, adducted thumbs, ACC, MR

ACC SEEN CONSISTENTLY (NO GENE YET IDENTIFIED)
Acrocallosal syndrome

ACC, polydactyly, craniofacial changes, MR

Aicardi syndrome

ACC, chorioretinal lacunae, infantile spasms, MR

Chudley-­McCullough syndrome

Hearing loss, hydrocephalus, ACC, colpocephaly

FG syndrome

MR, ACC, craniofacial changes, macrocephaly

Genitopatellar syndrome

Absent patellae, urogenital malformations, ACC

Temtamy syndrome

ACC, optic coloboma, craniofacial changes, MR

Toriello-­Carey syndrome

ACC, craniofacial changes, cardiac defects, MR

Vici syndrome

ACC, albinism, recurrent infections, MR

ACC SEEN OCCASIONALLY (PARTIAL LIST)‡
ACC with spastic paraparesis (SPG11, SPG15)

Progressive spasticity and neuropathy, thin corpus callosum

Craniofrontonasal syndrome

Coronal craniosynostosis, facial asymmetry, bifid nose

Fryns syndrome

CDH, pulmonary hypoplasia, craniofacial changes

Marden-­Walker syndrome

Blepharophimosis, micrognathia, contractures, ACC

Meckel-­Gruber syndrome

Encephalocele, polydactyly, polycystic kidneys

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 631 u Congenital Anomalies of the Central Nervous System

3575

Table 631.5  Disorders Associated with Agenesis of the Corpus Callosum*—cont’d
DISORDER

SALIENT FEATURES

Nonketotic hyperglycinemia (GLDC, GCST, GCSH)

ACC, cerebral and cerebellar atrophy, myoclonus, progressive
encephalopathy

Microphthalmia with linear skin defects

Microphthalmia, linear skin markings, seizures

Opitz G syndrome

Pharyngeal cleft, craniofacial changes, ACC, MR

Orofaciodigital syndrome

Tongue hamartoma, microretrognathia, clinodactyly

Pyruvate decarboxylase deficiency

Lactic acidosis, seizures, severe MR and spasticity

Rubinstein-­Taybi syndrome

Broad thumbs and great toes, MR, microcephaly

Septooptic dysplasia (de Morsier syndrome)

Hypoplasia of septum pellucidum and optic chiasm

Sotos syndrome

Physical overgrowth, MR, craniofacial changes

Warburg micro syndrome

Microcephaly, microphthalmia, microgenitalia, MR

Wolf-­Hirschhorn syndrome

Microcephaly, seizures, cardiac defects, 4p−

*Reliable incidence data are unavailable for these very rare syndromes.
†Gene symbols in parentheses.
‡Many of these also may consistently have a thin dysplastic corpus callosum, such as Sotos syndrome or agenesis of the corpus callosum (ACC) with spastic paraparesis (SPG11). The
overlap between ACC and these conditions is still under investigation. Other gene symbols are omitted from this section.
4p−, Deletion of the terminal region of the short arm of chromosome 4, defines the genotype for Wolf-­Hirschhorn patients; ACC, agenesis of the corpus callosum; ARX, Aristaless-­
related homeobox gene; CDH, congenital diaphragmatic hernia; HSAS/MASA, X-­linked hydrocephalus/mental retardation, aphasia, shuffling gait, and adducted thumbs; KCC3,
KCl co-transporter 3; L1CAM, L1 cell adhesion molecule; MR, mental retardation; MRPS16, mitochondrial ribosomal protein S16; SPG11, spastic paraplegia 11; XLAG, X-­linked
lissencephaly with absent corpus callosum and ambiguous genitalia; ZFHX1B, zinc finger homeobox 1b.
From Sherr EH, Hahn JS. Disorders of forebrain development. In: Swaiman KF, Ashwal S, Ferriero DM, Schor NF, eds. Swaiman’s Pediatric Neurology, 5th ed. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders; 2012: Table 23-­2.

CONGENITAL CRANIAL DYSINNERVATION
DISORDERS

*

C

C

A

B

expected evolution of the septum pellucidum.
Fig. 631.14 Age-­

Throughout fetal life, the septum pellucidum exists as paired leaflets
enclosing a midline CSF space. This configuration is known as a cavum
septum pellucidum and undergoes fusion into a single membrane during the first months of postnatal life. A, A brain MRI axial T2-­weighted
image of a 42-­day-­old female followed for a cistern of the velum interpositum cyst (C) demonstrates normal separation of the septal leaflets
with an intervening CSF pocket, the cavum septum pellucidum (asterisk). B, An axial single-­shot T2-­weighted brain MR image at 13 mo in the
same patient demonstrates expected fusion of the leaflets into a single
membrane (arrow).

631.8 Dysgenesis of the Cranial Nerves and
the Posterior Fossa
Sara K. Trowbridge, Edward Yang, and
Christopher J. Yuskaitis
The classification of disorders of development of the cranial nerve,
brainstem, and cerebellum remains anatomic, but future classification
systems will likely be based on the molecular biology of brain development based on the genes involved and the roles they play in orchestrating brain architecture.

Congenital cranial dysinnervation disorders (CCDDs) are congenital
nonprogressive disorders that affect the cranial nerves, primarily presenting with abnormal eye and/or facial movements. These disorders
include Möbius syndrome, Duane syndrome, and congenital fibrosis of
the external ocular muscles (CFEOM). Increasingly, genetic causes for
these disorders have been identified.
Möbius syndrome is generally characterized by bilateral facial
weakness (seventh cranial nerve) and sixth nerve palsies (limited eye
abduction). Injury or abnormal development at any level (i.e., cranial
nerve nuclei, roots, nerves, or muscles) can lead to Möbius syndrome,
but most patients have pathology at the level of the cranial nerve nuclei.
The genetics of Möbius syndrome remain incompletely understood.
Genetic linkage mapped inheritance to chromosome 13q12.2-­q13,
with identification of de novo pathogenic variants in PLXND1 and
REV3L in some patients. Environmental factors may also play a role.
Affected infants present in the newborn period with facial weakness,
causing feeding difficulties owing to a poor suck. Möbius syndrome
can also be associated with other congenital anomalies, including talipes equinovarus (clubfoot), arthrogryposis, and syndactyly. Over 30%
of patients with Möbius syndrome are reported to have autism spectrum disorder and/or intellectual disability.
Duane retraction syndrome is characterized by congenital limitation of horizontal globe movement and globe retraction and palpebral
fissure narrowing on attempted adduction. This is caused by underdevelopment or absence of the abducens nuclei and nerves, as well as
aberrant innervation of the lateral rectus muscle by the oculomotor
nerve. Duane syndrome often occurs in families with an autosomal
dominant pattern of inheritance, with three genes (CHN1, MAFB, and
SALL4) identified thus far as well as associations with chromosome
8q13, 20q12, and 2q21.1.
Congenital fibrosis of the extraocular muscles (CFEOM) is characterized by severe restriction of eye movements and ptosis from
abnormal oculomotor and trochlear nerve development and/or from
abnormalities of extraocular muscle innervation. The most common
form is caused by pathogenic autosomal dominant variants in KIF21A,
which encodes a kinesin motor protein. Variants in KIF21A therefore
lead to abnormal axonal transport. Other autosomal dominant causes

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3576 Part XXV u The Nervous System
of CFEOM include pathogenic variants in the tubulin genes TUBA1A,
TUBB2B, and TUBB3. Malformations of cortical development can also
be associated with these and other tubulinopathy genes. Autosomal
recessive forms of CFEOM are associated with variants in PHOX2A
and COL25A1.

BRAINSTEM AND CEREBELLAR DISORDERS

Disorders of the posterior fossa structures include abnormalities not
only of the brainstem and cerebellum but also of the CSF spaces.
Chiari malformation, the most common malformation of the posterior fossa and hindbrain, consists of downward displacement of the
cerebellum and sometimes the brainstem through the foramen magnum. Often, there is an associated developmental abnormality of the
bones of the skull base leading to a small posterior fossa. Chiari malformations are divided into three groups (type I, II, and III). In Chiari
type I, the cerebellar tonsils are downwardly displaced (Fig. 631.15).
Chiari type I malformations can be asymptomatic. When symptoms
develop, they often do not do so until late childhood. Symptoms include
headaches that are worse with straining and other Valsalva maneuvers
that increase ICP. Symptoms of brainstem compression such as diplopia, oropharyngeal dysfunction, spasticity, tinnitus, sleep apnea, and
H

H
1

2

A

B

Fig. 631.15 A, A 16-­yr-­old male with Chiari malformation type 1 (arrow 1) and syringomyelia (arrow 2). B, Postoperative MRI reveals decompression of the Chiari malformation and resolution of the syrinx.
(From Albert GW. Chiari malformation in children. Pediatr Clin N Am.
2021;68:783–792, Fig. 1, p. 786.)

vertigo can also occur. Type I malformations are not associated with
hydrocephalus. Syrinx of the spinal cord, especially in the cervical
region, should be looked for on MRI imaging. This can result in neck
pain, urinary frequency, and progressive lower extremity spasticity.
Although the pathogenesis is unknown, a prevailing theory suggests
that obstruction of the caudal portion of the fourth ventricle during
fetal development is responsible. Chiari type I malformations may be
associated with Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome.
With Chiari type II, the inferior cerebellar vermis, cerebellar tonsils, and medulla are displaced through the foramen magnum. Most
patients with myelomeningocele have a Chiari type II malformation
(also see Neural Tube Defects). Chiari type III, the rarest form, also
consists of downward displacement of the medulla, as well as a high
cervical or occipital encephalocele. Chiari type II is usually identified
early in life because of the association with myelomeningocele and, as
with Chiari type I, can cause symptoms from brainstem compression.
Complications for all the Chiari malformations include obstructive
hydrocephalus and/or syringomyelia. Patients with Chiari type III are
more severely affected, with high mortality and neurologic morbidity.
Dandy-­Walker malformation consists of cystic dilation of the
fourth ventricle, hypoplasia or agenesis of the cerebellar vermis, and an
enlarged posterior fossa with elevation of the lateral venous sinuses and
the tentorium (Fig. 631.16). Various associated brain malformations
can also be seen, including agenesis of the corpus callosum and malformations secondary to abnormal neuronal migration. Most patients will
develop hydrocephalus in infancy, and variable degrees of neurologic
impairment are usually present. The etiology of Dandy-­Walker malformation is heterogeneous and includes chromosomal abnormalities,
single gene disorders, and exposure to teratogens. It is important to distinguish Dandy-­Walker malformation from other causes of posterior
fossa CSF collections (see Fig. 631.16). These include the Blake pouch
cyst, a benign variant that consists of enlargement of the fourth ventricle, caused by persistence of the developmental Blake pouch structure. Isolated mega cisterna magna, another benign normal variant,
refers to an enlarged cisterna magna with otherwise normal cerebellar
architecture and size. Finally, posterior fossa arachnoid cysts can lead
to hydrocephalus caused by obstruction of CSF flow but often remain
asymptomatic.
Joubert syndrome and related disorders are a group of autosomal
recessive disorders in which there is cerebellar vermis hypoplasia and
the pontomesencephalic molar tooth sign (a deepening of the interpeduncular fossa with thick and straight superior cerebellar peduncles)
(Fig. 631.17). It is associated with hypotonia, ataxia, characteristic
breathing abnormalities including episodic apnea and hyperpnea
(which improves with age), global developmental delay, nystagmus,
strabismus, ptosis, and oculomotor apraxia. Joubert syndrome is

V
V

A

B

V

C

Fig. 631.16 Dandy-­Walker spectrum posterior fossa abnormalities. Abnormal fenestration of embryologic outlets of the fourth ventricle and as-

sociated hypoplasia of the vermis (V in A-­C) result in so-­called Dandy-­Walker spectrum. As illustrated by these sagittal T1-­weighted brain MRI sequences, the most severe end of the spectrum consists of the classic Dandy-­Walker malformation (A) where there is severe vermian hypoplasia and
a remodeling of an enlarged posterior fossa CSF space (e.g., elevation of the tentorium and torcula above the confluence of the lambdoid sutures,
arrows). At the least severe end of the spectrum, the vermis is fully formed but there is a prominent retrocerebellar and cisterna magna CSF space
without expansion of the posterior fossa: a mega cisterna magna (C). In between these extremes, one may encounter vermian hypoplasia and posterior fossa CSF space prominence without overt expansion of the posterior fossa (e.g., vermian hypoplasia with rotation in B).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 631 u Congenital Anomalies of the Central Nervous System

A

B

C

3577

D

Fig. 631.17 Neuroimaging findings in a 2-­yr-­old child with pure Joubert syndrome (upper panels) compared with a healthy control (lower panels).

A, Parasagittal T1-­weighted image shows the thickened, elongated, and horizontally oriented superior cerebellar peduncles (white arrow). B, Midsagittal T1-­weighted image demonstrates a moderate hypoplasia and dysplasia of the cerebellar vermis (white arrows) with secondary distortion and
enlargement of the fourth ventricle, with rostral shifting of the fastigium (white arrowhead). A deepened interpeduncular fossa is also noted. C, Axial
T1-­weighted image at the level of the pontomesencephalic junction shows the molar tooth sign with a deepened interpeduncular fossa (white arrowhead) and elongated, thickened, and horizontally oriented superior cerebellar peduncles (white arrows). Additionally, the cerebellar vermis appears
to be hypoplastic and its remnants dysplastic. D, Coronal T1-­weighted image reveals the thickened superior cerebellar peduncles (white arrows).
(From Romani M, Micalizzi A, Valente EM. Joubert syndrome: congenital cerebellar ataxia with the molar tooth. Lancet Neurol. 2013;12:894–905,
Fig. 1.)

considered a ciliopathy, as many of the 35 genes implicated encode for
proteins important in cilia function (e.g., AHI1, CC2D2A, CEP290).
There can also be associated systemic features, including progressive
retinal dysplasia (Leber congenital amaurosis), coloboma, congenital
heart disease, microcystic kidney disease, liver fibrosis, polydactyly,
tongue protrusion, and soft tissue tumors of the tongue (Fig. 631.18).
Rhombencephalosynapsis consists of an absent or small vermis
associated with a nonseparation or fusion of the deep midline cerebellar structures. Ventriculomegaly or hydrocephalus is often seen. There
is a variable clinical presentation from normal function to cognitive
and language impairments, epilepsy, and spasticity.
The pontocerebellar hypoplasias (PCHs) are a group of autosomal
recessive disorders characterized by impairment of cerebellar and pontine development. Ten types have been defined to date, with increasing identification of underlying genetic causes (e.g., TSEN2, TSEN34,
RARS2). Patients tend to be severely affected, with hypotonia, feeding difficulties, developmental delay, breathing difficulties, and seizures. Other
disorders can also present with some PCH, most commonly including
Walker-­Warburg syndrome, muscle-­eye-­brain disease, congenital disorders of glycosylation type 1A, and mitochondrial cytopathies.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

631.9 Hydrocephalus
Sara K. Trowbridge, Edward Yang, and
Christopher J. Yuskaitis
Hydrocephalus is not a specific disease; it represents a diverse group of
conditions that result from impaired circulation and/or absorption of
CSF or, in rare circumstances, from increased production of CSF by a
choroid plexus papilloma (Tables 631.6 and 631.7).

PHYSIOLOGY

The CSF is formed primarily in the ventricular system by the choroid plexus, which is situated in the lateral, third, and fourth ventricles. Although most CSF is produced in the lateral ventricles,
approximately 25% originate from extrachoroidal sources, including the capillary endothelium within the brain parenchyma. There
is active neurogenic control of CSF formation because adrenergic
and cholinergic nerves innervate the choroid plexus. Stimulation
of the adrenergic system diminishes CSF production, whereas excitation of the cholinergic nerves may double the normal CSF production rate. In a normal child, approximately 20 mL/hr of CSF
is produced. The total volume of CSF approximates 50 mL in an
infant and 150 mL in an adult. Most of the CSF is extraventricular.
The choroid plexus forms CSF in several stages; through a series of
intricate steps, a plasma ultrafiltrate is ultimately processed into a
secretion, the CSF.
CSF flow results from the pressure gradient that exists between
the ventricular system and venous channels. Intraventricular pressure may be as high as 180 mmH2O in the normal state, whereas the
pressure in the superior sagittal sinus is in the range of 90 mmH2O.
Normally, CSF flows from the lateral ventricles through the foramina of Monro into the third ventricle. It then traverses the narrow
aqueduct of Sylvius, which is approximately 3 mm long and 2 mm
in diameter in a child, to enter the fourth ventricle. The CSF exits
the fourth ventricle through the paired lateral foramina of Luschka
and the midline foramen of Magendie into the cisterns at the base
of the brain. Hydrocephalus resulting from obstruction within the
ventricular system is called obstructive or noncommunicating hydrocephalus. The CSF then circulates from the basal cisterns posteriorly through the cistern system and over the convexities of the
cerebral hemispheres. CSF is absorbed primarily by the arachnoid
villi through tight junctions of their endothelium by the pressure
forces that were noted earlier. CSF is absorbed to a much lesser

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3578 Part XXV u The Nervous System

Fig. 631.18 Spectrum of organ involvement in Jou-

bert syndrome and classification in clinical subgroups
(in bold). Chorioretinal colobomas are more frequently
found in the subgroup of Joubert syndrome with liver
involvement but can be present also in other subgroups.
Similarly, polydactyly (especially if preaxial or mesoaxial)
is invariably present in the orofaciodigital type VI subgroup, but postaxial polydactyly is frequently observed
also in association with other Joubert syndrome phenotypes. Other clinical features outside the circles occur
more rarely, without a specific association to a clinical
subgroup. CNS, Central nervous system; COR, cerebellooculorenal; OFDVI, orofaciodigital type VI syndrome.
(From Romani M, Micalizzi A, Valente EM. Joubert
syndrome: congenital cerebellar ataxia with the molar
tooth. Lancet Neurol. 2013;12:894–905, Fig. 3.)

Table 631.6  Causes of Pediatric Hydrocephalus
CAUSE

PROPOSED MECHANISM

ACQUIRED HYDROCEPHALUS
Inflammatory
Subarachnoid hemorrhage or infection

Arachnoid scar

Dysfunctional subarachnoid space

Intraventricular hemorrhage or infection

Ependymal scar

Ventricular obstruction

Neoplasm
Parenchymal brain tumor

Mass effect

Ventricular obstruction

Spinal cord tumor

Altered CSF composition

Dysfunctional subarachnoid space

Disseminated tumor

Tumors with meningeal infiltration (e.g., primitive
neuroectodermal tumor)

Dysfunctional subarachnoid space

Choroid plexus tumor

Altered CSF composition

Dysfunctional subarachnoid space

Choroid plexus tumor

Mass effect

Ventricular obstruction

Choroid plexus tumor or hyperplasia

Altered choroid plexus function

CSF overproduction or hyperdynamic
intraventricular pulsations

Ventricular obstruction (e.g., vein of Galen
malformation); venous hypertension (e.g.,
arteriovenous malformation)

Ventricular obstruction; decreased venous
compliance or decreased CSF absorption

Extrinsic venous obstruction (e.g., skeletal
dysplasias); intrinsic venous obstruction (e.g.,
venous sinus thrombosis); idiopathic venous
dysfunction (e.g., congenital idiopathic
hydrocephalus)

Decreased venous compliance or
decreased CSF absorption

Vascular
Vascular malformation

Disordered cerebral venous function

CONGENITAL OR DEVELOPMENTAL HYDROCEPHALUS
Congenital aqueduct stenosis
Third ventricle outlet obstruction

Ventricular obstruction

Neural tube defects (e.g.,
myelomeningocele and Chiari II
malformation)

Third or fourth ventricle outlet obstruction; altered
venous compliance; arachnoid or ependymal scar

Variable

Posterior fossa malformations

Fourth ventricle outlet obstruction (e.g.,
Dandy-­Walker complex); Chiari I malformation

Ventricular obstruction

Developmental cysts

Mass effect

Ventricular obstruction

Congenital foramen of Monro atresia

Lateral ventricle outlet obstruction

Ventricular obstruction

From Kahle KT, Kulkarni AV, Limbick DD Jr, et al. Hydrocephalus in children. Lancet. 2016;387:788–798, Table 1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 631 u Congenital Anomalies of the Central Nervous System
extent by the lymphatic channels directed to the paranasal sinuses,
along nerve root sleeves, and by the choroid plexus itself. Hydrocephalus resulting from obliteration of the subarachnoid cisterns or
malfunction of the arachnoid villi is called nonobstructive or communicating hydrocephalus.
Table 631.7  Genetic Abnormalities Associated with
Pediatric Hydrocephalus
PUTATIVE GENETIC LINK
X-­linked hydrocephalus with
aqueduct stenosis (307000)

L1CAM

Nonsyndromic autosomal
recessive hydrocephalus (HYC;
236600 [HYC1]; 615219 [HYC2])

CCDC88C; MPDZ

Fried-­type syndromic mental
retardation (304340)

AP1S2

Walker-­Warburg syndrome
(multiple subtypes)

POMT1, POMT2, POMGNT1,
and others

Neural tube defects
(folate-­sensitive [601634] and
insensitive [182940] forms)

Multiple susceptibility genes
involved in planar-­cell polarity
(e.g., FUZ, VANGL1/2, CCL2,
and others); folate-­sensitive
neural tube defects associated
with genes in folate synthesis
pathway (MTR, MTRR, MTHFR,
MTHFD)

Primary ciliary dyskinesias and
other ciliopathies (including the
many heterogeneous subtypes
of Meckel-­Gruber syndrome
and Joubert syndrome)

Multiple genes involved in
cilia structure, function, and
regulation (e.g., CC2D2A,
TMEM67, MKS1, and others)

RAS-­opathies (e.g.,
neurofibromatosis type
1, Noonan syndrome,
Costello syndrome,
cardiofaciocutaneous
syndrome)

NF1; Ras-­Raf-­MEK-­ERK pathway
genes) e.g., KRAS, BRAF,
PTPN11, and others)

VACTERL-­H (association of
vertebral, anal, cardiac,
tracheoesophageal, renal,
and limb anomalies plus
hydrocephalus; 276950)

PTEN

X-­linked VACTERL-­H (300515)

FANCB

Numbers given are Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) identifiers.
From Kahle KT, Kulkarni AV, Limbick DD Jr, et al. Hydrocephalus in children. Lancet.
2016;387:788–798, Table 2.

A

B

3579

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY AND ETIOLOGY

Obstructive or noncommunicating hydrocephalus develops most
commonly in children because of an abnormality of the aqueduct of
Sylvius or a lesion in the fourth ventricle. Aqueductal stenosis results
from an abnormally narrow aqueduct of Sylvius that is often associated
with branching or forking (Fig. 631.19). In a small percentage of cases,
aqueductal stenosis is inherited as a sex-­linked recessive trait. These
patients occasionally have minor neural tube closure defects, including
spina bifida occulta. Rarely, aqueductal stenosis is associated with neurofibromatosis. Aqueductal gliosis can also give rise to hydrocephalus.
As a result of neonatal meningitis or a subarachnoid hemorrhage in a
premature infant, the ependymal lining of the aqueduct is interrupted,
and a brisk glial response results in complete obstruction. Intrauterine viral infections can also produce aqueductal stenosis followed by
hydrocephalus. A vein of Galen malformation can expand and, because
of its midline position, obstruct the flow of CSF. Lesions or malformations of the posterior fossa are prominent causes of hydrocephalus, including posterior fossa brain tumors, Chiari malformation, and
Dandy-­Walker syndrome, as previously discussed.
Nonobstructive or communicating hydrocephalus most commonly follows a subarachnoid hemorrhage, which is usually a result
of intraventricular hemorrhage in a premature infant. Blood in the
subarachnoid spaces can disrupt CSF flow through the cisterns or
damage the arachnoid villi resulting in obstruction of CSF flow.
Pneumococcal and tuberculous meningitis have a propensity to produce a thick, tenacious exudate that obstructs the basal cisterns, and
intrauterine infections can also destroy the CSF pathways. Leukemic
infiltrates can seed the subarachnoid space and produce communicating hydrocephalus. Tumors or arteriovenous malformations in the
spinal cord or cauda equina are uncommon etiologies of communicating hydrocephalus.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The clinical presentation of hydrocephalus is variable and depends
on many factors, including the age at onset, the nature of the lesion
causing the obstruction, and the duration and rate of increase of the
ICP. In an infant, an accelerated rate of enlargement of the head is
the most prominent sign. In addition, the anterior fontanel is wide
open and bulging, and scalp veins can be dilated. The forehead is
broad, and the eyes might deviate downward (i.e., setting-­sun eye
sign) because of impingement of the dilated suprapineal recess on
the brainstem tectum. Long-­
tract signs, including brisk tendon
reflexes, spasticity, clonus (particularly in the lower extremities), and
Babinski sign, are common because of stretching and disruption of
the corticospinal fibers originating from the leg region of the motor
cortex. In an older child, the cranial sutures are less accommodating,
so that the signs of hydrocephalus may be subtler. Irritability, lethargy, poor appetite, and vomiting are common to both age-­groups,
and headache is a prominent symptom in older patients. A gradual

C

D

Fig. 631.19 Aqueduct stenosis. A, Sagittal brain T2-­weighted MRI of infant with hydrocephalus secondary to congenital aqueduct stenosis. Arrow

indicates point of obstruction. B, Same patient after endoscopic third ventriculostomy; note dark flow void indicating flow across endoscopic third
ventriculostomy. C, Endoscopic view of healthy patent aqueduct. D, Endoscopic view of obstructed aqueduct in aqueduct stenosis; note posterior
commissure at dorsal margin of the aqueduct ostium in both A and B. (From Kahle KT, Kulkarni AV, Limbick Jr DD, et al. Hydrocephalus in children.
Lancet. 2016;387:788–798, Fig. 1.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3580 Part XXV u The Nervous System
change in personality and deterioration in academic productivity
suggest a slowly progressive form of hydrocephalus. Percussion of
the skull might produce a cracked pot sound or Macewen sign, indicating separation of the sutures. Serial head circumference measurements, with special attention to the velocity of growth, are important
measurements when identifying hydrocephalus and tracking resolution. A foreshortened occiput suggests Chiari malformation, and
a prominent occiput suggests Dandy-­Walker malformation. Papilledema, abducens nerve palsies, and pyramidal tract signs, which are
most evident in the lower extremities, are apparent in many cases.
Type II Chiari malformations can manifest with progressive hydrocephalus. Approximately 10% of type II malformations produce symptoms during infancy, consisting of stridor, weak cry, and apnea, which
may be relieved by shunting or by decompression of the posterior fossa.
A more indolent form consists of abnormalities of gait, spasticity, and
increasing incoordination (including the arms and hands) during
childhood. Plain skull radiographs show a small posterior fossa and a
widened cervical canal. CT scanning with contrast and MRI display the
cerebellar tonsils protruding downward into the cervical canal and the
hindbrain abnormalities. The anomaly is treated by surgical decompression, but asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic patients may be
managed conservatively.
Approximately 90% of patients with Dandy-­Walker malformation have hydrocephalus, and a significant number of children have
associated anomalies, including agenesis of the posterior cerebellar
vermis and corpus callosum. Infants present with a rapid increase
in head size and a prominent occiput. Most children have evidence
of long-­tract signs, cerebellar ataxia, and delayed motor and cognitive milestones, probably because of the associated structural anomalies. Dandy-­Walker malformation is managed by shunting the cystic
cavity (and on occasion the ventricles as well) in the presence of
hydrocephalus.

DIAGNOSIS AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Investigation of a child with hydrocephalus begins with the history.
Familial cases suggest X-­linked or autosomal hydrocephalus secondary to aqueduct stenosis. A history of prematurity with intracranial hemorrhage, meningitis, or mumps encephalitis is important
to ascertain. Multiple café-­au-­lait spots and other clinical features
of neurofibromatosis point to aqueductal stenosis as the cause of
hydrocephalus.
Examination includes careful inspection, palpation, and auscultation of the skull and spine. The occipitofrontal head circumference is recorded and compared with previous measurements. The
size and configuration of the anterior fontanel are noted, and the
back is inspected for abnormal midline skin lesions, including tufts
of hair, lipoma, or angioma, that might suggest spinal dysraphism.
The presence of a prominent forehead or abnormalities in the shape
of the occiput can suggest the pathogenesis of the hydrocephalus.
A cranial bruit is audible in association with many cases of vein of
Galen arteriovenous malformation (Fig. 631.20). Transillumination
of the skull is positive with massive dilation of the ventricular system or in Dandy-­Walker syndrome. A fundoscopic exam is mandatory because the finding of chorioretinitis suggests an intrauterine
infection, such as toxoplasmosis, as a cause of the hydrocephalus.
Papilledema is observed in older children but is rarely present in
infants because the cranial sutures separate in the setting of the
increased pressure.
An ultrasound is a quick and easy study to perform on infants with
an open fontanelle to identify and monitor the trajectory of hydrocephalus. Brain MRI has the capability to perform specific sequences to
evaluate CSF flow dynamics as well as evaluating for etiology and additional abnormalities that may be present. In many centers, CT scans
are often limited to evaluating for acute symptomatic hydrocephalus
and skull abnormalities to avoid radiation exposure. Although rarely
used, plain skull films can show separation of the sutures, erosion of the
posterior clinoids in an older child, and an increase in convolutional

MPV
FS

Fig. 631.20 Vein of Galen malformation. A vein of Galen malforma-

tion is an arteriovenous fistula between intracranial arteries and the
embryologic median prosencephalic vein. As seen in this postcontrast
sagittal T1-­weighted brain MR image of a newborn with a prenatally
diagnosed vein of Galen malformation, this vascular malformation is
characterized by marked distension of the median prosencephalic vein
(MPV) and distension of downstream dural sinuses, commonly through
a persistent embryologic falcine sinus (FS). The ensuing high-­velocity
arteriovenous shunting can cause venous hypertension, communicating
hydrocephalus, and high-­output cardiac failure. Although large median
prosencephalic veins can compress the cerebral aqueduct (arrow), the
primary treatment modality is still endovascular intervention (embolization) rather than CSF diversion.

markings (beaten-­silver appearance) on the inside of the skull with
long-­standing increased ICP.
Rapid head growth raises suspicion of hydrocephalus; however,
other etiologies must be considered. Accelerated skull growth from
a thickened cranium can result from chronic anemia, rickets, osteogenesis imperfecta, and epiphyseal dysplasia. Chronic subdural collections can produce bilateral parietal bone prominence. Benign
external hydrocephalus is often associated with macrocephaly with
notable increase in volume of the subarachnoid spaces on brain
imaging. No intervention is required for this self-­limited hydrocephalus, which is hypothesized to be the result of a delayed maturation
of the arachnoid villi. Various metabolic and degenerative disorders
of the CNS produce megalencephaly as a result of abnormal storage
of substances within the brain parenchyma. These disorders include
lysosomal diseases (Tay-­Sachs disease, gangliosidosis, and the mucopolysaccharidoses), the aminoacidurias (maple syrup urine disease),
and the leukodystrophies (metachromatic leukodystrophy, Alexander disease, Canavan disease). In addition, cerebral gigantism (Sotos
syndrome), other overgrowth syndromes, and neurofibromatosis
are characterized by increased brain mass. Familial megalencephaly
is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait and is characterized by
delayed motor milestones and hypotonia but normal or near-­normal
intelligence. Measurement of the parents’ head circumferences is necessary to establish the diagnosis.
Ventriculomegaly can exist without increased ICP (normal-­pressure
hydrocephaly) or in patients with loss of white or gray matter secondary to prior injury (cerebral atrophy with ventricular dilation ex
vacuo). It can be difficult to distinguish between ventriculomegaly
and true hydrocephalus by static neuroimaging alone unless CSF flow
assessment is included in the MRI. Additional clinical information
(e.g., clinical context, fundoscopic exam, lumbar puncture with pressure measurements) may also be required. This is an important clinical
distinction to make, as the management of ventriculomegaly secondary to hydrocephalus is quite different from the management of ventriculomegaly secondary to brain volume loss.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 631 u Congenital Anomalies of the Central Nervous System

T

B

3581

T
B

A

B

C

Fig. 631.21 Hydranencephaly. Brain MRI sagittal (A), coronal (B), and axial (C) single-­shot T2-­weighted images of a 13-­yr-­old female with severe

neurologic impairment demonstrates lysis of the cerebral hemispheres apart from small remnants of the frontal/occipital poles and left temporal
pole. There is preservation of the thalami (T) and brainstem (B). This congenital lysis of the cerebrum is dubbed hydranencephaly and believed to
reflect anterior circulation vascular insufficiency in utero.

A

B

C

Fig. 631.22 Porencephaly from in utero encephaloclastic/hemorrhagic injury. High-­grade in utero germinal matrix hemorrhage results in venous

infarction and hemorrhagic injury to the brain parenchyma. As a result, there is focal lysis and thinning of the brain parenchyma, resulting in a hemispheric cavity in communication with the ventricular system called porencephaly. A, Axial single-­shot brain MR T2-­weighted imaging of a fetus at
32 wk demonstrates severe ventriculomegaly with a clot in the ventricular system (arrows) and hemosiderin-­stained (hypointense) tissue lysis in the
surrounding cerebral hemispheres. Axial (B) and coronal (C) T2-­weighted imaging of the same patient during the first day of life better depicts the
areas of hemosiderin staining and parenchymal thinning/lysis as well as residual clot in the ventricular system (arrows).

HYDRANENCEPHALY

Hydranencephaly may be confused with hydrocephalus. The cerebral
hemispheres are absent or represented by membranous sacs with remnants of frontal, temporal, or occipital cortex dispersed over the membrane. The midbrain and brainstem are relatively intact (Fig. 631.21).
The cause of hydranencephaly is unknown, but bilateral occlusion
of the internal carotid arteries during early fetal development would
explain most of the pathologic abnormalities. Affected infants can have
a normal circumference at birth that grows at an excessive rate postnatally because of excessive CSF production and absorption. Transillumination shows an absence of the cerebral hemispheres. The child is
irritable, feeds poorly, develops seizures and spastic quadriparesis, and
has little or no cognitive development. A ventriculoperitoneal shunt
prevents massive enlargement of the cranium.

PORENCEPHALY

Porencephaly is the presence of cysts or cavities within the brain
that result from developmental defects or acquired lesions, including

infarction of tissue. True porencephalic cysts are most commonly
located in the region of the sylvian fissure and typically communicate with the subarachnoid space or the ventricular system, or both.
They represent developmental abnormalities of cell migration and
are often associated with other malformations of the brain, including
microcephaly, abnormal patterns of adjacent gyri, and encephalocele.
Affected infants tend to have many problems, including intellectual
disability, spastic hemiparesis or quadriparesis, optic atrophy, and
seizures.
Several risk factors for porencephalic cyst formation have been
identified, including hemorrhagic venous infarctions, various
thrombophilias such as protein C deficiency and factor V Leiden
variants, perinatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia, von Willebrand
disease, maternal warfarin use, maternal cocaine use, congenital
infections, trauma such as amniocentesis, and maternal abdominal trauma. Pathogenic variants in the COL4A1 and COL4A2
genes have been described in cases of familial porencephaly
(Fig. 631.22).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3582 Part XXV u The Nervous System
TREATMENT

Therapy for hydrocephalus depends on the cause. Medical management, including the use of acetazolamide and furosemide, can provide temporary relief by reducing the rate of CSF production, but
long-­term results have been disappointing. Most cases of hydrocephalus require extracranial shunts, particularly a ventriculoperitoneal
shunt. Endoscopic third ventriculostomy is a viable approach, and
criteria have been developed for its use, but the procedure might need
to be repeated to be effective. Endoscopic fenestration of the floor of
the third ventricle with drainage into the subarachnoid space (prepontine cistern) is attempted in patients over 6 months of age with
noncommunicating hydrocephalus. It often requires cauterization
of the choroid plexus as an additional procedure (see Fig. 631.19).
Ventricular shunting may be avoided with this approach. The major
complications of shunting are occlusion (characterized by headache,
papilledema, emesis, and mental status changes) and bacterial infection (fever, headache, meningismus), usually caused by Staphylococcus epidermidis. With meticulous preparation, the shunt infection
rate can be reduced to <5%. The results of intrauterine surgical management of fetal hydrocephalus have been poor (possibly because of
the high rate of associated cerebral malformations in addition to the
hydrocephalus) except for some promise in cases of hydrocephalus
associated with fetal meningomyelocele.

PROGNOSIS

The prognosis depends on the cause of the dilated ventricles and not
on the size of the cortical mantle at the time of operative intervention,
except in cases in which the cortical mantle has been severely compressed and stretched. Children with hydrocephalus are at increased
risk for various developmental disabilities. The mean intelligence quotient is reduced compared with the general population, particularly for
performance tasks as compared with verbal abilities. Many children
have abnormalities in memory function. Vision problems are common,
including strabismus, visuospatial abnormalities, visual field defects,
and optic atrophy with decreased acuity secondary to increased ICP.
The visual evoked potential latencies are delayed and take some time
to recover after correction of the hydrocephalus. Accelerated pubertal
development in patients with shunted hydrocephalus or myelomeningocele is relatively common, possibly because of increased gonadotropin secretion in response to increased ICP. It is imperative that children
with hydrocephalus receive long-­term follow-­up in a multidisciplinary
setting.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

631.10 Craniosynostosis
Irene M.J. Mathijssen
See also Chapter 101.4.
Craniosynostosis is defined as premature closure of the cranial
sutures and is classified as primary or secondary. It is associated
with varying types of abnormal skull shape (see Fig. 101.5). Primary
craniosynostosis refers to closure of one or more sutures owing to
abnormalities of skull development, whereas secondary craniosynostosis results from failure of brain growth and expansion (e.g.,
microcephaly or after insertion of a ventriculoperitoneal shunt),
specific medication during pregnancy (e.g., valproate), or metabolic
disorders. The incidence of primary craniosynostosis approximates
1 in 2,000 live births. The cause is unknown in the majority of children; however, genetic syndromes account for 10–20% of cases (see
Table 101.5). The distinction between craniosynostosis and deformational forces is important in occipital and frontal plagiocephaly
to allow successful intervention to be offered in the form of physical
therapy for torticollis and other positional asymmetries that lead to
plagiocephaly.

Table 631.8  Commonly Used Clinical Genetic
Classifications of Craniosynostoses
DISORDER

CAUSE

ISOLATED CRANIOSYNOSTOSIS
Unicoronal synostosis
Unknown, consider TWIST1,
FGFR1, FGFR2, FGFR3, TCF12,
IL11RA, ERF pathogenic
variants
Metopic and sagittal synostosis

SMAD6

SYNDROMIC CRANIOSYNOSTOSIS
Antley-­Bixler syndrome
FGFR2, POR
Apert syndrome

Usually one of two pathogenic
variants in FGFR2

Beare-­Stevenson syndrome

FGFR2

Baller-­Gerold syndrome

RECQL4

Carpenter syndrome

RAB23 in most; MEGF8 in some

Craniofrontonasal syndrome

EFNB1

Crouzon syndrome (and Pfeiffer
syndrome)

Numerous different pathogenic
variants at FGFR2; rarely FGFR1

Crouzon acanthosis nigricans
syndrome

Ala391Glu pathogenic variants
in FGFR3

Muenke syndrome

Pro250Arg pathogenic variants
in FGFR3

Saethre-­Chotzen syndrome

Pathogenic variants or deletion
in TWIST1

TCF-­12 related craniosynostosis

Pathogenic variants or deletion
of TCF12

IL11RA-­related craniosynostosis

IL11RA

ERF-­related craniosynostosis

ERF

Shprintzen-­Goldberg syndrome

Pathogenic variants in FBN1 or
SKI

DEVELOPMENT AND ETIOLOGY

The bones of the cranium are well developed by the fifth month of
gestation (frontal, parietal, temporal, and occipital) and are separated
by sutures and fontanels. The brain grows rapidly in the first several years of life and is normally not impeded because of equivalent
growth along the suture lines. The cause of craniosynostosis is largely
unknown. Genetic factors have been identified for some isolated
and for many syndromic causes of craniosynostosis (Table 631.8; see
Table 101.5).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND TREATMENT

Most cases of craniosynostosis are evident at birth and are characterized by a progressive skull deformity that is a direct result of premature
suture fusion. Fusion of metopic and sagittal suture reveals a palpable
prominent bony ridge, and fusion of the suture may be confirmed by
plain skull roentgenograms, ultrasound, 3D-­CT scan, or black bone
MRI (Table 631.9).
Scaphocephaly is the result of premature closure of the sagittal
suture and produces a long and narrow skull, the most common
form of craniosynostosis. Scaphocephaly is associated with a prominent occiput, a broad forehead, and a triangular-­shaped anterior
fontanel. The condition is sporadic, is more common in males, and
can cause difficulties during labor because of cephalopelvic disproportion resulting from a head circumference of ≥2 SD. Scaphocephaly is associated with increased ICP in about 10% of patients

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 631 u Congenital Anomalies of the Central Nervous System

3583

Table 631.9  Epidemiology and Clinical Characteristics of the Common Craniosynostoses
TYPE

EPIDEMIOLOGY

SKULL DEFORMITY

CLINICAL PRESENTATION

Sagittal

Most common CSO affecting a
single suture, 80% male

Dolichocephaly or scaphocephaly
(boat-­shaped)

Frontal bossing, prominent occiput, palpable keel ridge;
OFC increased and reduced biparietal diameter

Coronal

More common in girls
Associated with various
syndromes

Unilateral: plagiocephaly
Bilateral: brachycephaly

Unilateral: flattened forehead and elevated orbit on
affected side, nose deviation; higher supraorbital margin
Bilateral: broad, flattened forehead.

Lambdoid

Rare

Unilateral: Lambdoid/occipital
plagiocephaly
Bilateral: pachycephaly

Unilateral: flattening of ipsilateral occiput, bulging of
ipsilateral forehead, ipsilateral ear and mastoid is
inferiorly displaced, curvature in face
Bilateral: brachycephaly with bilateral inferiorly displaced
ears and mastoids

Metopic

SMAD 6 mutation; genetic
overlap with developmental
delay disorders

Trigonocephaly

Pointed forehead and midline ridge, hypotelorism

Multiple

Often syndromic

Depending on which sutures are
involved

CSO, Craniosynostosis; OFC, occipital–frontal circumference.

at the age of 12 months if left untreated and thus requires surgical
treatment.
Trigonocephaly is the next most common form of craniosynostosis, caused by premature fusion of the metopic suture. These children have a keel-­shaped forehead and hypotelorism and are at risk for
associated cognitive impairment, behavioral problems and visual disturbances. The phenotype also includes milder presentations, which
are usually self-­limiting over time. Metopic ridging occurs with closure of the suture around the time of birth and is a physiologic process. The risk on increased ICP is limited, even in the more severe
presentation.
Frontal plagiocephaly is characterized by unilateral flattening of the
forehead, elevation of the orbit and eyebrow, and a caudal displacement
of the ear on the corresponding side, with contralateral bossing of the
forehead. The condition is more common in females and is the result
of premature fusion of one of the coronal sutures. These children can
present with raised ICP in up to 16% at 1 year of age and have a high
risk of visual disturbances. Therefore skull surgery is indicated in addition to close monitoring by the optometrist. Unicoronal synostosis can
be a presentation of a syndrome, and genetic analysis is always indicated (see Table 101.5).
Occipital plagiocephaly is most often a result of positioning
during infancy and is more common in an immobile child or a child
with a disability, but fusion of the lambdoid suture can cause unilateral occipital flattening and caudal displacement of the ipsilateral
ear and mastoid and of the contralateral parietal bone. Surgery is
indicated to prevent the development of distinct asymmetry of the
face.

GENETIC DISORDERS

The most prevalent genetic disorders associated with craniosynostosis include Crouzon, Apert, Saethre-­
Chotzen, and Muenke
syndromes.
Crouzon syndrome (including Pfeiffer syndrome) is characterized by premature craniosynostosis and is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait. The shape of the head depends on the timing
and order of suture fusion but often is a compressed back-­to-­front
diameter or brachycephaly resulting from bilateral closure of the
coronal sutures. Pansynostosis is also common, in which all sutures
close and the skull shape appears to be normal initially. The orbits

are underdeveloped, and ocular proptosis is prominent. Hypoplasia
of the maxilla and orbital hypertelorism are typical facial features.
Crouzon syndrome can be associated with the skin condition acanthosis nigricans.
Apert syndrome has many features in common with Crouzon syndrome. Apert syndrome is usually a sporadic condition and linked
to increased paternal age, although autosomal dominant inheritance
can occur. It is associated with premature fusion of multiple sutures,
especially the two coronal sutures. Apert syndrome is characterized
by symmetric complex syndactyly of the hands and feet. Severe acne
often develops during puberty, and most patients have a developmental
delay.
Saethre-­Chotzen syndrome is characterized by unicoronal or
bicoronal synostosis. The condition is inherited as an autosomal
dominant trait. It is associated with ptosis of one or both eyelids,
short fingers, and soft tissue syndactyly of the second and third fingers and/or toes.
Muenke syndrome is the most prevalent of the genetic syndromes
and usually presents with bicoronal synostosis. It is associated with
sensorineural hearing loss and behavioral issues.
Pathogenic variants of the fibroblast growth factor receptor
(FGFR) gene family have been shown to be associated with specific types of craniosynostosis. Crouzon syndrome is mainly caused
by variants in FGFR2 and incidentally of FGFR1 and FGFR3. Apert
syndrome is mainly caused by two specific types of FGFR2 variants.
Saethre-­Chotzen syndrome results from variants or deletions in
TWIST1, and Muenke syndrome is solely caused by the Pro250Arg
variant in FGFR3.
Each of the genetic syndromes poses a risk of additional anomalies, including hydrocephalus, increased ICP, optic atrophy, respiratory problems secondary to upper airway anomalies, and disorders
of speech and hearing. Vault expansion is mandatory for management of increased ICP, treatment to reduce the respiratory difficulties
such as midface advancement, and a multidisciplinary craniofacial
team is essential for the long-­term follow-­up of affected children until
adulthood. Craniosynostosis may be surgically corrected with good
outcomes and relatively low morbidity and mortality, especially for
nonsyndromic infants.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3584 Part XXV u The Nervous System

Chapter 632

Deformational
Plagiocephaly
Megan L. Dietze-­Fiedler and
John A. Girotto
Deformational plagiocephaly (DP), also known as positional plagiocephaly, is the development of cranial flattening and asymmetry in
the infant as a result of extrinsic molding forces placed on the skull,
such as consistently sleeping on the same area of the head. Since the
suggestion was made to place sleeping infants on their backs for the
prevention of sudden infant death syndrome, the incidence of DP has
risen dramatically, up to 46.6% and peaking between 7 weeks and 4
months of age.

EPIDEMIOLOGY AND ETIOLOGY
Risk Factors

Infants cannot reposition their heads in the first few postnatal weeks
and are unable to hold their heads up until about 4 months of age. It
is for this reason that DP is most severe around 4 months of age. It
is also during this time that an infant’s head circumference increases
rapidly: about 2 cm/month in the first 3 months, 1 cm/month from
4 to 6 months of age, and 0.5 cm/month after 6 months of age. By ∼6
months of age, infants have developed head control, and this ability to
actively reposition their head allows for the gradual improvement of
the cranial shape because of pressure offloading and continued brain
growth.
Congenital torticollis, positional preference when sleeping, and
lower levels of activity are especially prominent in patients with DP.
Table 632.1 lists other risk factors. Many of these risk factors cannot be
prevented, but sleeping supine with the head always turned to the same
side is associated with DP independent of the other factors, and this
factor can be prevented. There may be an association between developmental delay and DP. Although not causal, studies have identified
significant differences in gross motor development (e.g., sitting up,
crawling, and rolling back to side) between babies with and without
DP. Family demographics, such as lower maternal education, primiparity, more prenatal education, and siblings with cranial asymmetries,
may also be associated with the development of DP. The increased
prevalence of DP in infants of mothers receiving more prenatal education is considered related to the emphasis placed on sudden infant
death syndrome and the Back to Sleep campaign.

Causes

Prenatal causes of DP include uterine compression and intrauterine constraint, such as occurs with oligohydramnios or multifetus
Table 632.1  Factors that Increase the Risk for
Deformational Plagiocephaly
• Male
• First-­born child
• Prematurity
• Multiple pregnancy (twins, triplets)
• Limited passive neck rotation at birth (e.g., congenital torticollis)
• Developmental delay
• Sleep position is supine at birth and at 6 wk
• Bottle feeding only
• Tummy time <3 times/day
• Lower activity level, slower milestone achievement
• Sleeping with head to same side, positional preference

pregnancy. Postnatal causes of DP include infant sleeping position and
congenital muscular torticollis.
Muscular torticollis is a condition that is present in as many as one
in six newborns and causes continuous tightening of muscles in the
neck, preventing passive rotation (see Chapter 721.1). It is thought that
this condition precedes the development of cranial deformity. However, head position preference may result from cervical asymmetry
that leads to torticollis and later flattening of a side of the skull from
acquired positional preference. Muscular and positional issues lead to
nonsynostotic plagiocephaly rather than the opposite. Given that DP
results from more time spent on one side of the head and that torticollis (and other neck muscle imbalances) are likely to lead to this
disproportional partitioning of time, they are most likely causes, not
effects, of DP.
Sleeping position plays a major role in the incidence of DP. When
an infant continuously sleeps with the same part of the skull resting on a flat surface, a continuous force is placed in this area. During this time of rapid skull development, the growth is inhibited at
the area where it rests on a hard surface, causing a flat spot. Because
of this inhibition, growth is increased in opposite directions, causing a deformation that can be distinguished from other types of
plagiocephaly.

EXAMINATION AND DIFFERENTIATING BETWEEN
DEFORMATIONAL PLAGIOCEPHALY AND
CRANIOSYNOSTOSIS

An abnormal head shape in an infant is distressing for parents. DP is
a clinical diagnosis. Management also requires accurate counseling
about its cause and treatment. It is especially important to be able to
rule out craniosynostosis as a primary cause for cranial asymmetry
in infants because management of this condition is quite different
from that of DP and requires immediate referral to a craniofacial surgeon for evaluation (see Chapter 631.10). Craniosynostosis occurs in
approximately 1 in 2,000 live births and results in plagiocephaly as
a consequence of the early closure of skull sutures. Craniosynostosis
must be distinguished from DP because the management is different.
Lambdoidal craniosynostosis, although extremely rare (1 in 300,000
live births), presents with features most similar to those of DP. It
can be distinguished from DP by a variety of historical and physical findings. Bilateral coronal synostosis also presents similarly to
posterior DP.

History and Physical Examination

Tables 632.2 and 632.3 outline the key components of the history and
physical examination.
Observation of cranial shape and ear displacement are the first steps.
It is critical to observe the child anteriorly, laterally, and from a vertex
view. When cranial shape is viewed from above, DP typically looks like
a parallelogram, and the ear on the same side of the flat or bald spot
is displaced anteriorly. In lambdoidal craniosynostosis, the head has a
trapezoid shape and the ear on the same side as the flat spot is posteriorly displaced (Fig. 632.1). It is important to note that the ear position,
though more likely to be anterior in DP and posterior in lambdoidal
craniosynostosis, may present anteriorly in both conditions.
Palpation will help to differentiate these two conditions. Craniosynostosis presents with palpable ridges along the suture, whereas DP does
not. Additionally, patients with craniosynostosis will not have mobile
calvarial bones. This can be tested by applying gentle pressure on two
adjacent skull bones separated by a suspected synostotic suture. If the
plates do not move relative to each other, then the suspicion for craniosynostosis is raised.
Verifying neck muscle tone and range of motion is a key part of the
examination because it helps in evaluating motor development and in
diagnosing congenital torticollis. Resistance to passive motion raises
the concern for torticollis. Decreased tone should prompt further evaluation of motor development. Infants do not gain the muscle control to
turn or lift their heads until approximately 4 months of age, and delays
in motor development could increase the infant’s risk of DP at later

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 632 u Deformational Plagiocephaly

3585

Table 632.2  Important Factors to Evaluate in the History and Physical Examination of the Patient with Plagiocephaly
DEFORMATIONAL

SYNOSTOTIC

Birth history

Intrauterine compression
First-­born child

Typically no complications

Head shape at birth

Typically normal

Can be irregular

Age at which shape irregularity first noticed

Usually in first few months of life

Can be at birth

How patient prefers to sleep

Same side, same position
Same even during naps

Variable

Bald spot

Yes

No

Motor development for age

If age is atypical for deformational plagiocephaly,
motor development is typically slow for age
Torticollis present
History of limited activity or mobility

Varies depending on presence
of concomitant syndrome

Tummy time

Decreased

Suggested time

Signs or symptoms of increasing intracranial pressure

No

Possible

Table 632.3  Key Differences Between Synostotic (Craniosynostosis) and Deformational Plagiocephaly
DEFORMATIONAL PLAGIOCEPHALY

CRANIOSYNOSTOSIS

Causes

External forces applied to the skull
Prenatal: uterine compression, intrauterine constrained
Postnatal: congenital torticollis, sleeping position

Premature fusion of one or more cranial sutures

Common types

Lateral
Posterior

Bilateral coronal
Sagittal
Metopic

Common distinguishing
features

Normal round head shape at birth
Parallelogram shape to head
Ipsilateral ear anteriorly displaced
No palpable bony ridges or open fontanels

Can have abnormal head shape at birth
Trapezoid shape to head
Ipsilateral ear posteriorly displaced
Palpable bony ridges

Management

Repositioning
Physical therapy
Helmet in some cases

Surgery
Helmet in some cases

Adapted from Nield LS, Brunner MD, Kamat D. The infant with a misshapen head. Clin Pediatr (Phila). 2007;46:292–298, Tables 1 and 2.

Positional molding

Unilateral lambdoid synostosis

L

R

Width

Length

Transcranial
diagonal difference

Fig. 632.2 Cranial measurements. (Modified from Looman WS, Flan-

A

Contralateral
occipital
bossing

Flattening

Ipsilateral
ear displaced
anteriorly

Parietal
bossing

B

Ipsilateral ear
displaced
posteriorly
Ipsilateral (variable)
occipitomastoid
bossing

Flattening

Fig. 632.1 Differentiating physical findings between deformational

plagiocephaly and craniosynostosis. Vertex views. A, Right-­sided deformational plagiocephaly exhibiting a parallelogram head shape. B,
Right-­sided lambdoid craniosynostosis exhibiting a trapezoid-­like head
shape. (From Lin AY, Losee JE. Pediatric plastic surgery. In: Zitelli BJ,
McIntire SC, Norwalk AJ, eds. Zitelli and Davis’ Atlas of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2012: Fig. 22-­5.)

nery AB. Evidence-­
based care of the child with deformational plagiocephaly, part I: assessment and diagnosis. J Pediatr Health Care.
2012;26:242–250, Table 1.)

ages than those at which it usually occurs. Decreased range of motion
can also be seen in cervical spine abnormalities, although this is rare.
Early recognition of these conditions is critical in treatment, management, and outcome.
Accurate and consistent measurements will help to distinguish etiologies and manage infants presenting with an abnormally shaped skull.
Along with the usual head circumference measurements, the clinician
should also measure cranial width, length, and transcranial diagonal
diameter (Fig. 632.2), which is best performed with calipers. These

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3586 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 632.4  Diagnostic Guide for Determining Type and Severity of Lateral and Posterior Deformational Plagiocephaly
LATERAL DEFORMATIONAL
PLAGIOCEPHALY
DETERMINING TYPE BASED ON CLINICAL FINDINGS
Occiput (vertex
Ipsilateral occipital flattening; contralateral
view)
occipital bossing

POSTERIOR DEFORMATIONAL PLAGIOCEPHALY (BRACHYCEPHALY)
Uniform occipital flattening

Ear position (vertex
view)

Ipsilateral ear may be anteriorly displaced

Normal

Face, forehead
(anterior, lateral,
and vertex views)

May be normal; more severe cases may
present with the following: mandibular
asymmetry, ipsilateral frontal bossing,
contralateral forehead flattening,
ipsilateral cheek anteriorly displaced

Temporal bossing, increase in vertical height in severe cases

Other

Torticollis, head position preference

Large size, history of limited activity or limited mobility

DETERMINING SEVERITY
Mild
TDD 3-­10 mm

Type I

Flattening restricted
to back of the skull

CI: 0.82-­0.9

Central posterior deformity
(ping-­pong ball
depression)

Moderate

Type II

Malposition of ear

CI: 0.9-­1.0

Type III

Forehead deformity

Central posterior deformity
and widening of
posterior skull

Type IV

Malar deformity

CI: >1.0

Type V

Vertical or temporal
skull growth

Vertical head, head growth,
or temporal bossing

Severe

TDD 10-­12 mm

TDD > 12 mm

CI, Cephalic index (cranial index); TDD, transcranial diagonal diameter difference.

measurements allow the clinician to diagnose, determine severity, and
monitor the plagiocephaly:
• Cranial length: Distance from the most prominent point between the
eyebrows to the most prominent point of the occiput.
• Width: Maximum transverse diameter, horizontal.
• Cephalic index (cranial index): Ratio of the cranial width to the cranial length.
• Occipital-­frontal transcranial diameter: Find the points on either side
of the head where the deformation is the worst (two on the right,
two on the left), then measure the diagonal distances between these
points.
• Transdiagonal difference (transcranial diagonal difference): The difference between two transcranial diagonal diameters.
• Cranial vault asymmetry: Ratio of oblique measurements. This is
difficult to implement because different physicians and authors propose varying points to use for these measurements.
One technology for the evaluation of the severity and improvement over time of DP is the three-­dimensional photographic system.
Advantages of this system include an easy and comfortable ability
to image in an unbiased manner. Similarly, the use of laser scanners
for the prefabrication scans for helmets is frequently employed by
orthotists.
After observations and measurements, the clinician can determine the type and severity of the DP (Table 632.4 and Fig. 632.3).
For lateral DP, bossing of the occiput occurs opposite the flattened deformity and the ear on the same side as the flat area can
be anteriorly displaced. This type of DP is typically associated with
infants who have torticollis or a head position preference to one
side. Transdiagonal diameter is typically abnormal in this type of
plagiocephaly, and this measurement is the gold standard for determining severity.
In posterior DP, the occiput is uniformly flattened, temporal bossing
can occur, and the ears are normal. It is usually associated with large
head size and a history of limited activity or mobility. The cephalic
index is increased with posterior DP.
Time and accurate exam records can help in management. If deformation is worsening when DP typically begins to demonstrate improving head shape, craniosynostosis should be suspected.

LATERAL DEFORMATIONAL PLAGIOCEPHALY
Mild

Moderate

Severe

Ipsilateral ear
anteriorly
displaced,
ipsilateral
frontal bossing

Ipsilateral
temporal
skull growth

Key findings
Flattening on
back of skull
only

POSTERIOR DEFORMATIONALPLAGIOCEPHALY
(BRACHYCEPHALY)
Mild

Moderate

Severe

Widening of
posterior
skull

Temporal
bossing

Key findings
Central
posterior
deformity

Fig. 632.3 Types of deformational plagiocephaly. (From Looman WS,

Flannery AB. Evidence-­based care of the child with deformational plagiocephaly, part I: assessment and diagnosis. J Pediatr Health Care.
2012;26:242–250, Fig. 1.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 632 u Deformational Plagiocephaly
TREATMENT
Prevention

The sleep position should be monitored and varied. Alternating the
infant’s head to face the head and foot of the crib on alternate nights
will allow the infant to sleep facing into the room without always lying
on the same side of the head. Consistently alternating the sleeping
position early on allows the infant to have equal time on both sides
of the occiput, and the infant will become used to this pattern. Infants
who have an obvious positional preference for a particular side will
take more time and make more effort to purposefully reposition themselves counter to their preference. Parents must be counseled in the
benefit of this strategy in preventing bald spots or flat spots that can
progress to cranial deformity.
Tummy time is the term used to describe the infant’s awake time
spent lying on the stomach. The suggested amount of tummy time is
10-­15 minutes at least 3 times a day. Reassure parents that sleep is the
only time during which the prone position should be avoided, and educate the parents as to the benefits for the infant of awake prone positioning to help progression of motor development.

Treatment Options

Cranial asymmetry from DP does not usually spontaneously improve,
nor do the more severe manifestations of facial and ear asymmetry disappear. Once a flat spot develops, it is unlikely that the infant will be
able to overcome the pull to lie on the same spot in time to allow for
reversal of the asymmetry.
Watch-­and-­wait management is not recommended in infants with
DP. Evidence suggests that, at a minimum, repositioning and physiotherapy (RPPT) should be initiated as soon as asymmetry is observed.
RPPT includes the counseling and teaching of parents about positional changes and tummy time for their child, as well as the referral
to physical therapy in the case of congenital torticollis. RPPT is the
optimal treatment choice for patients younger than 4 months of age
who have mild or moderately severe DP. The earliest types of behavioral modifications can be as simple as increasing tummy time or repositioning the infant’s crib such that everything interesting in the room
is on the side opposite the DP.
Molding therapy (helmet therapy) is the use of an orthotic helmet to
promote the resolution of cranial asymmetry while the infant’s head is
still rapidly growing. Orthotic helmets do not actively mold the skull;
rather, they protect the areas that are flat and allow the child to grow
into the flat spot. Helmet therapy achieves correction 3 times faster and
better than repositioning alone. This therapy is still debated because of
its expense, time requirements, coverage, and side effects (irritation,
rashes, and pressure sores). Combined treatment with helmet therapy
and RPPT is the most beneficial management of infants older than 4
months with severe DP or with worsening of mild or moderate DP trialed on RPPT. Infants with severe DP should be considered for helmet
therapy at any age.
Studies suggest helmet therapy should be started for significant DP
between 4 and 8 months and continued for 7-­8 months. Parents should
be counseled on the commitment involved in this treatment because
helmets need to be worn up to 23 hours per day. Noncompliance has
been documented in 80% of study patient populations in as little as 4
months.
Risk factors are associated with failure of RRPT and helmet therapy.
Table 632.5 provides a list of these risk factors by treatment modality.
These are important to consider when prescribing treatment regimens

3587

Table 632.5  Risk Factors for Failure of Conservative
and Helmet Therapy in the Treatment of
Deformational Plagiocephaly
CONSERVATIVE THERAPY

HELMET THERAPY

Poor compliance
Advanced age*
Presence of torticollis
Presence of developmental delay
Increases severity of cranial deformity
at time of therapy (via cranial ratio
and diagonal difference)

Advanced age*
Poor compliance

*Advanced age is defined as older than 6 mo.

to families in order to give the patient the best chance at a successful
outcome.
Patients with craniosynostosis require surgery. Sometimes, a molding helmet can be used as an adjunctive therapy after surgery but never
as monotherapy.

OUTCOMES

Outcomes may be better when helmet therapy is started before 6
months of age; infants starting therapy later than that do not achieve
the same degree of normal head measurements as those whose helmet
therapy is started before 6 months of age. Significant improvements
in asymmetry are usually obvious at 4-­11 weeks after starting helmet therapy. An 8-­year single-­center review analyzing 4,378 patients
found complete correction in 77.1% of patients undergoing conservative (RRPT) therapy and 94.4% of patients treated with helmet
therapy.
Studies in patients with a median follow-­up age of 9 years found that
75% of cases had what both parents and patients considered to be a
normal head appearance. Nine percent of patients and 4% of parents
noted residual asymmetry that they considered significant. Though
some literature hints at more satisfaction and less anxiety in parents
of helmeted children, there is evidence to suggest that the treatment
modality and outcome make no difference regarding parents’ long-­
term satisfaction.
There is a small but growing body of literature that suggests conservative therapy (RRPT) may be as effective as helmet therapy for correcting certain cases of DP. Generalization of these findings to larger
populations is not currently possible.
Cognitive and academic outcomes may be different depending
on the side of deformity. Poorer academic performance and greater
speech abnormalities were found in patients with left-­sided deformities than in those with right-­sided deformities. This manifested as
double the number of patients with expressive speech abnormalities
and triple the number of special education needs. It is unclear what
the underlying mechanism is; treatment differences were apparently
not a factor. In general, children with DP and without comorbid conditions are usually developmentally normal, healthy children. This
development contrasts with craniosynostosis, in which increases in
intracranial pressure may have deleterious effects on central nervous
system function.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3588 Part XXV u The Nervous System

Chapter 633

Seizures in Childhood
Mohamad A. Mikati, Dmitry Tchapyjnikov,
and Kevin M. Rathke
An epileptic seizure is a sudden transient occurrence of signs and/or
symptoms resulting from abnormal excessive or synchronous neuronal
activity in the brain. The International League Against Epilepsy (ILAE)
operational classification of seizure types divides epileptic seizures
into four categories based on the presumed mode of seizure onset:
focal, generalized, unknown onset, and unclassified (Figs. 633.1 and
633.2). In focal (formerly known as partial) seizures, the first clinical and electroencephalographic (EEG) changes suggest initial activation of a system of neurons limited to part of one cerebral hemisphere.
Focal seizures can be described as motor or nonmotor and are further
characterized by preserved or impaired consciousness, which is used
synonymously with the term awareness. Simple partial seizure is an
outdated term that refers to a focal seizure with no alteration in consciousness or awareness; the current term is focal aware seizure. Complex partial seizure is also an outdated term that denotes focal seizures
with altered consciousness or awareness of the surroundings; they are
currently referred to as focal seizures with impaired awareness. In
generalized seizures, the first clinical and EEG changes indicate synchronous involvement of both hemispheres. A seizure may be labeled
as being of unknown onset if there is not enough clinical information
available to determine if the seizure is focal or generalized. If the clinical characteristics of a seizure are unusual and a determination of onset
cannot be made despite an adequate evaluation, the seizure may be
labeled as unclassified. Approximately 30% of patients who have a first
afebrile seizure later develop epilepsy; the risk is approximately 20% if
the neurologic exam, EEG, and neuroimaging are normal.
Febrile seizures are a separate category (see Chapter 633.1). Acute
symptomatic or provoked seizures occur secondary to an acute problem affecting brain excitability, such as an electrolyte imbalance; most
children with these types of seizures do well. However, sometimes
these seizures signify major structural, inflammatory, or metabolic disorders of the brain, such as meningitis, encephalitis, acute stroke, or
brain tumor. Consequently, the prognosis depends on the underlying
disorder, including its reversibility or treatability and the likelihood of

Generalized onset

Focal onset
Aware

Impaired
awareness

Motor onset
Automatisms
Atonic
Clonic
Epileptic spasms
Hyperkinetic
Myoclonic
Tonic
Nonmotor onset
Autonomic
Behavior arrest
Cognitive
Emotional
Sensory
Focal to bilateral tonic–clonic

Motor
Tonic–clonic
Clonic
Tonic
Myoclonic
Myoclonic–tonic–clonic
Myoclonic–atonic
Atonic
Epileptic spasms
Nonmotor (absence)
Typical
Atypical
Myoclonic
Eyelid myoclonia

developing epilepsy from it. An unprovoked seizure is one that is not
an acute symptomatic seizure. A remote symptomatic seizure is one
secondary to a distant brain injury, such as an old stroke.
Reflex seizures are a type of seizure precipitated by a sensory
stimulus. These types of seizures can be caused by a variety of stimuli,
including visual (flickering lights, patterns, reading), auditory (music),
somatosensory, or proprioceptive stimuli; praxis; eating; bathing in hot
water; or being startled (see Chapter 631.9).
Epilepsy is a disorder of the brain characterized by an enduring predisposition to generate seizures and by the neurobiologic, cognitive,
psychologic, and social consequences of this condition (see Fig. 633.2).
The clinical diagnosis of epilepsy usually requires the occurrence of at
least one unprovoked epileptic seizure with either a second such seizure or enough EEG and clinical information to convincingly establish
an enduring predisposition to develop recurrences. For epidemiologic
and, commonly, for clinical purposes, epilepsy is considered present
when two or more unprovoked seizures occur in a time frame of longer than 24 hours in between them. Approximately 4–10% of children
experience at least one seizure (febrile or afebrile) in the first 16 years
of life. The cumulative lifetime incidence of epilepsy is 3%, and more
than half of the disorders start in childhood. The annual prevalence is
0.5–1.0%. Thus the occurrence of a single seizure or of febrile seizures
does not necessarily imply the diagnosis of epilepsy. Seizure disorder
is a general term that is usually used to include any one of several disorders, including epilepsy, febrile seizures, and, possibly, single seizures
and symptomatic seizures secondary to metabolic, infectious, or other
etiologies (e.g., hypocalcemia, meningitis).
An epileptic syndrome is a disorder that manifests as one or more
specific seizure types and has a specific age of onset and a specific prognosis. Several types of epileptic syndromes can be distinguished (Tables
633.1-­633.6; Fig. 633.3). This category must be distinguished from the
category of epileptic seizures that refers to single events rather than to
clinical syndromes. In general, the seizure type is the primary determinant of the medications to which the patient is likely to respond,
and the epilepsy syndrome determines the prognosis one could expect.
An epileptic encephalopathy is an epilepsy syndrome in which there
is a severe EEG abnormality that is thought to result in cognitive and
other impairments. Developmental encephalopathy denotes a disorder in which the underlying etiology (e.g., a specific gene variant)
contributes to a developmental delay independently of the patient’s
seizure burden and/or EEG abnormalities. The terms epileptic and
developmental encephalopathy can be combined (i.e., developmental
epileptic encephalopathy) in specific situations where both the EEG
abnormalities and the underlying etiology contribute to the patient’s
developmental delay.

Unknown onset
Motor
Tonic–clonic
Epileptic spasms
Nonmotor
Behavior arrest

Unclassified

Fig. 633.1 International League Against

Epilepsy classification of seizures. (Modified
from Katyayan A, Diaz-­Medina G. Epilepsy:
epileptic syndromes and treatment. Neurol
Clon. 2021;39:779–794, Fig. 1, p. 780.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 633 u Seizures in Childhood 3589
Seizure types*
Focal

Generalized

Etiology
Unknown

Structural

Co-morbidities

Genetic
Infectious

Epilepsy types
Focal

Generalized

Combined
generalized
and focal

Unknown

Metabolic
Immune
Unknown

Epilepsy syndromes

Fig. 633.2 ILAE classification of epilepsies. *Denotes onset of seizure. (From Katyayan A, Diaz-­Medina G. Epilepsy: epileptic syndromes and treatment. Neurol Clon. 2021;39:779–794, Fig. 2, p. 781.)

The ILAE Task Force on Classification has proposed a multilevel
framework for categorizing epilepsies (Table 633.7). This framework
should help guide therapeutic decisions and assist with prognostication. At the most basic level (level 1), a patient’s epilepsy can be classified by seizure type (focal, generalized, focal and generalized, or
unknown). At the next level (level 2), based on available clinical data
and known seizure types, an epilepsy type can be assigned (focal, generalized, focal and generalized, or unknown). At the next level (level
3), if further clinical data are available and based on supporting studies
(e.g., EEG and/or MRI), the diagnosis of a specific epilepsy syndrome
can be made (e.g., juvenile myoclonic epilepsy). Concurrent to this
classification paradigm, the associated comorbidities and the underlying cause for the epilepsy must also be considered. If categorized by
etiology, epilepsies are grouped into genetic, structural, metabolic,
immune, infectious, or unknown categories. It is important to note that
these categories are not mutually exclusive, and a patient’s epilepsy may
have multiple concurrent etiologies (e.g., genetic and structural). At
the final level (level 4) of categorizing and diagnosing the epilepsy, the
epilepsy syndrome, the underlying etiology, and associated comorbidities are considered.
Genetic epilepsy (previously also referred to as idiopathic epilepsy) implies that the epilepsy syndrome is the direct result of a
known or presumed genetic defect(s) that is not causative of a brain
structural or metabolic disorder other than the epilepsy. This category encompasses genetic generalized epilepsies (previously called
idiopathic generalized epilepsies), such as childhood absence epilepsy, as well as epilepsies caused by a known gene defect (see Tables
633.1-­633.6).
Structural epilepsy (previously called symptomatic epilepsy) refers
to an epilepsy syndrome caused by an underlying structural brain disorder that may or may not be genetic. This includes etiologies such
as old stroke or hypoxic-­ischemic injury, as well as epilepsy secondary to tuberous sclerosis (which is also genetic). Immune-­mediated
epilepsy is an important category that describes epilepsies occurring
secondary to immune-­mediated central nervous system (CNS) inflammation. This group of disorders warrants special attention because
immunotherapies such as steroids and intravenous immunoglobulin
(IVIG) may be the first-­line treatments. Autoimmune encephalitides
such as anti–N-­methyl-­d-­aspartate (NMDA) receptor encephalitis and
anti-­LG1 limbic encephalitis are examples of immune-­mediated epilepsies. Infectious epilepsy describes epilepsies secondary to chronic

infectious conditions such as tuberculosis and HIV rather than acute
infections such as bacterial meningitis or herpes simplex virus (HSV)
encephalitis.
The older terms cryptogenic epilepsy and presumed symptomatic
epilepsy refer to an epilepsy syndrome in which there is a presumed
underlying brain disorder causing the epilepsy and affecting neurologic function, but the underlying disorder is not known; the disorder
is now referred to as unknown epilepsy, designating that the underlying cause of the epilepsy is still unknown.

EVALUATION OF THE FIRST SEIZURE

The initial evaluation of an infant or a child during or shortly after a
suspected seizure should include an assessment of the adequacy of
the airway, ventilation, and cardiac function, as well as measurement
of temperature, blood pressure, and glucose concentration. For acute
evaluation of the first seizure, the physician should search for potentially life-­threatening causes of seizures, such as meningitis, systemic
sepsis, unintentional or intentional head trauma, and ingestion of
drugs or medications or other toxins. The history should aim to determine if the event was a seizure or not and to define factors that might
have promoted the convulsion and to provide a detailed description of
the seizure and the child’s postictal state.
The subsequent step in an evaluation is to determine whether
the seizure has a focal onset or is generalized. Focal seizures could
include forceful turning of the head and eyes to one side, unilateral
clonic movements beginning in the face or extremities, or a sensory
disturbance, such as paresthesia or pain localized to a specific area.
Focal seizures in an adolescent or adult usually indicate a localized
lesion, whereas these seizures during childhood are often either secondary to a lesion or the result of a genetic, formerly known as idiopathic, epilepsy. Focal seizures in a neonate may be seen because of
focal lesions such as perinatal stroke or because of a metabolic abnormality such as hypocalcemia that results in focal seizures that may
not generalize because of immaturity of the brain connections. Focal
and generalized motor seizures may be tonic-­clonic, tonic, clonic,
myoclonic, or atonic. Tonic seizures are characterized by increased
tone or rigidity (usually lasting 2 seconds up to several minutes), and
atonic seizures are characterized by flaccidity and lack of movement.
Clonic seizures consist of rhythmic, fast muscle contractions and
slightly longer relaxations; myoclonus is a shocklike contraction of
a muscle of <50 milliseconds that is often repeated. The duration of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3590 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 633.1  Classification of Epilepsy Syndromes with an Indication of Age of Onset, Duration of Active Epilepsy, Prognosis,
and Therapeutic Options
SPECIFIC SYNDROMES
NEONATAL
Benign neonatal seizures

AGE RANGE
AT ONSET

AGE AT
REMISSION

PROGNOSIS

MONOTHERAPY
OR ADD-­ON*

POSSIBLE
ADD-­ON†

SURGERY†

Newborn

Newborn

Good

LEV, TPM, PB

—

No

Early myoclonic
encephalopathy and
Ohtahara syndrome

Newborn infant

Poor, Ohtahara
syndrome
evolves into
West syndrome

Ominous

PB, steroids, VGB

BZD, ZON, TPM,
LEV, ketogenic
diet

No

Benign familial neonatal
convulsions

Newborn to
young infant

Newborn to
young infant

Good

LEV, TPM, PB

—

No

INFANCY
Benign infantile seizures
(nonfamilial)

Infant

Infant

Good

LEV, TPM, PB

—

No

Benign familial infantile
convulsions

Infant

Infant

Good

LEV, TPM, OXC,
CBZ, PB

—

No

Epilepsy of infancy with
migrating focal seizures

Infant

No remission

Ominous

LEV, PB, OXC, CBZ,
PHT, TPM, QND

BZD, bromides,
LAC, VPA, ZON

No

West syndrome

Infant

Variable

Variable

ACTH, steroids,
VGB

BZD, FBM, IVIG,
TPM, ZON,
ketogenic diet

Lesionectomy ±
cortical resection

Dravet syndrome (severe
myoclonic epilepsy in
infancy)

Infant

No remission

Severe

CLB, stiripentol,
VPA (only after
age 2 yr)

BZD, TPM, LEV,
ZON, ketogenic
diet

No

Benign myoclonic
epilepsy in infancy

3 mo-­3 yr

3-­5 yr

Variable

LEV, TPM, BZD

VPA, ZON

No

3-­13 yr

16 yr

Good

OXC, CBZ, LEV,
VPA

LAC, PER

No

Early and late-­onset
idiopathic occipital
epilepsy

2-­8 yr; 6-­17 yr

12 yr or younger;
18 yr

Good

OXC, CBZ, LEV,
VPA

LAC, PER

No

Autosomal dominant
nocturnal frontal lobe
epilepsy

Childhood

Variable

OXC, CBZ, LEV

CLB, PB, PHT,
LAC, PER, GBP,
TPM

No

Familial lateral temporal
lobe epilepsy

Childhood to
adolescence

Variable

OXC, CBZ, LEV

CLB, PB, PHT,
GBP, TPM, VPA,
LAC, PER

No, except in rare
cases

Generalized epilepsies
with febrile seizures plus

Childhood to
adolescence

Variable

ESM, LTG, LEV, VPA
(depending on
seizure type)

CLB, TPM, PER

No

Mesial temporal
lobe epilepsy with
hippocampal sclerosis

School-­age or
earlier

Long-­ lasting

Variable

OXC, CBZ, LEV

CLB, GBP, LAC,
PB, PER, PHT,
ZON, TPM, VPA

Temporal resection

Rasmussen syndrome

6-­12 yr

Progressive

Ominous

LEV, OXC, CBZ,
plasmapheresis,
immunoglobulins

LAC, PB, PER,
PHT, TPM

Functional
hemispherectomy

Hemiconvulsion-­
hemiplegia syndrome

1-­5 yr

Chronic

Severe

OXC, CBZ, LEV

CLB, GBP, LAC,
PB, PER, PHT,
ZON, TPM, VPA

Functional
hemispherectomy

Epilepsy with myoclonic
astatic seizures

3-­5 yr

Variable

Variable

ESM, TPM, VPA,
LEV, ZON

BZD, ketogenic
diet, LTG, PER,
steroids

No

Childhood absence
epilepsy

5-­6 yr

10-­12 yr

Good

ESM, LTG, VPA

Acetazolamide,
CZP, ketogenic
diet, ZON

No

Epilepsy with myoclonic
absences

1-­12 yr

Variable

Guarded

ESM, VPA, CZP

ZON, LTG

No

CHILDHOOD
Benign childhood
epilepsy with
centrotemporal spikes

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 633 u Seizures in Childhood 3591
Table 633.1  Classification of Epilepsy Syndromes with an Indication of Age of Onset, Duration of Active Epilepsy, Prognosis,
and Therapeutic Options—cont’d
SPECIFIC SYNDROMES

AGE RANGE
AT ONSET

AGE AT
REMISSION

PROGNOSIS

MONOTHERAPY
OR ADD-­ON*

POSSIBLE
ADD-­ON†

SURGERY†

Lennox-­Gastaut
syndrome

3-­10 yr

No remission

Severe

CLB, LTG, RFD,
TPM, VPA

BZD, FBM, IVIG,
PER, steroids,
ZON, ketogenic
diet

Callosotomy

Landau-­Kleffner
syndrome

3-­6 yr

8-­12 yr

Guarded

Nocturnal DZP,
steroids, VPA, LEV

CLB, ESM, IVIG,
LTG, ketogenic
diet

Multiple subpial
transections,
rarely
lesionectomy

Epilepsy with continuous
spike waves during
slow-­wave sleep

4-­7 yr

8-­12 yr

Guarded

Nocturnal DZP,
steroids, VPA, LEV

CLB, ESM, IVIG,
LTG, ketogenic
diet

No

Other visual-­sensitive
epilepsies

2-­5 yr

Unclear

Variable

VPA

BZD, LEV, LTG,
ZON

No

Febrile seizures

3-­5 yr

3-­6 yr

Good

BZD (only as
needed for
febrile periods if
frequent febrile
seizures)

—

No

JUVENILE ONSET
Juvenile absence
epilepsy

10-­12 yr

Usually lifelong

Good

ESM, LTG, VPA

Same as in
childhood
absence
epilepsy

No

Juvenile myoclonic
epilepsy

12-­18 yr

Usually lifelong

Good

LEV, TPM, VPA

BZD, LTG, PB,
PER, PRM, ZON

No

Epilepsy with generalized
tonic-­clonic seizures
only

12-­18 yr

Usually lifelong

Good

LEV, LTG, TPM, VPA

BZD, CBZ, PER,
ZON

No

Idiopathic photosensitive
occipital lobe epilepsy

10-­12 yr

Unclear

Variable

VPA, LEV

BZD, LTG, ZON

No

Progressive myoclonic
epilepsies (e.g.,
Unverricht-­Lundborg,
Lafora, ceroid
lipofuscinoses)

Late infant to
adolescent

Progressive

Ominous

TPM, VPA, ZON,
LEV

BZD, PB, CLB,
PER, ketogenic
diet

No

Long-­lasting

Variable

LEV, OXC, CBZ,
TPM, VPA

PHT, PB, CLB,
GBP, LAC, PER,
ZON

Lesionectomy ±
cortical resection

VARIABLE AGE OF ONSET
Mesial temporal lobe
Variable
epilepsy defined by
location and cause
Mesial temporal lobe
epilepsy defined by
specific causes

Variable

Long-­lasting

Variable

LEV, OXC, CBZ,
TPM, VPA

CLB, GBP, LAC,
PB, PER, PHT,
ZON

Temporal resection

Startle epilepsy

Variable

Long-­lasting

Guarded

OXC, CBZ, LEV,
TPM, VPA

CLB, LEV, PB,
PHT, ZON, GBP

Lesionectomy ±
cortical resection
in some

Reflex seizures

Variable

n/a

LEV, VPA

LTG, ZON

No

Drug or other chemically
induced seizures

Variable

n/a

Withdraw
offending agent

—

No

Immediate and early
posttraumatic seizures

Variable

n/a

LEV, PHT

—

No

*Reflects current trends in practice, which may be off-­label and may not be FDA-­approved for that indication. Order of listing does not necessarily imply preference of use in that
order. See Table 633.13 for FDA indications.
†May apply to selected cases only. Vagus nerve stimulation has been used for all types of refractory seizures and epilepsy types but has been FDA-­approved as an adjunct therapy in
patients 4 yr or older with medically refractory partial-­onset seizures.
ACTH, Adrenocorticotropic hormone; BZD, benzodiazepine; CBZ, carbamazepine; CLB, clobazam; DZP, diazepam; ESM, ethosuximide; FBM, felbamate; GBP, gabapentin; IVIG,
intravenous immunoglobulin; LAC, lacosamide; LEV, levetiracetam; LTG, lamotrigine; n/a, not applicable; OXC, oxcarbazepine; PB, phenobarbital; PER, perampanel; PHT,
phenytoin; PRM, primidone; QND, quinidine; RFD, rufinamide; TPM, topiramate; VGB, vigabatrin; VPA, valproic acid; ZON, zonisamide.
Modified from Guerrini R. Epilepsy in children. Lancet. 2006;367:499–524; and Parisi P, Verrotti A, Paolino MC, et al. “Electro-­clinical syndromes” with onset in the pediatric age group:
the highlights of the clinical-­EEG, genetic, and therapeutic advances. Ital J Pediatr. 2011;37:58.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3592 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 633.2  Ion Channel Pathogenic Gene Variants and Associated Epilepsy Syndromes/Seizure Types
ION CHANNEL
SODIUM
α Subunit

GENE
SCN1A
SCN2A

POTASSIUM
Voltage dependent

Infancy, childhood
Neonatal, infancy

SCN8A

GTC, tonic, myoclonic

Neonatal, infancy

SCN9A
SCN1B

Febrile seizures, focal unaware, GTC
GEFS+

Childhood
Childhood, adolescence,
adulthood

KCNA2

GTC, focal unaware, alternating hemiclonic seizures, absence, juvenile
myoclonic epilepsy
GTC, focal unaware, infantile spasm, West syndrome, Lennox-­Gastaut
GTC, focal unaware
Benign familial neonatal seizures, tonic
Focal unaware, infantile spasm
Temple-­Baraitser syndrome, GTC, focal unaware, myoclonic, tonic, clonic
GTC, hemiclonic
GTC

Infancy, childhood

KCNT1
KCNJ10

MMFSI, ADNFLE
EAST syndrome, idiopathic generalized epilepsies, childhood absence
epilepsy

Infancy, childhood
Infancy, childhood

CLCN1
CLCN2

Idiopathic generalized epilepsies
Idiopathic generalized epilepsies, childhood absence, juvenile absence,
GTC, tonic
Epileptic encephalopathy with focal migrating seizures, idiopathic
generalized epilepsy, GTC, myoclonic, absence

Infancy
Infancy, childhood

CACNA1H
CACNA1A

Idiopathic generalized epilepsies
Epileptic encephalopathy, absence

Infancy, childhood
Infancy

CNCNB4

Myoclonic epilepsy, tonic, idiopathic generalized epilepsies

Infancy, childhood

KCNB1
KCND2
KCNQ2
KCNQ5
KCNH1
KCNH5
KCNMA1
Non–voltage
dependent
CHLORIDE
K+/Cl−co-transporter

SLC12A5
CALCIUM
α Subunit
β Subunit

SEIZURE ONSET

DS, GEFS+, GTCs
Benign familial neonatal-­infantile epilepsy, sporadic infantile spasm,
sporadic neonatal epileptic encephalopathy
Cryptogenic focal epilepsy, focal unaware to bilateral GTC, GTC,
myoclonic

SCN3A

β Subunit

EPILEPSY SYNDROMES/SEIZURE TYPES

Neonatal, infancy,
childhood

Infancy, childhood
Infancy, adolescence
Neonatal, infancy
Infancy, childhood
Neonatal, infancy
Infancy
Childhood

Infancy

ADNFLE, Autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy; EAST, epilepsy, ataxia, sensorineural deafness, and tubulopathy; GEFS+, genetic epilepsy with febrile seizures plus;
GTCs, generalized tonic-­clonic seizures; MMFSI, malignant migrating focal seizures of infancy.
Modified from Martinez LA, Lai YV, Holder JL Jr, Anderson AE. Genetics in epilepsy. Neurol Clin. 2021;39:743–777, Table 1, p. 745–747.

Table 633.3  Defects in Neurotransmitter Receptors and Associated Epilepsy Syndromes/Seizure Types
RECEPTOR

EPILEPSY SYNDROMES/SEIZURE TYPES

SEIZURE ONSET
Infancy, childhood, adolescence

GABRE

Absence, idiopathic generalized epilepsy, epileptic encephalopathy,
juvenile myoclonic epilepsy
Childhood absence, epileptic encephalopathy
Childhood absence, GEFS+, idiopathic generalized epilepsy,
epileptic encephalopathies
Infantile spasm, focal unaware, focal unaware to bilateral GTC, GTC

Nicotinic
acetylcholine

CHRNA4
CHRNB2
CHRNA2

ADSHE
ADSHE
Benign infantile familial seizures

Childhood, adolescence
Childhood, adolescence
Infancy

Glutamate

GRIN1
GRIN2A

Infantile spasm, tonic, atonic, hypermotor, focal dyscognitive, GTC
Childhood focal epilepsy, rolandic epilepsy, epileptic
encephalopathy, absence, tonic, myoclonic
West syndrome, childhood-­onset focal epilepsy, epileptic
encephalopathy
Infantile spasm, focal unaware to bilateral GTC, GTC, myoclonic,
atypical absence

Neonatal, infancy, childhood
Infancy, childhood

GABA

GENE
GABRA1
GABRB3
GABRG2

GRIN2B
GRIN2D

Neonatal, infancy, childhood
Neonatal, infancy
Infancy

Infancy, childhood
Neonatal, infancy, childhood

ADSHE, Autosomal dominant sleep-­related hypermotor epilepsy; GEFS+, genetic epilepsy with febrile seizures plus; GTC, generalized tonic-­clonic seizure.
Modified from Martinez LA, Lai YV, Holder Jr. JL, Anderson AE. Genetics in epilepsy. Neurol Clin. 2021;39:743–777. Table 2, p. 748.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 633 u Seizures in Childhood 3593
Table 633.4  Pathogenic Gene Variants of Synaptic Complexes and Associated Epilepsy Syndromes/Seizure Types
LOCATION

GENE

EPILEPSY SYNDROMES/SEIZURE TYPES

Presynaptic

DNM-­1

Neonatal, infancy

SV2A
TBC1D24

Infantile spasms, absence with eyelid myoclonia, atonic,
myoclonic, tonic, focal, GTCs
Absence, GTCs, myoclonic
Infantile spasms, GTCs, focal, absence, myoclonic, tonic
GTC, partial, absence, tonic, atonic, Ohtahara syndrome,
West syndrome
Myoclonic, tonic
Myoclonic, GTC, partial, absence, infantile spasms

CNTNAP2
IQSEC2
PCDH19
SHANK3
SYNGAP1
STXBP1

Focal, tonic
Atypical absence, GTCs
GTC, tonic, absence, atonic, partial, myoclonic
GTC, partial, absence, tonic, myoclonic, atonic
GTC, atonic, absence with eyelid myoclonia, myoclonic
Infantile spasms, myoclonic, GTC, atonic, absence, partial

Infancy, childhood
Infancy, childhood
Infancy
Infancy, childhood
Childhood
Neonatal, infancy

NRXN1
SNAP25
STX1B

Postsynaptic

SEIZURE ONSET

Childhood
Neonatal, infancy, childhood
Infancy, childhood, adolescence
Infancy
Neonatal, infancy, childhood

GTCs, Generalized tonic-­clonic seizures.
Modified from Martinez LA, Lai YV, Holder JL Jr, Anderson AE. Genetics in epilepsy. Neurol Clin. 2021;39:743–777, Table 3, p. 749.

Table 633.5  Defects in Intracellular Pathways/Organelles and Associated Epilepsy Syndromes/Seizure Types
GENE
mTOR pathway

Mitochondria

Tuberous sclerosis

MTOR
RHEB
DEPDC5
NPRL2, NPRL3
AKT3

Focal cortical dysplasia
Focal cortical dysplasia
Focal cortical dysplasia
Nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy, frontal lobe
epilepsy, temporal lobe epilepsy
Infantile spasm

POLG
MT-­TK

Alpers-­Huttenlocher syndrome
Myoclonic epilepsy with red, ragged fibers

PDHA1

Infantile spasm, myoclonic absence, atypical
absence, West syndrome, Lennox-­Gastaut
Infantile spasm, myoclonic absence, atypical
absence, West syndrome, Lennox-­Gastaut

PDHB
Lysosome

EPILEPSY SYNDROMES/SEIZURE TYPES

TSC1, TSC2

SCARB2
CLN1 – CLN8, CLN10 – CLN14

AMRF
Myoclonic epilepsy, atypical absence

NEU1

Progressive myoclonic epilepsy, GTC

SEIZURE ONSET
Infancy, childhood, adolescence,
adulthood
Variable age of onset
Variable age of onset
Neonatal, infancy, childhood
Infancy, childhood
Infancy
Childhood
Childhood, adolescence,
adulthood
Neonatal, infancy
Neonatal, infancy
Adolescence, adulthood
Variable age of onset depending
on specific CLN gene defect
Adolescence, adulthood

AMRF, Action myoclonus–renal failure, progressive myoclonic epilepsy; mTOR, mechanistic target of rapamycin; PDHB, pyruvate dehydrogenase complex E1-­beta.
Modified from Martinez LA, Lai YV, Holder JL Jr, Anderson AE. Genetics in epilepsy. Neurol Clin. 2021;39:743–777, Table 4, p. 750.

Table 633.6  Metabolic Defects and Associated Epilepsy Syndromes/Seizure Types
GENE

EPILEPSY SYNDROMES/SEIZURE TYPES

SEIZURE ONSET

Pyridoxine

ALDH7A1
PNPO

Focal, GTC, infantile spasm, myoclonic
GTC, tonic, clonic, myoclonic, focal

Neonatal, infancy, childhood
Neonatal

Biotin

BTD

GTC, myoclonic, infantile spasm, Ohtahara
syndrome

Neonatal, infancy

Folic acid

FOLR1

Myoclonic-­astatic, myoclonic, GTC

Childhood

Glycine

GLDC
AMT

Nonketotic hyperglycinemia
Nonketotic hyperglycinemia

Neonatal
Neonatal

Glutamate

SLC2A1

Focal, absence, myoclonic-­astatic

Infancy

Uridine

CAD

GTC, focal

Infancy

GTC, Generalized tonic-­clonic seizures.
Modified from Martinez LA, Lai YV, Holder JL Jr, Anderson AE. Genetics in epilepsy. Neurol Clin. 2021;39:743–777, Table 5, p. 751.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3594 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Early myoclonic
encephalopathy
PIGA, SETBP1, SIK1, SLC25A22

Dravet syndrome
SCN1A
GABRA1, GABRG2, HCN1, KCNA2,
SCN1B, STXBP1

Early-onset epileptic
encephalopathy
CDKL5
KCNQ2
AARS, CACNA2D2, SCN2A
STXBP1
NECAP1, PIGA,
GNA01
QARS, SCN8A
ARX, D0CK7,
SLC25A22,
SLC35A2, WW0X
Early infantile
epileptic encephalopathy
(Ohtahara syndrome)
KCNQ2
KCNT1, PIGQ

Infantile spasms
ALG13, DNM1, F0XG1 duplications, GABRA1,
GABRB3, GRIN1, GRIN2A, GRIN2B,IQSEC2,
KCNT1, MAGI2, MEF2C, NEDDL4, NDP,
NRXN1, PIGA,PLCB1, PTEN, SCA2, SCN1A,
SCN2A, SCN8A, SETBP1, SIK1, SLC25A22,
SLC35A2, SPTAN1, ST3GAL3, STXBP1,
TBC1D24, TCF4

Epilepsy with myoclonic–atonic seizures
SLC2A1
SLC6A1
GABRA1, GABRG2, SCN1A, SCN1B

Lennox-Gastaut syndrome
ALG13, DNM1, FLNA, GABRB3, GLI3, HNRNPU,
SCN1A, SCN2A, SCN8A, STXBP1

Epilepsy of infancy with migrating focal seizures
KCNT1
SCN2A, SCN1A
PLCB1, QARS, SCN8A, SLC25A22, TBC1D24, SLC12A5

Epilepsy–aphasia spectrum
GRIN2A

Other predominantly myoclonic epilepsies
Onset 0–1 years: EEF1A2, MEF2C, SCN1A, SLC2A1, SPTAN1, SYNGAP1, TBC1D24
Onset >1 year: CHD2, MEF2C, SYNGAP1, UBE3A

Other predominantly focal or multifocal epilepsies
Onset 0–6 months: ARHGEF9,DEPDC5, SCN1A, TBC1D24, PNKP, SLC2A1
Onset 6–12 months: ARHGEF9, DEPDC5, F0XG1 mutations, MBD5, PIG0, SLC13A5
Onset >1 year: ARHGEF9, DEPDC5, MBD5, PCDH19, P0LG, TNK2, ZEB2

0 months

3 months

6 months

1 year

2 years

Table 633.7  Diagnostic and Classification Scheme of
Epilepsies
Level 1: Determine if the event was an epileptic seizure and, if so,
characterize the seizure type or types based on available clinical
information as focal, generalized, or unknown. (Refer to Fig. 633.1
for more detailed characterizations.)
Level 2: Determine the type of epilepsy the patient has (focal,
generalized, focal and generalized, or unknown).
Level 3: Determine if the epilepsy fits into a particular epilepsy
syndrome (refer to Table 633.2).
Level 4: Establish a unifying diagnosis that takes into account
the epilepsy syndrome, underlying etiologies, and associated
comorbidities.
The etiology for the epileptic seizures should be considered at all
levels of an epilepsy diagnosis as listed earlier; etiologic categories
include:
Genetic
Structural
Metabolic
Immune
Infectious
Unknown
Comorbidities should be considered at all levels of an epilepsy
diagnosis. These can include developmental delay, psychiatric
symptoms, behavioral issues, academic difficulties, movement
abnormalities, and many others.
Modified from Scheffer IE, Berkovic S, Capovilla G, et al. ILAE classification of the
epilepsies: position paper of the ILAE Commission for Classification and Terminology.
Epilepsia. 2017;58(4):512–521.

the seizure and state of consciousness (retained or impaired) should
be documented. The history should determine whether an aura
preceded the convulsion and the behavior the child was exhibiting
immediately preceding the seizure. Auras can take the form of a
number of sensations, including visual (e.g., flashing lights or seeing
colors or complex visual hallucinations), somatosensory (tingling),
olfactory, auditory, vestibular, or experiential (e.g., déjà vu, déjà vécu
feelings) sensations, depending on the precise localization of the origin of the seizures. The most common aura experienced by children
consists of epigastric discomfort or pain and a feeling of fear. The
posture of the patient, presence or absence and distribution of cyanosis, vocalizations, loss of sphincter control (more commonly of the
urinary bladder), and postictal state (including sleep, headache, and
hemiparesis) should be noted. The provider taking the history should

4 years

Fig. 633.3 Genetic causes, and proportion of cases

caused by each gene, including only nonchromosomal,
nonmalformative, and nonmetabolic disorders. Only
genes with more than one case reported are included.
Black font denotes genes that account for at least 50%
of cases, purple font 10–50% of cases, and red font
5–10% of cases. Blue font denotes genes that account
for less than 5% of cases, and green font denotes genes
that account for an unknown percentage of cases. (From
McTague A, Howell KB, Cross JH, et al. The genetic
landscape of the epileptic encephalopathies of infancy
and childhood. Lancet. 2016;15:304–316.)

ask specifically about each of these symptoms as appropriate because
caretakers may not spontaneously report them. Determination of
focal versus generalized onset is sometimes difficult historically. A
seizure may start focally and secondarily generalize too quickly to
manifest observable early focal symptoms. In addition, a caregiver
witnessing the seizure later in its evolution may describe only the
more generalized-­appearing signs.
In addition to clarifying the seizure semiology, a detailed history is crucial in identifying an underlying cause for the seizure.
Reported personality changes or symptoms of increased intracranial pressure can suggest an intracranial tumor. Similarly, a history
of cognitive regression can suggest a degenerative or metabolic disease. A history of prenatal or perinatal distress or of developmental
delay can suggest etiologic congenital or perinatal brain dysfunction. Acute to subacute personality changes, psychiatric symptoms,
and/or associated movement abnormalities may suggest an autoimmune etiology.
The examination of a child with a seizure disorder should also be
geared toward the search for an organic cause. The child’s head circumference, length, and weight are plotted on a growth chart and compared with previous measurements. A careful general and neurologic
examination should be performed. A funduscopic exam should be
performed to evaluate for the presence of papilledema, optic neuritis, retinal hemorrhages, uveitis, chorioretinitis, coloboma, or macular changes, as well as retinal phakoma. The finding of unusual facial
features or of associated physical findings such as hepatosplenomegaly
may point to storage disease or inborn error of metabolism as the cause
of the neurologic disorder. The presence of a neurocutaneous disorder
may be indicated by the presence of vitiliginous ash leaf–type lesions
usually better seen using an ultraviolet light (Wood lamp); of adenoma
sebaceum, shagreen patches, or retinal phakomas (tuberous sclerosis);
of multiple café-­au-­lait spots (neurofibromatosis); or of V1-­or V2-­
distribution nevus flammeus (Sturge-­Weber syndrome) (see Chapter
636).
Localizing neurologic signs, such as a subtle hemiparesis with hyperreflexia, an equivocal or positive Babinski sign, and pronator drifting of
an extended arm with eyes closed, might suggest a contralateral hemispheric structural lesion, such as a slow-­growing glioma, as the cause
of the seizure disorder. Unilateral growth arrest of the thumbnail, hand,
or extremity in a child with a focal seizure disorder suggests a chronic
condition, such as a porencephalic cyst, arteriovenous malformation,
or cortical atrophy of the opposite hemisphere.
In an acute setting such as the emergency department, the decision
to pursue further laboratory testing, including serum electrolytes, a

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 633 u Seizures in Childhood 3595
complete blood count, and/or urine toxicology tests, should be made
on a case-­by-­case basis that considers the patient’s clinical history and
examination. ECG to rule out long QT or other cardiac dysrhythmias
and other tests directed at disorders that could mimic seizures may
be needed (see Chapter 634). A lumbar puncture is usually of limited
value in an acute workup of a nonfebrile seizure unless the history or
examination is concerning for an infectious or inflammatory process
or if there is clinical concern for intracranial bleeding despite normal
brain imaging. A routine EEG should be performed in all cases of a first
unprovoked nonfebrile seizure to help predict the risk of seizure recurrence. If the patient’s neurologic status has returned to baseline, the EEG
can often be done on an outpatient basis even though the yield may be
slightly lower because the EEG has been delayed beyond the first 12
hours. Emergent brain imaging with a head CT or brain MRI is usually
performed if the seizure was focal, if there are postictal focal deficits on
neurologic exam, or if the patient’s status is not returning to baseline; in
patients with trauma preceding the seizure; and in patients with a high-­
risk medical history. In other situations, the yield of emergent imaging
identifying an abnormality that warrants emergent intervention is less
than 1%. Brain MRI is preferred over a CT scan, and performing it on a
nonemergent basis should be considered in most patients. CT is useful if
a rapid study is needed to look for trauma, a mass, or signs of increased
intracranial pressure. In select situations, such as when the clinical and
EEG manifestations are consistent with a genetic generalized epilepsy
such as childhood absence epilepsy, a brain MRI may not be necessary.
Gadolinium (contrast) does not need to be routinely used when performing the brain MRI unless there is clinical suspicion of a neoplasm,
vascular malformation, abscess, or another infectious or inflammatory process. Further details regarding the approach to a first seizure
are included in Chapter 633.2. The 2021 guidelines from the American College of Radiology provide recommendations in different clinical scenarios (variants) for pediatric patients presenting with seizures
while taking into consideration the patient’s age, precipitating events,
clinical findings, EEG, and neurodevelopmental status. These address
neonatal seizures, simple and complex febrile seizures, posttraumatic
seizures, focal seizures, and primary generalized seizures (Table 633.8).

633.1 Febrile Seizures
Mohamad A. Mikati, Dmitry Tchapyjnikov, and
Kevin M. Rathke
Febrile seizures are seizures that occur between the ages of 6 and 60
months of life (peak 12-­18 months old) with a temperature of 38°C
(100.4°F) or higher, that are not the result of CNS infection or any metabolic imbalance, and that occur in the absence of a history of prior afebrile seizures. A simple febrile seizure is a primary generalized, usually
tonic-­clonic, attack associated with fever, lasting for a maximum of 15
minutes, and not recurrent within a 24-­hour period. A complex febrile
seizure is more prolonged (>15 minutes), and/or is focal, and/or recurs
within 24 hours. Febrile status epilepticus is a febrile seizure lasting
longer than 30 minutes. Most patients with simple febrile seizures have
a very short postictal state and usually return to their baseline normal behavior and consciousness within minutes of the seizure. Febrile
infection–related (or refractory) epilepsy syndrome (FIRES) is a
very different disorder seen predominantly in older (>5 years of age)
usually male children and associated with an encephalitis-­like illness
but without an identifiable infectious agent. Children with FIRES were
previously normal but subsequently develop difficult-­to-­treat epilepsy.
Between 2% and 5% of neurologically healthy infants and children
experience at least one, usually simple, febrile seizure. Simple febrile
seizures do not have an increased risk of mortality even though they
are concerning to the parents. Complex febrile seizures may have an
approximately twofold long-­term increase in mortality rates as compared with the general population over the subsequent 2 years, probably secondary to a coexisting pathology. There are no long-­term
adverse effects of having one or more simple febrile seizures. Compared
with age-­matched controls, patients with febrile seizures do not have

Table 633. 8  American College of Radiology Panel
Summary of Recommendations for Imaging
After a Seizure
Variant 1: MRI head without IV contrast is usually appropriate for the
initial imaging of neonatal seizures.
Variant 2: Imaging is usually not appropriate for the assessment of
simple febrile seizures in children 6 months to 5 years of age.
Variant 3: MRI head without IV contrast may be appropriate for the
initial imaging of children 6 months to 5 years of age with complex
febrile seizures.
Variant 4: CT head without IV contrast or MRI head without IV
contrast is usually appropriate for the initial imaging of children
with posttraumatic seizures (not including abusive head trauma).
These procedures are equivalent alternatives (i.e., only one
procedure will be ordered to provide the clinical information to
effectively manage the patient’s care).
Variant 5: MRI head without IV contrast is usually appropriate for the
initial imaging of a child with focal seizures (not including abusive
head trauma). The panel did not agree on recommending MRI
head without and with IV contrast for this clinical scenario. There
is insufficient medical literature to conclude whether or not these
patients would benefit from this procedure in this clinical setting.
Imaging in this patient population is controversial but may be
appropriate.
Variant 6: MRI head without IV contrast may be appropriate for
the initial imaging of children with primary generalized seizure
(neurologically normal).
Variant 7: MRI head without IV contrast is usually appropriate for the
initial imaging of children with generalized seizure (neurologically
abnormal).
Variant 8: MRI head without IV contrast is usually appropriate for
children with intractable seizures or refractory epilepsy. The panel
did not agree on recommending MRI head without and with IV
contrast for children with intractable seizures or refractory epilepsy.
There is insufficient medical literature to conclude whether or not
these patients would benefit from administration of IV gadolinium
contrast in this clinical setting.
Modified from Expert Panel on Pediatric Imaging, Trofimova A, Milla SS, Ryan ME, et al.
ACR appropriateness criteria seizures-­child. J Am Coll Radiol. 2021;18(55):S199–S210
(Summary of Expectations, p. S208-­S209).

any increase in the incidence of abnormalities of behavior, scholastic
performance, neurocognitive function, or attention. Children who
develop later epilepsy, however, might experience such difficulties.
Febrile seizures recur in approximately 30% of those experiencing a
first episode, in 50% after two or more episodes, and in 50% of infants
younger than 1 year of age at febrile seizure onset. Several factors affect
the recurrence risk (Table 633.9). Although approximately 15% of children with epilepsy have had febrile seizures, only 5% (range 1–33%,
dependent on risk factors) of children who experience febrile seizures
proceed to develop epilepsy later in life. There are several predictors of
epilepsy after febrile seizures (Table 633.10).

GENETIC AND OTHER FACTORS LEADING TO
FEBRILE SEIZURES

The genetic contribution to the incidence of febrile seizures is manifested by a positive family history for febrile seizures in many patients.
In some families, the disorder is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait, and multiple single genes that cause the disorder have
been identified in such families. However, in most cases the disorder
appears to be polygenic, and many genes predisposing to it remain to
be identified. Genes associated with febrile seizures include SCN1A,
SCN1B, SCN9A, and CPA6. In terms of other etiologies, a dysregulation between the proinflammatory interleukin (IL)-­1β, IL-­6, and IL-­8
cytokines and antiinflammatory ILR-­1A cytokines has been associated
with febrile status epilepticus. A decreased ILR-­1A/IL-­8 ratio (suggestive of an overall proinflammatory state) is predictive of hippocampal
abnormalities on MRI done after febrile status epilepticus. The ILR-­1A/
IL-­8 ratio may thus prove to be a potential biomarker for identifying
febrile seizure patients who may be at higher risk for developing mesial
temporal lobe epilepsy later in life.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3596 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 633.9  Risk Factors for Recurrence of Febrile
Seizures*

FSz*

GMS*
SE

CG

DD

Ataxia

MSz

60%

AA

40%

OS

CPS**
20%

SUDEP

MINOR
Family history of febrile seizures
Family history of epilepsy
Complex febrile seizure
Daycare
Male gender
Lower serum sodium at time of presentation

10%

AE

3m

6m

12m

2y

4y

8y

16y

32y

Age

*Having no risk factors carries a recurrence risk of approximately 12%; one risk factor,
25–50%; two risk factors, 50–59%; three or more risk factors, 73–100%.

Table 633.10  Risk Factors for Occurrence of Subsequent
Epilepsy After a Febrile Seizure*
RISK FOR SUBSEQUENT
EPILEPSY

RISK FACTOR

HS

80%
Incidence

MAJOR
Age <1 yr
Duration of fever <24 hr
Fever 38–39°C (100.4–102.2°F)

100%

Simple febrile seizure

1%

Recurrent febrile seizures

4%

Complex febrile seizures
(>15 min in duration or
recurrent within 24 hr)

6%

Fever <1 hr before febrile seizure

11%

Family history of epilepsy

18%

Complex febrile seizures (focal)

29%

Neurodevelopmental
abnormalities

33%

*Having more than one risk factor is at least in part additive.

Almost any type of epilepsy can be preceded by febrile seizures. A few
epilepsy syndromes typically start with febrile seizures; these are generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures plus (GEFS+), severe myoclonic epilepsy of infancy (SMEI or Dravet syndrome), and, in many
patients, temporal lobe epilepsy secondary to mesial temporal sclerosis. GEFS+ is an autosomal dominant syndrome with a highly variable
phenotype. Onset is usually in early childhood, and remission is usually in mid-­childhood. It is characterized by multiple febrile seizures
and by several subsequent types of afebrile generalized seizures, including generalized tonic-­clonic, absence, myoclonic, atonic, or myoclonic
astatic seizures with variable degrees of severity. A focal febrile seizure
plus epilepsy variant, in which the seizures are focal rather than generalized, has also been described.
Dravet syndrome is the most severe of the phenotypic spectrum
of febrile seizure–associated epilepsies. It constitutes a distinct entity,
the onset of which is in infancy. It is initially characterized by febrile
and afebrile unilateral clonic seizures that recur every 1 or 2 months.
These early seizures are typically induced by fever, but they differ from
the usual febrile convulsions in that they are more prolonged, more
frequent, and focal and recur in clusters. Seizures subsequently start
to occur with lower fevers and then without fever. During the second
year of life, myoclonus, atypical absences, and focal seizures occur
frequently, and developmental delay usually follows (Fig. 633.4). This
syndrome is usually caused by a de novo pathogenic variant, although
rarely it is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner or may be
inherited from a nonaffected carrier parent. Variants in the SCN1A
gene are the most common cause of Dravet syndrome (causing ∼80%
of all cases). The same gene is affected in the GEFS+ spectrum; however, in Dravet syndrome the variant leads to loss of function and

Stage 1
Febrile stage

Stage 2
Worsening stage

Stage 3
Stabilization stage

Fig. 633.4 Schematic representation of the varied clinical manifes-

tations of Dravet syndrome and their relative incidence according to
age. AA, Atypical absences; AE, acute encephalopathy; CG, crouching gait; CPS, complex partial seizures; DD, developmental delay; FSz,
complex febrile seizures; GMS, generalized motor seizures; HS, hyperthermia sensitivity; MSz, myoclonic seizures; OS, obtundation status;
SE, convulsive status epilepticus; Ataxia; SUDEP, sudden unexpected
death in epilepsy. *Moderate fever for 60%; mostly clonic generalized
and unilateral motor seizures. **Difficult distinction between atypical
absences and complex partial seizures without ictal EEG recording, so
their precise incidence is unknown; including generalized tonic-­clonic
and unilateral seizures. However, unilateral seizures are less frequent
after the age of 7 yr, whereas sleep seizures increase after 6-­7 yr and
become predominant after age of 9-­10 yr. (From Gataullina S, Dulac O.
From genotype to phenotype in Dravet disease. Seizure. 2017;44:58–
64, Fig. 1, p. 59.)

thus to a more severe phenotype. There are several milder variants of
Dravet syndrome that manifest some, but not all, of the previous features and that are referred to as Dravet syndrome spectrum or SMEI-­
Borderland. Rarely the GABRG2, SCN1B, and SCN2A genes may cause
Dravet syndrome; however, in 10–20% of the cases a specific gene variant is not identified.
The majority of patients who had prolonged febrile seizures and
encephalopathy after vaccination and who had been presumed to have
suffered from vaccine encephalopathy (seizures and psychomotor
regression occurring after vaccination and presumed to be caused by
it) turn out to have Dravet syndrome pathogenic gene variants, indicating that their disease is caused by the variant and not secondary to the
vaccine. This has raised doubts about the very existence of the entity
termed vaccine encephalopathy.

EVALUATION

Figure 633.5 delineates the general approach to the patient with febrile
seizures. Each child who presents with a febrile seizure requires a
detailed history and a thorough general and neurologic examination.
Febrile seizures often occur in the context of otitis media; roseola and
human herpesvirus (HHV) 6 infections; and infections with norovirus, parechovirus, enteroviruses, Shigella, or similar agents, making the
evaluation more demanding. In patients with febrile status epilepticus,
HHV-­6B (more frequently) and HHV-­7 infections may account for
30% of the cases.

Lumbar Puncture

Meningitis should be considered in the differential diagnosis, and
lumbar puncture should be performed for all infants younger than 6
months of age who present with fever and seizure, if the child is ill-­
appearing, or at any age if there are clinical signs or symptoms of concern. A lumbar puncture is an option in a child 6-­12 months of age
who is deficient in Haemophilus influenzae type b and Streptococcus
pneumoniae immunizations or for whom the immunization status is
unknown. A lumbar puncture is an option in children who have been
pretreated with antibiotics. In uninfected patients presenting with
febrile status epilepticus, a nontraumatic lumbar puncture rarely shows
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pleocytosis (96% have <3 nucleated cells in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 633 u Seizures in Childhood 3597
the CSF) with a concurrently normal CSF protein and glucose. Pleocytosis suggests bacterial or viral infection.

Electroencephalogram

If the child is presenting with the first simple febrile seizure and is otherwise neurologically healthy, an EEG need not be performed as part
of the evaluation. An EEG would not predict the future recurrence of
febrile seizures or epilepsy even if the result is abnormal. Spikes during
drowsiness are often seen in children with febrile seizures, particularly
those older than age 4 years, and these do not predict later epilepsy.
EEGs performed within 2 weeks of a febrile seizure often have nonspecific slowing, usually posteriorly. Thus in many cases, if an EEG is
indicated, it is delayed until or repeated after more than 2 weeks have
passed. An EEG should therefore generally be restricted to special cases
in which epilepsy is highly suspected (see Table 633.10), and, generally,
it should be used to delineate the type of epilepsy rather than to predict
its occurrence. If an EEG is done, it should be performed for at least 20
minutes in wakefulness and in sleep according to international guidelines to avoid misinterpretation and drawing of erroneous conclusions.
At times, if the patient does not recover immediately from a seizure, an
EEG can help distinguish between ongoing seizure activity and a prolonged postictal state. After febrile status epilepticus, focal EEG slowing over the temporal lobe increases the chance that the patient may
have medial temporal sclerosis on follow-­up.

Blood Studies

Blood studies (serum electrolytes, calcium, phosphorus, magnesium,
and a complete blood count) are not routinely recommended in the
workup of a child with a first simple febrile seizure. Blood glucose
should be measured initially and with prolonged postictal obtundation
or with poor oral intake (prolonged fasting). Serum electrolyte values
may be abnormal in children after a febrile seizure, but this should be
suggested by precipitating or predisposing conditions elicited in the
history and reflected in the physical examination. If clinically indicated
(e.g., dehydration), these tests should be performed. A low sodium
level is associated with a higher risk of recurrence of the febrile seizure
within the following 24 hours.

Neuroimaging

A CT or MRI is not recommended in evaluating the child after a first
simple febrile seizure. The workup of children with complex febrile
seizures needs to be individualized. This can include an EEG and
neuroimaging, particularly if the child is neurologically abnormal.
Approximately 10% of children with febrile status epilepticus are
reported to have unilateral or, less frequently, bilateral swelling of their
hippocampus acutely; subsequent long-­term hippocampal atrophy is
evident in about 71% of those who had the acute findings. Whether
these patients will ultimately develop temporal lobe epilepsy remains
to be determined.

TREATMENT

In general, antiepileptic therapy, continuous or intermittent, is not
recommended for children with one or more simple febrile seizures.
Parents should be counseled about the relative risks of recurrence of
febrile seizures and recurrence of epilepsy, educated on how to handle
a seizure acutely, and given emotional support. If the seizure lasts for
longer than 5 minutes, acute treatment with lorazepam, midazolam,
or diazepam is needed (see Chapter 633.8 for acute management of
seizures and status epilepticus). Rectal diazepam is often prescribed to
families to be used at home as a rescue medication if a febrile seizure
lasts longer than 5 minutes (see Table 633.14 for dosing). Alternatively,
buccal or intranasal midazolam or diazepam may be used. In cases
of frequently recurring febrile seizures, intermittent oral clonazepam
(0.01 mg/kg every 8-­12 hours up to a maximum dose of 1.5 mg/day) or
oral diazepam (0.33 mg/kg every 8 hours) can be given during febrile
illnesses. Such therapies help reduce, but do not eliminate, the risks of
recurrence of febrile seizures. Historically, continuous therapy with the
antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) phenobarbital or valproic acid was occasionally used to prevent febrile seizures. However, in the vast majority

• History
• Exam
• Manage acute febrile seizure and acute illness (first aid,
midazolam, diazepam, diagnostic tests) as needed
• Determine risk factors for recurrence and estimate risk of
recurrence of the febrile seizures (Table 633.9).

Counsel parents about risk of recurrence and
how to provide first aid and manage fever

Determine risk factors for later epilepsy
(Table 633.10)

Low risk
(vast majority of cases)
No therapy or
investigations
are necessary

High risk
(minority of cases)
1. Consider EEG and imaging
2. Consider intermittent oral
diazepam or, in exceptional
cases that recur, continuous
therapy

Fig. 633.5 Treatment algorithm for the management of febrile sei-

zures. (Modified from Mikati MA, Rahi A. Febrile seizures: from molecular biology to clinical practice. Neurosciences [Riyadh]. 2004;10:14–22.)

of cases, use of continuous therapy is not justified because of the risk
of side effects and lack of demonstrated long-­term benefits, even if the
recurrence rate of febrile seizures is expected to be decreased by these
drugs.
Antipyretics can decrease the discomfort of the child but do not
reduce the risk of having a recurrent febrile seizure. Chronic antiepileptic therapy may be considered for children with a high risk for later epilepsy. The possibility of future epilepsy does not change with or without
antiepileptic therapy. Iron deficiency is associated with an increased
risk of febrile seizures, and thus screening for that problem and treating
it appear appropriate. A recent Delphi-­type European study generated
specific recommendations for providers to deliver to caretakers after
a febrile seizure (reference provided later). These included the definition of febrile seizures, basis of this clinical diagnosis, acknowledging
parental stress, risk of recurrence, and long-­term care of the child,
which also should include that the parents should avoid cosleeping,
which is dangerous for their child and does not prevent febrile seizures.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

633.2 Unprovoked Seizures
Mohamad A. Mikati, Dmitry Tchapyjnikov, and
Kevin M. Rathke

HISTORY AND EXAMINATION

Evaluation of a first-­time seizure was discussed earlier in this chapter. It
entails stabilization of the patient if the child presents during or shortly
after the seizure. A careful history and examination are done to accurately characterize the seizure, exclude acute intervenable causes, and
attempt to determine the underlying etiology of the seizure.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

This involves consideration of nonepileptic paroxysmal events (see
Chapter 634), determination of the seizure type as classified by the
ILAE system (see Fig. 633.1), and consideration of potential underlying
etiologies. Some seizures might begin with auras, which are sensory
experiences reported by the patient and are not observed externally.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3598 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Motor seizures can be tonic, clonic, myoclonic, atonic, or astatic.
Astatic seizures often follow myoclonic seizures and cause a momentary loss of tone with a sudden fall. Atonic seizures, on the other hand,
are usually longer, and the loss of tone often develops more slowly.
Sometimes it is difficult to distinguish among tonic, myoclonic, atonic,
or astatic seizures based on the history alone when the family reports
only that the patient falls; in such cases, the seizure may be described
as a drop attack. Loss of tone or myoclonus in only the neck muscles
results in a milder seizure referred to as a head drop. Tonic, clonic,
tonic-­clonic, myoclonic, and atonic seizures can be focal (including
one limb or one side only), focal with secondary generalization, or primary generalized. Epileptic spasms, or axial spasms (these terms being
preferred over infantile spasms because the spasms can occur beyond
infancy), consist of flexion or extension of the truncal and extremity
musculature that is sustained for 1-­2 seconds, shorter than the duration seen in tonic seizures, which last longer than 2 seconds. Focal
motor clonic and/or myoclonic seizures that persist for days, months,
or even longer are termed epilepsia partialis continua.
Absence seizures are generalized seizures consisting of staring,
unresponsiveness, and eye flutter lasting usually for a few seconds.
Typical absences are associated with 3-­
Hz spike–and–slow-­
wave
discharges and with childhood absence epilepsy, which has a good
prognosis. Atypical absences are associated with 1-­to 2-­Hz spike–
and–slow-­wave discharges and with head atonia and myoclonus during the seizures. They occur in Lennox-­Gastaut syndrome and similar
syndromes, which have a poor prognosis. Juvenile absences are similar to typical absences but are associated with 4-­to 5-­Hz spike–and–
slow-­wave discharges and often occur in juvenile myoclonic epilepsy.
Seizure type and other EEG and clinical manifestations determine the
type of epilepsy syndrome with which a particular patient is afflicted
(see Tables 633.1-­633.6; see also Chapters 633.3 and 633.4).
A family history of certain forms of epilepsy, such as benign familial neonatal seizures, can suggest the specific epilepsy syndrome. More
often, however, different members of a family with a positive history of
epilepsy have different types of epilepsy. Specific findings on physical
exam may point to an underlying disorder causing the seizure, such
as tuberous sclerosis, Sturge-­Weber syndrome, neurofibromatosis, or
other brain malformations.

LONG-­TERM APPROACH TO THE PATIENT AND
ADDITIONAL TESTING

The approach to the patient with epilepsy is based on the diagnostic
scheme proposed by the ILAE Task Force on Classification and Terminology and presented in Table 633.7. Most epilepsy syndromes are
potentially caused by any one of multiple underlying or still undetermined etiologies. However, in addition, there are many epilepsy syndromes that are associated with specific gene mutations (see Tables
633.1-­633.6 and Fig. 633.3). Different pathogenic variants of the same
gene can result in different epilepsy syndromes, whereas variants of
different genes can cause the same epilepsy syndrome phenotype. The
clinical use of gene testing in the diagnosis and management of childhood epilepsy is indicated in patients manifesting specific underlying
malformational, metabolic, or degenerative disorders; patients with
severe epilepsy syndromes (such as West and Dravet syndromes and
progressive myoclonic epilepsies); and patients with syndromes of
mendelian inheritance (see Tables 633.1 and 633.6). Gene testing is
indicated in epilepsy encephalopathy syndromes and in patients with
other organ involvement (hepatic, muscle, cardiac, intestinal) and in
atypical phenotypes.
In patients with drug-­resistant epilepsy or in infants with new-­onset
epilepsy in whom the initial testing did not reveal an underlying etiology, a full metabolic workup, including amino acids, organic acids,
biotinidase, and CSF studies, is needed. Additional testing can include,
depending on the case, some or most of the following:
1.	Measurement of serum lactate, pyruvate, acyl carnitine profile, creatine,
very long-­chain fatty acids, ammonia, and guanidino-­acetic acid.
2.	Blood and serum sometimes need to be tested for white blood cell
lysosomal enzymes, serum coenzyme Q levels, and serum copper
and ceruloplasmin levels (for Menkes syndrome).

3.	Serum immune isoelectric focusing (or gene panels) is performed
for carbohydrate-­deficient transferrin in disorders of glycosylation.
CSF glucose testing looks for glucose transporter deficiency, and the
CSF can be examined for cells and proteins (for parainfectious and
postinfectious syndromes and for Aicardi-­Goutières syndrome, which
also shows cerebral calcifications and has a specific gene defect test
available).
4.	Other laboratory studies include CSF immunoglobulin (Ig) G index, NMDA receptor, and other autoimmune encephalitis–associated antibodies, as well as measles titers in serum and CSF.
5.	CSF tests can also confirm, with the appropriate clinical setup, the
diagnosis of cerebral folate deficiency, pyridoxine dependency,
pyridoxal-­
5-­
phosphate dependency, mitochondrial disorders,
nonketotic hyperglycinemia, neopterin/biopterin metabolism disorders, adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency, and neurotransmitter
deficiencies.
In infants who do not respond immediately to antiepileptic therapy,
vitamin B6 (100 mg intravenously) is given as a therapeutic trial to help
diagnose pyridoxine-­responsive seizures, with precautions to guard
against possible apnea. The trial is best done with continuous EEG
monitoring, including a preadministration baseline recording period.
Before the vitamin B6 trial, a pipecolic acid level and serum, urine, or
CSF α-­aminoadipic acid semialdehyde levels should be drawn because
they are often elevated in this rare syndrome and the therapeutic trial
result may not be definitive. Some patients are pyridoxal phosphate,
rather than pyridoxine, dependent. Patients with cerebral folate deficiency can also have intractable seizures. Thus trials of pyridoxal phosphate given orally (up to 50 mg/kg/day given every 6 hours) and folinic
acid (2.5-­5 mg twice a day, if needed; can titrate up to a maximum
dose of 8 mg/kg/day) over several weeks can help diagnose these rare
disorders while one is waiting for the definitive diagnosis from CSF or
genetic testing. Certain EEG changes such as continuous spike–and–
slow-­wave seizure activity and burst-­suppression patterns may also
suggest these vitamin-­responsive syndromes.
6.	Urine may also need to be tested for urinary sulfites indicating molybdenum cofactor deficiency and for oligosaccharides and mucopolysaccharides. MR spectroscopy can be performed for lactate
and creatine peaks to rule out mitochondrial disease and creatine
transporter deficiency.
7.	Gene testing looks for specific disorders that can manifest with
seizures, including SCN1A pathogenic variants in Dravet syndrome; ARX gene for West syndrome in males; MECP2, CDKL5,
and protocadherin 19 for Rett syndrome and similar presentations;
syntaxin-­binding protein for Ohtahara syndrome; and polymerase
G for West syndrome and other seizures in infants. Gene testing can
also be performed for other dysmorphic or metabolic syndromes.
8.	Muscle biopsy can be performed for mitochondrial DNA and oxidative enzymes as well as coenzyme Q10 levels, and skin biopsy for
inclusion bodies seen in neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis and Lafora
body disease.
9.	Genetic panels are available that include multiple genes that can
cause epilepsy at specific ages; whole exome or genome sequencing
is also available. The availability of gene panels, particularly ones
that can test for amenably treatable conditions such as vitamin B6–
dependent epilepsy, and the rapid turnaround time have replaced
the need for many of the tests listed in points 1-­9.
10.	MRI should also be performed to identify congenital disorders
(cortical dysplasias, lissencephaly, schizencephaly), calcifications,
focal lesions (basal ganglia), and myelinization disorders (acute
disseminated encephalomyelitis [ADEM], leukodystrophies). MRI
may identify specific disorders such as posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES), stroke (mitochondrial encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, and strokelike episodes [MELAS]), Rasmussen encephalitis, tumors, cerebral edema, hemorrhage, or venous
thrombosis (see Table 633.8). It should also be noted that seizures
alone may cause nonspecific-­nondiagnostic transient MRI abnormalities; these may include transient gray matter and subcortical
white matter signals or transient hippocampal and temporal lobe
abnormalities.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 633 u Seizures in Childhood 3599
Most patients do not require an extensive evaluation. The pace and
extent of the workup must depend on the clinical epileptic and nonepileptic features, the family and antecedent personal history of the
patient, the medication responsiveness of the seizures, the likelihood
of identifying a treatable condition, and the wishes and need of the
family to assign a specific diagnosis to the child’s illness.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

633.3 Focal Seizures and Related Epilepsy
Syndromes
Mohamad A. Mikati and Dmitry Tchapyjnikov
Focal seizures account for approximately 40% of seizures in children
and can be divided into focal seizures with preserved awareness, in
which consciousness is not impaired, and focal seizures with impaired
awareness, in which consciousness is affected.
Focal seizures with preserved or impaired awareness can each occur
in isolation, one can temporally lead to the other (usually from preserved to impaired awareness), and/or each can progress into secondary generalized seizures, called focal to bilateral tonic-­clonic seizures,
although less commonly, the secondary generalized seizure may also
be tonic, clonic, or atonic.

FOCAL SEIZURES WITH PRESERVED AWARENESS

These can take the form of sensory seizures (auras, called focal aware
seizures) or brief motor seizures, the specific nature of which gives
clues as to the location of the seizure focus. Brief motor seizures are the
most common and include focal tonic, clonic, or atonic seizures. Often
there is a motor (Jacksonian) march from face to arm to leg, adversive
head and eye movements to the contralateral side, or postictal (Todd)
paralysis that can last minutes or hours, and sometimes longer. Unlike
tics, motor seizures are not under partial voluntary control; seizures are
more often stereotyped and are less likely than tics to manifest different
types in a given patient.

FOCAL SEIZURES WITH IMPAIRED AWARENESS

These seizures usually last 1-­2 minutes and are often preceded by an aura,
such as a rising abdominal feeling, déjà vu or déjà vécu, a sense of fear,
complex visual hallucinations, micropsia or macropsia (temporal lobe),
generalized difficult-­
to-­
characterize sensations (frontal lobe), focal
sensations (parietal lobe), or simple visual experiences (occipital lobe).
Children younger than 7 years old are less likely than older children to
report auras, but parents might observe unusual preictal behaviors that
suggest the experiencing of auras. Subsequent manifestations consist of
decreased responsiveness, staring, looking around seemingly purposelessly, and automatisms. Automatisms are automatic semipurposeful
movements of the mouth (oral, alimentary such as chewing) or of the
extremities (manual, such as manipulating the sheets; leg automatisms
such as shuffling, walking, or bicycling movements). Often there is salivation, dilation of the pupils, and flushing or color change. The patient
might appear to react to some of the stimulation around him or her but
does not later recall the epileptic event. At times, walking and/or marked
limb flailing and agitation occur, particularly in patients with frontal
lobe seizures. Frontal lobe seizures often occur at night and can be very
numerous and brief, but other complex partial seizures from other areas
in the brain can also occur at night. There is often contralateral dystonic
posturing of the arm and, in some cases, unilateral or bilateral tonic arm
stiffening. Some seizures have these manifestations with minimal or no
automatisms. Others consist of altered consciousness with contralateral
motor, usually clonic, manifestations. After the seizure, the patient can
have postictal automatisms, sleepiness, and/or other transient focal deficits such as weakness (Todd paralysis) or aphasia.

FOCAL TO BILATERAL TONIC-­CLONIC SEIZURES

These can either start with generalized clinical phenomena (from rapid
spread of the discharge from the initial focus) or as focal seizures with

subsequent clinical generalization. There is often adversive eye and
head deviation to the side contralateral to the side of the seizure focus,
followed by generalized tonic, clonic, or tonic-­clonic activity. Tongue
biting, urinary and stool incontinence, vomiting with risk of aspiration,
and cyanosis are common. Fractures of the vertebrae or humerus are
rare complications. Most such seizures last 1-­2 minutes. Focal tonic
or focal to bilateral tonic-­clonic seizures often manifest as adversive
head deviation to the contralateral side, fencing, hemi-­or full figure-­
of-­four arm, and/or Statue of Liberty postures. These postures usually
suggest a frontal origin and, when awareness is preserved during them,
favor that the seizure originated from the medial frontal supplementary motor area.
EEG in patients with focal/partial seizures usually shows focal spikes
or sharp waves in the lobe where the seizure originates. A sleep-­deprived
EEG with recording during sleep increases the diagnostic yield and is
advisable in all patients (Fig. 633.6). Despite that, approximately 15%
of children with epilepsy initially have normal EEGs because the discharges are relatively infrequent or the focus is deep. If repeating the
test does not detect paroxysmal findings, longer recordings in the laboratory or using ambulatory EEG or even inpatient 24-­hour video EEG
monitoring may be helpful. The latter is particularly helpful if the seizures are frequent enough because it then can allow visualization of the
clinical events and the corresponding EEG tracing.
Brain imaging is critical in patients with focal seizures. MRI is preferable to CT, which misses subtle but, occasionally, potentially clinically significant lesions. MRI can show pathologies such as changes as
a result of previous strokes or hypoxic injury, malformations, medial
temporal sclerosis, arteriovenous malformations, inflammatory pathologies, or tumors (Fig. 633.7). Of note is that patients with focal seizures
and epilepsies can have focal corresponding neuropsychologic deficits
but also have patterns of network-­related deficits such as impaired
social cognition, deficits that are shared with generalized epilepsies.

(i)

(i)

Cz-C3

Fp1-A1

C3-T3

F7-A1
(ii)

C3-Sp1

P3-PZ

Sp1-Sp2

PZ-P4

Sp2-T4
T4-C4
T4-CZ

P4-T6
T5-01
(iii)
Fp1-F7
F7-T3

(ii)

T3-T5

T3-C3

T5-O1

C3-CZ

(iv)

CZ-C4

C4-T4

A

Fp1-F3
F3-C3
C3-P3
P3-O1
Fp2-F4
F4-C4

B

Fig. 633.6 A, Representative EEG associated with partial seizures: (i)

Spike discharges from the left temporal lobe (arrow) in a patient with
complex partial seizures caused by mesial temporal sclerosis; (ii) left
central-­parietal spikes (arrow) characteristic of benign partial epilepsy
with centrotemporal spikes. B, Representative EEGs associated with
generalized seizures: (i) 3/sec spike-­and-­wave discharge of absence seizures with normal background activity; (ii) 1-­2/sec interictal slow spike
waves in a patient with Lennox-­Gastaut syndrome; (iii) hypsarrhythmia
with irregular multifocal high-­
voltage spike-­
and-­
wave activity with a
chaotic high-­voltage slow background; (iv) juvenile myoclonic epilepsy
EEG showing 4-­6/sec spike and waves enhanced by photic stimulation.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3600 Part XXV u The Nervous System
lobe epilepsy has been linked to acetylcholine-­receptor and to KCNT1
pathogenic variants. It manifests with nocturnal seizures with dystonic
posturing, agitation, screaming, and kicking that respond promptly to
carbamazepine. Several other less frequent familial benign epilepsy
syndromes with different localizations have also been described, some
of which occur exclusively or predominantly in adults.

SEVERE EPILEPSY SYNDROMES WITH FOCAL
SEIZURES

A

B

Fig. 633.7 A, Coronal fluid-­attenuated inversion-­recovery (FLAIR) MRI
scan of a 13-­yr-­old with intractable seizures and mesial temporal sclerosis (MTS). The arrow points at the hippocampus with the high-­intensity
signal characteristic of MTS. B, Axial FLAIR MRI of a 7-­yr-­old with intractable seizures and right frontal cortical dysplasia. The arrows point
at the high-­intensity signal corresponding to the dysplasia. (A from Lee
JYK, Adelson PD. Neurosurgical management of pediatric epilepsy.
Pediatr Clin North Am. 2004;51:441–456.)

These observations support current thinking that not only generalized
but also focal epilepsy involves network-­related pathophysiology.

BENIGN EPILEPSY SYNDROMES WITH FOCAL
SEIZURES

The most common such syndrome is benign childhood epilepsy
with centrotemporal spikes (BECTS), which typically starts during
childhood (ages 3-­10 years) and is outgrown by adolescence. The child
typically wakes up at night because of a focal seizure with preserved
awareness causing buccal and throat tingling and tonic or clonic contractions of one side of the face, with drooling and inability to speak
but with preserved consciousness and comprehension. Focal seizures
with impaired awareness and secondary generalized seizures can also
occur. EEG shows typical wide-­based centrotemporal spikes that are
markedly increased in frequency during drowsiness and sleep. MRI is
normal. Patients respond very well to AEDs such as oxcarbazepine and
carbamazepine. In some patients who only have rare and mild seizures,
treatment might not be needed. Traditionally patients with BECTS
are considered to have normal neurocognitive development, but some
studies have documented problems in memory and in other neuropsychologic functions and in attention. Atypical BECTS is a less common
variant of the disorder characterized by often a younger age of onset,
multiple seizure types including drop attacks, atypical EEG patterns
including secondary bilateral synchrony, and/or other comorbidities
such as developmental delay.
Benign epilepsy with occipital spikes can occur in early childhood (Panayiotopoulos type) and manifests with focal seizures with
impaired awareness and with ictal vomiting; they may also first appear
in later childhood (Gastaut type) as focal seizures with impaired
awareness, visual auras, and migraine headaches that occur independently or postictally (epilepsy-­migraine sequence). Both are typically
outgrown in a few years.
In infants, several less common benign infantile familial convulsion syndromes have been reported. For some of these, the corresponding gene variant and its function are known (see Table 633.1),
including benign familial neonatal seizures (KCNQ2, KCNQ3),
benign familial neonatal infantile seizures (SCN2A), and early
familial neonatal infantile seizures (SCN2A).
A number of benign infantile nonfamilial syndromes have been
reported, including focal seizures with impaired awareness with temporal foci, focal to bilateral tonic-­clonic seizures with variable foci,
tonic seizures with midline foci, and focal seizures in association with
mild gastroenteritis. All of these have a good prognosis and respond to
treatment promptly; often, only short-­term therapy (e.g., 6 months),
if any therapy, is needed. Nocturnal autosomal dominant frontal

Symptomatic structural/metabolic epilepsy secondary to focal brain
lesions has a higher chance of being severe and refractory to therapy
than genetic (idiopathic) epilepsy. Many patients with focal lesions,
for example, old strokes or brain tumors, either never have seizures or
have well-­controlled epilepsy. In infants, drug-­resistant epilepsy with
focal seizures is often caused by severe metabolic problems, hypoxic-­
ischemic injury, or congenital malformations. In addition, in this age-­
group, a syndrome of multifocal severe partial seizures with progressive
mental regression and cerebral atrophy called epilepsy of infancy with
migrating focal seizures (EIMFS; previously called malignant migrating partial seizures of infancy) has been described. Some cases of EIMFS
are secondary to pathogenic variants in the calcium-­sensitive potassium
channel KCNT1. Brain malformations causing focal epilepsy include
focal cortical dysplasia, hemimegalencephaly, Sturge-­Weber cutaneous
lesion, tuberous sclerosis, and congenital tumors such as ganglioglioma
and dysembryoplastic neuroepithelial tumors and others. The intractable seizures can be focal seizures with or without impaired awareness, focal to bilateral tonic-­clonic seizures, or combinations thereof.
If secondary generalized seizures predominate and take the form of
absence-­like seizures and drop attacks, the clinical picture can mimic
the generalized epilepsy syndrome of Lennox-­Gastaut syndrome and
has been termed by some as pseudo–Lennox-­Gastaut syndrome.
Temporal lobe epilepsy can be caused by any temporal lobe lesion.
A common cause is mesial (also termed medial) temporal sclerosis,
a condition often preceded by febrile seizures. They are rarely genetic
in origin. Pathologically, these patients have atrophy, gliosis, or cortical dysplasia of the hippocampus and, in some these conditions, of the
amygdala. Some patients with mesial temporal sclerosis have pathogenic variants in SUCO. Medial temporal lobe epilepsy is the most
common cause of surgically remediable partial epilepsy in adolescents
and adults. Occasionally, in patients with other structural or genetic
focal or generalized epilepsies, the focal discharges are so continuous
that they cause an epileptic encephalopathy. Activation of temporal
discharges in sleep can lead to loss of speech and verbal auditory agnosia (Landau-­Kleffner epileptic aphasia syndrome). Activation of secondary generalized and at times focal discharges in sleep leads to more
global delay secondary to the syndrome of continuous spike waves in
slow-­wave sleep (>85% of the slow-­wave sleep recording is dominated
by discharges).
The syndrome of Rasmussen encephalitis is a form of chronic
encephalitis that manifests with unilateral intractable partial seizures,
epilepsia partialis continua, and progressive hemiparesis of the affected
side, with progressive atrophy of the involved hemisphere. The etiology is usually unknown, although autoimmune etiologies have been
hypothesized.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

633.4 Generalized Seizures and Related
Epilepsy Syndromes
Mohamad A. Mikati and Dmitry Tchapyjnikov

ABSENCE SEIZURES

Typical absence seizures usually start at 5-­8 years of age and are often,
because of their brevity, overlooked by parents for many months even
though they can occur up to hundreds of times per day. Unlike focal
seizures with impaired awareness, they do not have an aura, usually last

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 633 u Seizures in Childhood 3601
for only a few seconds, and are sometimes accompanied by eyelid flutter or upward rolling of the eyes but typically not by the usually more
florid automatisms seen in focal seizures with impaired awareness
(absence seizures can have simple automatisms such as lip smacking
or picking at clothing, and the head can very minimally fall forward).
Absence seizures do not have a postictal period and are characterized
by immediate resumption of what the patient was doing before the seizure. Hyperventilation for 3-­5 minutes can precipitate the seizures and
the accompanying 3-­Hz spike–and–slow-­wave discharges. The presence of eye closure eyelid myoclonia (Jeavons syndrome) and periorbital, perioral, or limb myoclonic jerks (the latter called myoclonic
absences) with the typical absence seizures usually predicts difficulty
in controlling the seizures with medications. Early-­onset absence seizures (<4 years of age) or drug resistance should trigger evaluation for
a glucose transporter defect, which is often associated with low CSF
glucose levels and an abnormal sequencing test of the SLC2A1 transporter gene.
Atypical absence seizures have associated myoclonic components
and tone changes of the head (head drop) and body, usually last longer than typical absence seizures, and are also usually more difficult to
treat. They are precipitated by drowsiness and are usually accompanied
by 1-­to 2-­Hz spike–and–slow-­wave discharges.
Juvenile absence seizures are similar to typical absences but occur
at a later age and are accompanied by 4-­to 6-­Hz spike–and–slow-­wave
and polyspike–and–slow-­wave discharges. These are usually associated
with juvenile myoclonic epilepsy (see “Benign Generalized Epilepsies”).

GENERALIZED MOTOR SEIZURES

The most common generalized motor seizures are generalized tonic-­
clonic seizures that can be either primarily generalized (bilateral) or
focal to bilateral tonic-­clonic (as described in Chapter 633.3) from
a unilateral focus. If there is no partial component, the seizure usually starts with loss of consciousness and, at times, with a sudden cry,
upward rolling of the eyes, and a generalized tonic contraction with
falling, apnea, and cyanosis. In some, a clonic or myoclonic component
precedes the tonic stiffening. The tonic phase is followed by a clonic
phase that, as the seizure progresses, shows slowing of the rhythmic
contractions until the seizure stops, usually 1-­2 minutes later. Incontinence and a postictal period often follow. The latter usually lasts for
a few minutes up to several hours with semicoma or obtundation and
postictal sleepiness, weakness, ataxia, hyperreflexia or hyporeflexia, and
headaches. There is a risk of aspiration and injury. First aid measures
include positioning the patient on his or her side, clearing the mouth
if it is open, loosening tight clothes or jewelry, and gently extending
the head and, if necessary, insertion of an airway by a trained professional. The mouth should not be forced open with a foreign object (this
could dislodge teeth, causing aspiration) or with a finger in the mouth
(this could result in serious injury to the examiner’s finger). Many
patients have single genetic generalized tonic-­clonic seizures that
may be associated with a concurrent illness or with a cause that cannot be ascertained (see Chapter 633.2). Generalized tonic, atonic, and
astatic seizures often occur in severe generalized pediatric epilepsies.
Generalized myoclonic seizures can occur in either benign or difficult-­
to-­control generalized epilepsies (see “Benign Generalized Epilepsies”
and “Severe Generalized Epilepsies”).

BENIGN GENERALIZED EPILEPSIES

Childhood absence epilepsy typically starts in mid-­childhood, and
most patients outgrow it before adulthood. Approximately 25% of
patients also develop generalized tonic-­clonic seizures, half before and
half after the onset of absences. Benign myoclonic epilepsy of infancy
consists of the onset of myoclonic and other seizures during the first
year of life, with generalized 3-­Hz spike–and–slow-­wave discharges.
Often, it is initially difficult to distinguish this type from more severe
syndromes, but follow-­up clarifies the diagnosis. GEFS+ manifests as
febrile seizures and multiple types of generalized seizures in multiple
family members, and at times different individuals within the same
family manifest different generalized and febrile seizure types (see
Chapter 633.1).

Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy (Janz syndrome) is the most common
generalized epilepsy in young adults, accounting for 5% of all epilepsies. It has been linked to pathogenic variants in many genes, including CACNB4; CLNC2; EJM2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9; GABRA1; GABRD; and
myoclonin1/EFHC1. Typically, it starts in early adolescence with one
or more of the following manifestations: myoclonic jerks in the morning, often causing the patient to drop things; generalized tonic-­clonic
or clonic-­tonic-­clonic seizures upon awakening; and juvenile absences.
Sleep deprivation, alcohol (in older patients), and photic stimulation or, rarely, certain cognitive activities can act as precipitants. The
EEG usually shows generalized 4-­to 5-­Hz polyspike–and–slow-­wave
discharges.
There are other forms of generalized epilepsies such as photoparoxysmal epilepsy, in which generalized tonic-­clonic, absence, or myoclonic generalized seizures are precipitated by photic stimuli such as
strobe lights, flipping through TV channels, and viewing video games.
Other forms of reflex (i.e., stimulus-­provoked) epilepsy can occur;
associated seizures are usually generalized, although some may be focal
(see Chapter 633.9).

SEVERE GENERALIZED EPILEPSIES

Severe generalized epilepsies are associated with intractable seizures
and developmental delay. Early myoclonic encephalopathy (EME)
starts during the first 2 months of life with severe myoclonic seizures
and a burst suppression pattern on EEG. It is usually caused by inborn
errors of metabolism such as nonketotic hyperglycinemia. Early infantile epileptic encephalopathy (Ohtahara syndrome) has a similar
age of onset and EEG but manifests as tonic seizures and is usually
caused by brain malformations or various epileptogenic gene mutations. The term early infantile epileptic encephalopathy (EIEE) has also
been applied to the increasing number (∼36) of other genetic epileptic encephalopathies and developmental epileptic encephalopathies
that are associated with an increasing number of specific genes with
pathogenic variants (Table 633.11); these may or may not manifest as
Ohtahara syndrome, but all share the characteristic of early-­onset epileptic encephalopathy. For example, EIEE type 4 is Ohtahara syndrome
caused by syntaxin-­
binding protein 1 pathogenic variants. Severe
myoclonic epilepsy of infancy (Dravet syndrome), most often caused
by pathogenic variants in SCN1A, starts as focal febrile status epilepticus or focal febrile seizures and later manifests as myoclonic and other
seizure types (see Chapter 633.1).
West syndrome starts between the ages of 2 and 12 months and
consists of a triad of infantile epileptic spasms that usually occur in
clusters (particularly in drowsiness or upon arousal), developmental
regression, and a typical EEG picture called hypsarrhythmia (see Fig.
633.6). Hypsarrhythmia is a high-­voltage, slow, chaotic background
with multifocal spikes. Patients with cryptogenic/idiopathic (referred
to as unknown etiology) West syndrome have normal development
before onset, whereas patients with symptomatic West syndrome have
preceding developmental delay owing to perinatal encephalopathies,
malformations, underlying metabolic disorders, infections like with
congenital Zika virus, or other etiologies (see Chapter 633.2). In males,
West syndrome can also be caused by ARX gene variants (often associated with ambiguous genitalia and cortical migration abnormalities).
West syndrome, especially in cases where the etiology is unknown
(i.e., cases that are not explained by the presence of a gene variant or
a structural brain anomaly), is a medical emergency because a delay
in diagnosis of 3 weeks or longer can affect the long-­term prognosis.
The spasms are often overlooked by parents and by physicians, being
mistaken for startles caused by colic or other benign paroxysmal syndromes (see Chapter 634).
Lennox-­Gastaut syndrome typically starts between the ages of 2
and 10 years and consists of a triad of developmental delay, multiple
seizure types that as a rule include atypical absences, and myoclonic,
astatic, and tonic seizures, as well as specific EEG abnormalities. The
tonic and/or atonic seizures occur either in wakefulness (causing falls
and injuries, broadly termed drop attacks) or also, typically, in sleep.
The third component is the EEG findings (see Fig. 633.6): 1-­to 2-­Hz
spike and slow waves, polyspike bursts in sleep (also called generalized

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3602 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 633.11  Early Infantile Epileptic Encephalopathy
(EIEE)
GENE

PROTEIN

ARX (EIEE1)

Aristaless-­related homeobox

CDKL5 (EIEE2)

Cyclin-­dependent kinase-­like 5

SLC25A22 (EIEE3)

Mitochondrial glutamate carrier 1

STXBP1 (EIEE4)

Syntaxin-­binding protein 1

SPTAN1 (EIEE5)

α2-­Spectrin

SCN1A (EIEE6)

Sodium-­channel protein type 1α

KCNQ2 (EIEE7)

Potassium voltage-­gated channel

ARHGEF9 (EIEE8)

Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factor 9

PDCH19 (EIEE9)

Protocadherin-­19

PNKP (EIEE10)

Bifunctional polynucleotide phosphatase/kinase

SCN2A (EIEE11)

Sodium-­channel protein type 2α

PLCβ1 (EIEE12)

Phospholipase C β1

SCN8A (EIEE13)

Sodium-­channel, voltage-­gated, type VIII, alpha
subunit

KCNT1 (EIEE14)

Potassium-­channel subfamily T, member 1

ST3GAL3 (EIEE15)

ST3 beta-­galactoside alpha-­2,3-­sialyltransferase 3

TBC1D24 (EIEE16)

TBC1 domain family, member 24

GNAO1 (EIEE17)

Guanine nucleotide-­binding protein G(o)
subunit alpha

SZT2 (EIEE18)

Seizure threshold 2 homolog

GABRA1 (EIEE19)

Gamma-­aminobutyric acid receptor subunit
alpha-­1

PIGA (EIEE20)

Phosphatidylinositol N-­
acetylglucosaminyltransferase subunit A

NECAP1 (EIEE21)

Adaptin ear-­binding coat-­associated protein 2

SLC35A2 (EIEE22)

UDP-­galactose translocator

DOCK7 (EIEE23)

Dedicator of cytokinesis 7

HCN1 (EIEE24)

Potassium/sodium hyperpolarization–activated
cyclic nucleotide-­gated channel 1

SLC13A5 (EIEE25)

Solute carrier family 13 (sodium-­dependent
citrate transporter), member 5

KCNB1 (EIEE26)

Potassium voltage-­gated channel, Shab-­related
subfamily, member 1

GRIN2B (EIEE27)

NMDA receptor subtype 2B

WWOX (EIEE28)

WW domain–containing oxidoreductase

AARS (EIEE29)

Alanyl-­tRNA synthetase

SIK1 (EIEE30)

Salt inducible kinase 1

DNM1 (EIEE31)

Dynamin-­1

KCNA2 (EIEE32)

Potassium voltage-­gated channel subfamily A
member 2

EEF1A2 (EIEE33)

Elongation factor 1-­alpha 2

SLC12A5 (EIEE34)

Potassium–chloride transporter member 5

ITPA (EIEE35)

Inosine triphosphate pyrophosphatase

ALG13 (EIEE36)

Asparagine-­linked glycosylation 13 homolog

paroxysmal fast activity or GPFA), and a slow background in wakefulness. Most patients are left with long-­term cognitive impairment
and intractable seizures despite multiple therapies. Some patients start
with Ohtahara syndrome, develop West syndrome, and then progress
to Lennox-­
Gastaut syndrome. Myoclonic astatic epilepsy (Doose

syndrome) is a syndrome similar to, but milder than, Lennox-­Gastaut
syndrome and is characterized by seizures consisting of myoclonic
jerking rapidly followed by an atonic (astatic) drop attack. Patients with
Doose syndrome usually do not have tonic seizures or polyspike bursts
in sleep. The prognosis is more favorable than that for Lennox-­Gastaut
syndrome. Another syndrome characterized by atonic seizures causing
head nodding as well as tonic, clonic, and stimulus-­sensitive seizures
is nodding syndrome, which is seen in some African countries and
is often associated with encephalopathy, stunted growth, and variable
degrees of cognitive deficits. The underlying etiology is a likely autoimmune reaction to the parasitic worm Onchocerca volvulus. The head
nodding is associated with generalized slow waves and electrodecrement, likely representing generalized ictal activity, but is commonly
resistant to drug therapy.
Progressive myoclonic epilepsies (EPM) are a group of epilepsies
characterized by progressive dementia and worsening myoclonic and
other seizures. Type I, or Unverricht-­Lundborg disease, is caused by
pathogenic variants in the CSTB gene, is more slowly progressive than
the other types, and usually starts in adolescence. Type II, or Lafora
body disease, can have an early childhood onset but usually starts in
adolescence, is more quickly progressive, and is usually fatal within the
second or third decade of life. It can be associated with photosensitivity,
manifests periodic acid–Schiff–positive Lafora inclusions on muscle or
skin biopsy (in eccrine sweat gland cells), and has been shown to be
caused by laforin (EPM2A) or malin (EPM2B) gene variants and possibly PRDM8 in 90% of patients. Other causes of progressive myoclonic
epilepsy include myoclonic epilepsy with ragged red fibers (MERRF,
caused by various pathogenic variants in mitochondrial DNA), sialidosis type I (caused by variants in NEU1), neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (lysosomal storage disorders caused by variants in CLN1-­CLN14),
type 3 neuronopathic Gaucher disease (caused by lysosomal glucocerebrosidase deficiency), dentatorubral-­pallidoluysian atrophy
(caused by unstable expansion of trinucleotide repeats on the ATN1
gene), action myoclonus–renal failure syndrome (aka EPM4, caused
by variants in SCARB2), progressive myoclonus epilepsy–ataxia syndrome (aka EPM5, caused by variants in PRICKLE1), and North Sea
progressive myoclonic epilepsy (aka EPM6, caused by variants in
GOSR2).
Myoclonic encephalopathy in nonprogressive disorders is an
epileptic encephalopathy that occurs in some congenital disorders
affecting the brain, such as Angelman syndrome, and consists of
almost continuous and difficult-­to-­treat myoclonic and, at times, other
seizures.
Landau-­Kleffner syndrome is a rare condition of presumed autoimmune but sometimes also of genetic (GRIN2A variants) etiology. It is
characterized by loss of language skills and by verbal auditory agnosia
in a previously normal child; ∼70% have associated clinical seizures.
The seizures, when they occur, are of several types, including focal with
preserved awareness, focal to bilateral tonic-­clonic, atypical absence,
focal with impaired awareness, and occasionally myoclonic seizures.
High-­amplitude spike-­and-­wave discharges predominate and tend to
be bitemporal. In the later evolutionary stages of the condition, the EEG
findings may be normal. The spike discharges are always more apparent during non–rapid eye movement sleep; a child in whom Landau-­
Kleffner syndrome is suspected should have an EEG during sleep. CT
and MRI studies typically yield normal results. In the related but clinically distinct epilepsy syndrome called epileptic encephalopathy with
continuous spike waves in slow-­wave sleep (CSWS), the discharges
occur in >85% of the slow-­wave sleep, a finding termed electrical
status epilepticus in sleep (ESES). ESES can also occur in Landau-­
Kleffner syndrome, but in CSWS the discharges are usually frontal or
generalized and the delays usually global. The approach to and therapy
for the two syndromes are similar. Although valproic acid and benzodiazepines are often used first, the evidence favors that they address
the seizures and that steroids and possibly nocturnal diazepam are the
more effective agents for the aphasia. Some children respond to the
combination of valproic acid and clobazam or to levetiracetam. Nocturnal diazepam (0.2-­0.5 mg/kg orally at bedtime for several months)
is often used as first-­or second-­line therapy, as are steroids used either

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 633 u Seizures in Childhood 3603
orally (more commonly studied) or intravenously. Oral prednisone is
started at 2 mg/kg/day for 1-­2 months, then weaned over a period of
1-­3 months. Alternatively, monthly infusions of high-­dose intravenous
methylprednisolone have been used instead of oral steroids. Long-­term
therapy is often needed irrespective of which drug(s) elicit a patient
response. If the seizures and aphasia persist after diazepam and steroid trials, then a course of IVIGs should be considered because many
patients can respond to that. It is imperative to initiate speech therapy
and maintain it for several years, because improvement in language
function occurs over a prolonged period.
Amenably treatable metabolic epilepsies are well recognized (see
Table 633.6). Pyridoxine-­dependent epilepsy typically presents with
a neonatal or infantile (and rarely childhood) onset of encephalopathy
with, at times, reports of increased fetal movements (seizures) in utero.
There are recurrent focal motor seizures, generalized tonic seizures,
and myoclonus. Seizures progress to status epilepticus if no pyridoxine is used. Diagnosis is confirmed by the presence of elevated plasma,
urine, and CSF α-­aminoadipic semialdehyde and elevated plasma and
CSF pipecolic acid levels. The presence of either homozygous or compound heterozygous pathogenic variants in ALDH7A1 (which encode
the protein antiquitin) confirms the diagnosis. The use of pyridoxine
100 mg daily orally (higher doses, up to 500-­600 mg/day, have been
used) or intravenously helps stop the seizures. Variants of PROSC can
also cause pyridoxine-­
dependent epilepsy. Pyridoxal phosphate–
responsive neonatal epileptic encephalopathy (pyridox[am]ine
5′-­phosphate oxidase [PNPO] deficiency) may present similarly in the
absence of gastrointestinal symptoms sometimes seen with pyridoxine-­
dependent epilepsy. Diagnostically, there are reduced pyridoxal phosphate levels in the CSF with increased levels of CSF levodopa and
3-­methoxytyrosine, along with decreased CSF homovanillic acid and
5-­hydroxyindoleacetic acid. The EEG may show a burst suppression
pattern. Treatment is by enteral administration of pyridoxal phosphate
(up to 50 mg/kg/day every 6 hours). Folinic acid–responsive seizures
may also present with neonatal or infantile epileptic encephalopathy
and intractable seizures. Some of these patients have a diagnostic profile similar to that of pyridoxine-­dependent epilepsy patients, and their
disorder is caused by the same gene variants but responds to folinic
acid supplementation in addition to pyridoxine. Cerebral folate deficiency, which also responds to high doses of folinic acid (1-­3 mg/kg/
day), may manifest with epilepsy, intellectual disability, developmental
regression, dyskinesias, and autism. CSF 5-­methyltetrahydrofolate levels are decreased, with normal plasma and red blood cell folate levels.
There are usually pathogenic variants in the folate receptor (FOLR1)
gene or blocking autoantibodies against membrane-­associated folate
receptors of the choroid plexus. Tetrahydrobiopterin deficiencies
with or without hyperphenylalaninemia may present with epilepsies
and symptoms resulting from deficiencies of dopamine (parkinsonism, dystonia), noradrenaline (axial hypotonia), serotonin (depression,
insomnia, temperature changes), and folate (myelin formation, basal
ganglia calcifications, and seizures). Treatment is by substitution therapy with tetrahydrobiopterin and neurotransmitter precursors started
as early as possible. Creatine deficiency syndromes present typically
with developmental delay, seizures, autistic features, and movement
disorders and are diagnosed by gene sequencing and abnormal levels of
urine creatine and guanidinoacetic acid and/or, particularly in the case
of creatine transporter deficiency, an absent creatine peak on MR spectroscopy of the brain. Use of creatine monohydrate and dietary restrictions is helpful. Biotinidase deficiency presenting as developmental
delay, seizures, ataxia, alopecia, and skin rash and often associated with
intermittent metabolic acidosis and an organic acid profile of lactic and
propionic acidemia, responds to the use of biotin. Serine biosynthesis
defects with low serine levels in plasma or CSF amino acids often present
with congenital microcephaly, intractable seizures, and psychomotor
retardation and respond to supplemental serine and glycine. Developmental delay, epilepsy, and neonatal diabetes are caused by activating
pathogenic variants in the adenosine triphosphate–sensitive potassium channels. Sulfonylurea drugs that block the potassium channel
treat the neonatal diabetes and probably also favorably affect the CNS
symptoms and affect seizures. Hyperinsulinism-­hyperammonemia

syndrome is caused by activating variants of the glutamate dehydrogenase encoded by GLUD1. Patients present with hypoglycemic seizures
after a protein-­rich meal with hyperammonemia (ammonia levels 80-­
150 μmol/L). They are managed with a combination of protein restriction, AEDs, and diazoxide (a potassium channel agonist that inhibits
insulin release). GLUT-­1 deficiency syndrome (caused by pathogenic
variants in SLC2A1, which encodes for a glucose transporter) classically
presents with infantile-­onset epilepsy, developmental delay, acquired
microcephaly, and complex movement disorders. It causes impaired
glucose transport to the brain that is typically diagnosed by genetic
testing or a finding of low CSF lactate and CSF glucose or low CSF–
to–serum glucose ratios (<0.4). The manifestations of the disease are
usually responsive to the ketogenic diet. Thiamine transporter variants with acute basal ganglia disease often presents with accompanying seizures and is responsive to biotin and thiamine supplementation.
Riboflavin transporter deficiency can also manifest as a seizure in
addition to the usual symptoms of neuromuscular (polyneuropathy)
weakness; it is treated with high-­dose riboflavin supplementation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

633.5 Mechanisms of Seizures
Mohamad A. Mikati, Muhammad S. Zafar, and
Dmitry Tchapyjnikov
There are four distinct, often sequential, mechanistic processes in the
pathophysiology of epilepsy. First is the underlying etiology, which is
any pathology or pathologic process that can disrupt neuronal function and connectivity, leading to the second process (epileptogenesis),
which makes the brain epileptic. Sometimes the underlying etiology
can directly increase excitability even without the contribution of the
downstream effects of epileptogenesis.
In some genetic epilepsies, a disorder in ion channel function and/
or structure is the underlying etiology that leads to aberrant signal
transduction, which can cause seizures (see Tables 633.2-­633.4). These
variants can involve voltage-­gated channels (Na+, K+, Ca2+, Cl−, and
HCN [hydrogen cyanide]), ligand-­gated channels (nicotinic acetylcholine and γ-­aminobutyric acid A receptors [GABAA]), or other proteins.
For example, in Dravet syndrome, the loss-­of-­function pathogenic
variant in SCN1A encodes a voltage-­gated sodium channel and causes
decreased excitability in inhibitory GABAergic interneurons, leading
to increased excitability and epilepsy. In human cortical dysplasia, the
expression of the NR2B subunit of the NMDA receptor is increased,
leading to excessive depolarizing currents. Gene variants can also
affect neurotransmitter function through other mechanisms (see Table
633.3). For example, ARX variants can lead to dysfunction in GABAergic neurons and can cause X-­linked West syndrome, among other epilepsies. In fragile X syndrome, it is hypothesized that variants in FMR
cause enhanced glutamatergic signaling via the mGluR5 receptor. In
Rett syndrome, variants in MECP2 lead to increased NMDA receptor
expression, which can cause epilepsy and other symptoms associated
with the disorder.
In infantile spasms, animal models suggest that increases in the
stress-­related corticotropin-­releasing hormone, sodium channel blockade, and NMDA receptor stimulation are contributing mechanisms.
Autoimmune etiologies for epilepsy are also recognized. Autoantibodies, sometimes generated because of cross-­reactivity from a recent
infection or secondary to a malignancy, can bind to extracellular receptors or other proteins expressed in neurons. This, in turn, leads to an
inflammatory response and, in some cases, seizures. NMDA-­receptor
antibody encephalitis is probably the best-­characterized autoimmune
cause of epilepsy. Other epilepsy syndromes have been associated with
autoantibodies targeting the voltage-­gated potassium channel complex
(anti-­LGI2 and anti-­CASPR2), GABA receptors (GABA-­A and GABA­B), glycine receptors, and glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD).
Abnormalities in the structure of the brain can be the underlying
etiology for epilepsy. The structural abnormalities can be scarring from

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3604 Part XXV u The Nervous System
previous injuries (hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy [HIE], stroke,
cerebral hemorrhage), brain tumors, vascular malformations (cavernomas or arteriovenous malformations), and Sturge-­Weber syndrome.
In some cases where no identifying underlying etiology is found, epilepsy may be from the self-­resolving maturational process of developing brains like BECTS and childhood occipital epilepsy syndromes
(Gastaut and Panayiotopoulos types).
Second, epileptogenesis is the mechanism through which the brain,
or part of it, turns epileptic. The role of large-­scale molecular cell signaling pathways in epileptogenesis has been implicated in the mechanisms leading to epilepsy, namely, the mammalian target of rapamycin
(mTOR), the Ras/ERK, and repressor element 1 (RE1)–silencing
transcription factor (REST) pathways. The mTOR pathway is seen in
tuberous sclerosis, hemimegalencephaly, and cortical dysplasia–related
epilepsies; the Ras/ERK pathway in a number of syndromes; and the
REST pathway in epileptogenesis after acute neuronal injury. Repeat
seizures lead through the earlier and other mechanisms to rewiring of
the brain and to long-­term epilepsy.
The third process is the resultant epileptic state of increased excitability present in all patients irrespective of the underlying etiology or
mechanism of epileptogenesis. A dysregulation of glutamatergic excitation versus GABAergic inhibition occurs in epileptogenic neurons,
which creates a seizure focus or network.
The fourth process is seizure-­related neuronal injury, as often is
demonstrated by MRI in patients after prolonged status epilepticus
or those with long-­term drug-­resistant epilepsy. Many patients show
acute swelling in the hippocampus or other regions after status epilepticus and long-­term hippocampal atrophy with sclerosis on MRI.
There is evidence from surgically resected epileptic tissue that apoptotic pathways are activated in foci of drug-­resistant epilepsy. There is
evidence that the pathophysiology of epileptic seizures, whether focal
or generalized, and of the coexisting comorbidities involves disruption
of neural networks of the brain resulting not only in increased excitability but the often-­associated abnormal neurologic dysfunction.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

633.6 Treatment of Seizures and Epilepsy
Mohamad A. Mikati, Muhammad S. Zafar, and
Dmitry Tchapyjnikov

DECIDING ON LONG-­TERM THERAPY

After a first seizure, if the risk of recurrence is low, such as when the
patient has a normal neurodevelopmental status, EEG, and MRI (risk
∼20%), treatment is usually not started. If the patient has an abnormal
EEG, MRI, developmental status, and/or neurologic exam and/or has
a positive family history of epilepsy, the risk is higher, and often treatment is started. Other considerations are also important, such as motor
vehicle driving status and type of employment in older patients or the
parents’ ability to manage recurrences or AED therapy in children. The
decision is individualized and should be discussed with the family.
Figure 633.8 presents an overview of the approach to the treatment of
seizures and epilepsy.

COUNSELING

An important part of the management of a patient with epilepsy is educating the family and the child about the disease, its management, and
the limitations it might impose and how to live with them. Restrictions
on driving (in adolescents), swimming, and certain sports are usually
necessary (Table 633.12). In most states, the physician is not required
to report the epileptic patient to the motor vehicle registry; this is the
patient’s responsibility. The physician is then requested to complete
a specific form for patients who are being cleared to drive. In addition, in most states, a seizure-­free period of 6 months, and in some
states longer, is required before driving is allowed. Often swimming
in rivers, lakes, or the sea and underwater diving are prohibited, but

swimming in pools may be allowable. When swimming, even patients
with epilepsy under excellent control should be under the continuous
supervision of an observer who is aware of the condition and capable
of lifeguard-­level rescue.
The physician, parents, and child should jointly evaluate the risk of
involvement in athletic activities. To participate in athletics, proper
medical management, good seizure control, and proper supervision
are crucial to avoid significant risks. The ILAE Task Force on Sports
and Epilepsy recommendations group sports into categories based on
the potential risk of injury or death to the patient and to bystanders.
Group 1 sports are associated with no significant additional risk to
patients with epilepsy and include most athletics (excluding pole vaulting), bowling, most collective contact sports such as judo and wrestling,
most ground-­based collective sports (e.g., baseball, basketball, cricket,
field hockey, football, rugby), cross country skiing, curling, dancing,
golf, and racquet sports, including tennis and table tennis. Group 2
sports are associated with moderate risk to patients with epilepsy but
not to bystanders; they include alpine skiing, archery, pole vaulting,
biathlon/triathlon/modern pentathlon, canoeing, collective sports that
can potentially lead to serious injury (e.g., boxing, karate, kickboxing),
cycling, fencing, gymnastics, horse riding, ice hockey, shooting, skateboarding, roller and ice skating, skiing and snowboarding, swimming,
water skiing, and weightlifting. Group 3 sports are considered high
risk for the patient and for bystanders; they include aviation, climbing,
platform and springboard diving, horse racing, motorsports, parachuting and other forms of skydiving, rodeo, scuba diving, ski jumping,
solitary sailing, and surfing and windsurfing (see Table 633.12). In general, there has been a shift toward encouraging safe sports participation
in patients with epilepsy rather than indiscriminately restricting their
participation; however, the decision has to be individualized to the
patient and his or her family. Staying physically active has been shown
to reduce the chance for neuropsychologic impairments that often are
associated with epilepsy.
Counseling is helpful to support the family and to educate them
about the resources available in the community. Educational and, in
some cases, a psychologic evaluation may be necessary to evaluate
for possible learning disabilities or abnormal behavioral patterns that
might coexist with epilepsy. Epilepsy does carry a risk of increased
mortality rates (2 or more times the standardized mortality rates of the
general population) and of sudden unexpected death. This is mostly
related to the conditions associated with or underlying epilepsy (e.g.,
tumor, metabolic diseases), to poor seizure control (e.g., in patients
with severe epileptic encephalopathies or drug-­resistant seizures), and
to poor compliance with prescribed therapies. Thus it is recommended
that family members be informed about this increased risk without
inappropriately increasing their anxiety. Many family members feel
they need to observe the patient continuously in wakefulness and sleep
and have the patient sleep in the parents’ room to detect seizures. There
are advertised seizure-­detection devices that use motion sensors placed
under the mattress or worn on the wrist to detect seizures. Some are
disappointing and ineffective in detecting seizures, whereas data from
other equipment are encouraging. They are useful in detecting a majority of generalized tonic-­clonic seizures during sleep; most have not been
rigorously studied. Whether such measures can reduce the risk of sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) remains to be seen. The
parents need to guard against being overprotective to avoid adversely
affecting the child’s psychology. Education about what to do in case of
seizures, the choices of treatment or no treatment and medications and
their side effects, and the potential complications of epilepsy should
be provided to the parents and, if the child is old enough, to the child.

PRINCIPLE OF DRUG THERAPY

The clinical pharmacology of an AED consists of three important facets: pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, and pharmacogenomics.
Pharmacokinetics describes how the body affects antiepileptics
after administration through the mechanisms of absorption and distribution, as well as the metabolic changes of the substance in the body.
The steps involved in pharmacokinetics are liberation (the process of
release of a drug from the pharmaceutical formulation), absorption

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 633 u Seizures in Childhood 3605
Did the child have a seizure?

NO

YES

Benign paroxysmal
vertigo
Breath holding
Cough syncope
Familial choreoathetosis
Hereditary chin trembling
Shuddering attacks
Narcolepsy
Night terror
Pseudoseizures
Rage attack
Benign myoclonus of
infancy
Tics

Recurrent seizures
Drug compliance?
Improper dose?
Incorrect drug?
Metabolic disorder?
Underlying structural lesion?
Drug interaction?
CNS degenerative disease?
Intractable seizures?

Initial Seizure
Fasting blood sugar,
calcium, metabolic
studies dictated by
history and physical;
EEG?
CT scan?
MRI?
CSF examination?

Studies and Examination

Abnormal
Symptomatic seizures
Treat underlying cause
(hypoglycemia,
urea cycle abnormality,
meningitis, temporal
lobe tumor, etc.)
Antiepileptic drugs if
necessary

Normal
Isolated first seizure
with normal EEG
Negative family history
No continuous drug
treatment
Close observation
Prescribe rescue
medications (rectal
diazepam) for
seizures longer than
5 min

Normal (except EEG)
Consider drug therapy

Follow-up

Poor control
Consider hospitalization
Prolonged EEG
recording and video monitoring for
possible epilepsy surgery candidacy
Readjust medication
Reconsider underlying
pathology with reinvestigation with CT or MRI
Frequent follow-up

Good control
Regular follow-up
Antiepileptic drug levels
Monitor toxicity (CBC,
liver function,
behavioral, learning)
EEG as indicated

Fig. 633.8 Algorithm for the approach to the child with a suspected convulsive disorder.
Table 633.12  Sports and Special Considerations for the Child with Epilepsy*
CLINICAL SITUATION

GROUP 1

GROUP 2

GROUP 3

Acute symptomatic seizures (one or
more)

Permitted

Neurologist’s discretion

Neurologist’s discretion

One unprovoked seizure

Permitted

Permitted if >12 mo of seizure
freedom

Permitted if >12 mo of seizure
freedom

Seizure freedom for >12 mo

Permitted

Permitted

Permitted

Sleep-­related seizures

Permitted

Neurologist’s discretion

Neurologist’s discretion

Seizures without impaired awareness

Permitted

Neurologist’s discretion

Not recommended

Seizures with impaired awareness

Neurologist’s discretion

Neurologist’s discretion

Not recommended

Resolved epilepsy with no seizures
>10 yr and off AEDs >5 yr

Permitted

Permitted

Permitted

Medication withdrawal

Neurologist’s discretion

Neurologist’s discretion

Neurologist’s discretion

*Specific advice should be individualized, depending on the patient’s clinical condition. Group 1: low-­risk sports; Group 2: moderate-­risk sports; Group 3: high-­risk sports. Refer to
Chapter 633.6 for further details about the definition of each group.
Modified from Capovilla G, Kaufman KR, Perucca E, et al. Epilepsy, seizures, physical exercise, and sports: a report from the ILAE Task Force on Sports and Epilepsy. Epilepsia. 2016;57:6–12.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3606 Part XXV u The Nervous System
(the process of a substance entering the blood circulation), distribution
(the dispersion or dissemination of substances throughout the fluids
and tissues of the body), metabolism (the irreversible transformation
of parent compounds into daughter metabolites), and excretion (the
removal of the substances from the body).
Pharmacodynamics describes the biochemical and physiologic
effect of AED dose or concentration. The response may be desirable
(effectiveness) or untoward (toxicity). Pharmacogenomics is the study
of how variant forms of human genes contribute to interindividual
variability in drug response.

MECHANISMS OF ACTION OF ANTIEPILEPTIC
DRUGS

AEDs reduce excitability by interfering with sodium, potassium, or calcium ion channels by reducing excitatory neurotransmitter release or
function or enhancing GABAergic inhibition (Fig. 633.9). Most medications have multiple mechanisms of action, and the exact mechanism
responsible for their activity in human epilepsy is usually not fully
understood. Often, medications acting on sodium channels are effective against partial seizures, and medications acting on T-­type calcium
channels are effective against absence seizures. Voltage-­gated sodium
channels are blocked by felbamate, valproate, topiramate, carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, lamotrigine, phenytoin, rufinamide, lacosamide,
and zonisamide. T-­type calcium channels found in the thalamus area

are blocked by valproate, zonisamide, and ethosuximide. Voltage-­gated
calcium channels are inhibited by gabapentin, pregabalin, lamotrigine,
and felbamate. N-­type calcium channels are inhibited by levetiracetam.
GABAA receptors are activated by phenobarbital, benzodiazepines,
topiramate, felbamate, and levetiracetam. Tiagabine, by virtue of its
binding to GABA transporters 1 (GAT-­1) and 3 (GAT-­3), is a GABA
reuptake inhibitor. GABA levels are increased by vigabatrin via its irreversible inhibition of GABA transaminases. Valproate inhibits GABA
transaminases, acts on GABAB presynaptic receptors (also done by
gabapentin), and activates glutamic acid decarboxylase (the enzyme
that forms GABA).
Glutaminergic transmission is decreased by felbamate that blocks
NMDA and AMPA (α-­amino-­3-­hydroxy-­5-­methyl-­4-­isoxazole-­
propionic acid)/kainate receptors. Topiramate also blocks AMPA/kainate receptors. Levetiracetam and brivaracetam bind to the presynaptic
vesicle protein SV2A found in all neurotransmitter vesicles and possibly result in inhibition of presynaptic neurotransmitter release in a use-­
dependent manner. Perampanel blocks glutamate AMPA receptors.
The precise mechanisms by which cannabidiol (CBD) exerts its
anticonvulsant effect in humans are unknown. CBD does not appear
to exert its anticonvulsant effects through interaction with cannabinoid receptors. Fenfluramine increases extracellular levels of serotonin through interaction with serotonin transporter proteins and
exhibits agonist activity at serotonin 5HT-­2 receptors. Everolimus is

Fig. 633.9 Mechanisms of action of AEDs, which are diverse, mainly involving modulation of voltage-­activated ion channels, potentiation of

GABA, and inhibition of glutamate. Approved AEDs have effects on inhibitory (left-­hand side) and excitatory (right-­hand side) nerve terminals. The
antiepileptic efficacy in trials of most of these drugs as initial add-­ons does not differ greatly, indicating that seemingly similar antiseizure activity
can be obtained by mechanisms aimed at diverse targets. However, putative mechanisms of action were determined only after discovering the
antiseizure effects; mechanism-­driven drug discovery has played only a minor role. AMPA, α-­Amino-­3-­hydroxy-­5-­methyl-­4-­isoxazole propionic acid;
GABA, γ-­aminobutyric acid; GAT-­1, sodium-­dependent and chloride-­dependent GABA transporter 1; SV2A, synaptic vesicle glycoprotein 2A. (From
Schmidt D, Schachter SC. Drug treatment of epilepsy in adults. BMJ. 2014;348:g254.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 633 u Seizures in Childhood 3607
an inhibitor of mTOR, a serine-­threonine kinase, downstream of the
PI3K/AKT pathway. The mTOR pathway is dysregulated (too active)
in tuberous sclerosis. Ganaxolone is a positive allosteric modulator of
synaptic and extrasynaptic GABAA receptors. It is being studied for
long-­term use in certain types of epilepsy and in acute treatment of
status epilepticus.
There is also a role for immune modulation in treating epilepsy, as
depicted by the use of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), IVIG,
oral prednisone, and intravenous methylprednisolone.

CHOICE OF DRUG ACCORDING TO SEIZURE TYPE
AND EPILEPSY SYNDROME

Drug therapy should be based on the type of seizure and the epilepsy
syndrome and on other individual factors. In general, the drugs of first
choice for focal seizures and epilepsies are oxcarbazepine and levetiracetam; for absence seizures, ethosuximide; for juvenile myoclonic
epilepsy, valproate (less so in women because of its hormonal and fetal
side effects); other choices include levetiracetam (which is often the
first drug to use in other primary generalized seizures), lamotrigine,
zonisamide, topiramate, and perampanel. There is significant controversy about these choices, and therapy should always be individualized
(see “Choice of Drug: Other Considerations”).
West syndrome is best treated with hormonal therapy in the form
of either ACTH injections or, possibly, oral steroids. There are several
protocols that range in dose from high to intermediate to low. The recommended regimen of ACTH (80 mg/mL) is a daily dose of 150 units/
m2 (divided into twice-­daily intramuscular injections of 75 units/m2)
administered over a 2-­week period with a subsequent gradual taper
over a 2-­week period (30 units/m2 in the morning for 3 days; 15 units/
m2 in the morning for 3 days; 10 units/m2 in the morning for 3 days;
and 10 units/m2 every other morning for 6 days; then stop). Response
is usually observed within the first 7 days. During the tapering period
of any regimen, spasm relapse can occur. Remediation entails increasing the dose to the previously effective dose for 2 weeks and then beginning the taper again. Synthetic ACTH (tetracosactide/cosyntropin) can
also be used as long as the long-­acting (depot) preparation is chosen.
Oral high-­dose prednisolone is a lower-­cost alternative to ACTH and
does not necessitate families learning how to administer intramuscular
injections; however, it may be inferior in efficacy to ACTH, particularly
in those with cryptogenic (of unknown etiology) West syndrome.
Awake and asleep EEGs are often done 1, 2, and 4 weeks after the
initiation of hormonal therapy to monitor the patient’s response, with
the aim of clearing the EEG from hypsarrhythmia and of stopping the
seizures. Side effects, more common with the higher doses, include
hypertension, electrolyte imbalance, infections, hyperglycemia and/
or glycosuria, and gastric ulcers. Prophylactic therapy for ulcers with
an H2 blocker or protein pump inhibitor is desirable while the patient
is receiving hormonal therapy. Also, live vaccines are contraindicated,
and other vaccines are not effective during ACTH and steroid therapy
because of the immune-­suppressive effects of these hormonal agents.
Thus all vaccines are not given during hormonal therapy and in the
period after it (usually ≤3 months after the last dose).
Vigabatrin can be used as a first-­line agent to treat infantile spasms
in patients with tuberous sclerosis and is the second-­line choice if hormonal therapy was unsuccessful in other cases of infantile spasms.
Its principal side effect is retinal toxicity, seen in approximately 30%
of patients, most often if the drug is used for longer than 6 months,
with resultant visual field defects that persist despite the withdrawal of
the drug. Because of this toxicity, vigabatrin is available only through
a restricted distribution Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategy
(REMS) program. The level of evidence for its efficacy is weaker than
that for ACTH but stronger than that of other alternative medications.
Emerging evidence suggests that dual treatment with vigabatrin and
hormonal therapy at the onset of spasms may be superior to hormonal
therapy alone but may predispose to the CNS neurotoxicity of vigabatrin associated with increased T2 signal in the basal ganglia. The ketogenic diet is probably the third-­line therapy. Subsequent alternative
treatment options for spasms include valproate, benzodiazepines such
as nitrazepam and clonazepam, topiramate, lamotrigine, zonisamide,

pyridoxine, and IVIG. None of these alternative drugs offers uniformly
satisfactory results. However, they are useful for decreasing the frequency and severity of seizures in patients with symptomatic infantile
spasms and as adjunctive therapy in patients with idiopathic infantile
spasms who do not respond completely to ACTH or vigabatrin.
Lennox-­Gastaut syndrome is another difficult-­
to-­
treat epilepsy
syndrome. Treatment of seizures in the syndrome varies according
to the preponderant seizure type. For drop attacks (tonic, atonic, or
myoclonic-­astatic seizures), clobazam, valproate, lamotrigine, topiramate, felbamate, and rufinamide are considered effective. The FDA
also approved CBD and fenfluramine to be used in Lennox-­Gastaut
syndrome. Fenfluramine is available only through a restricted distribution REMS program because of the risk of valvular heart disease and
pulmonary arterial hypertension.
Felbamate is used as a last-­resort medication because of its potential toxicity. These drugs might control other types of seizures (partial,
generalized tonic-­clonic, atypical absence, other tonic, myoclonic).
For patients who have a preponderance of atypical absence seizures,
valproate, lamotrigine, or ethosuximide are often suitable drugs to
try because they are relatively less toxic than many alternative drugs.
Clonazepam is often helpful but produces significant sedation, hyperactivity, and drooling and often tolerance to its antiepileptic effects
develops in a few months. Consequently, in Lennox-­Gastaut or other
drug-­resistant epilepsy syndromes, clonazepam is often used as a rescue medication for clusters of seizures (disintegrating tablet preparation) or as a bridge over a few days until dose changes of background
medications take effect. In resistant cases of Lennox-­Gastaut syndrome
and related epilepsies, ketogenic diet, zonisamide, levetiracetam, acetazolamide, methsuximide, corticosteroids, or IVIG can be used.
Dravet syndrome is usually treated with benzodiazepines such as
clobazam and with valproate. The ketogenic diet can also be useful in
patients with this syndrome, including cases with refractory status. Stiripentol, which is available in some countries, is useful, particularly if
used in combination with valproate and clobazam; doses need to be
adjusted because stiripentol can increase clobazam levels, and valproate
can increase stiripentol levels. Other medications include zonisamide
and topiramate. Lamotrigine, carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, and phenytoin are reported to exacerbate seizures in Dravet syndrome. Barbiturate use during status epilepticus in this syndrome is suspected to
be associated with adverse outcomes; consequently, alternative acute
therapies in such cases need to be considered.
The FDA has approved CBD and fenfluramine for the treatment
of seizures associated with Lennox-­
Gastaut syndrome or Dravet
syndrome in patients ≥2 years. The starting dose is 2.5 mg/kg taken
twice daily (5 mg/kg/day). After 1 week, the dose is usually increased
to a maintenance dosage of 5 mg/kg twice daily (10 mg/kg/day). If it
is tolerated and needed, the dose may be increased up to 10 mg/kg
twice daily (20 mg/kg/day). It comes as an oral solution (100 mg/mL).
Checking the package insert of all these medications before initiating
their use is essential because of the frequent interactions with concurrent antiseizure and other medications.
Absence seizures are most often initially treated with ethosuximide,
which is as effective as, but less toxic than, valproate; both are more
effective than lamotrigine (which has fewer side effects than valproate). Alternative drugs of first choice are lamotrigine and valproate,
especially if generalized tonic-­clonic seizures coexist with absence seizures. These two medications are effective against the latter seizures,
whereas ethosuximide is not. Patients resistant to ethosuximide might
still respond to valproate or to lamotrigine. In absence seizures, the
EEG is usually helpful in monitoring the response to therapy and is
often more sensitive than the parents’ observations in detecting these
seizures. The EEG often normalizes when complete seizure control is
achieved. This is usually not true for partial epilepsies. Other medications that could be used for absence seizures include acetazolamide,
zonisamide, or clonazepam.
Benign myoclonic epilepsies are often best treated with valproate,
particularly when patients have associated generalized tonic-­clonic
and absence seizures. Zonisamide, clonazepam, lamotrigine, and topiramate are alternatives.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3608 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Severe myoclonic epilepsies are treated with medications effective
for Lennox-­Gastaut syndromes, such as topiramate, clobazam, valproate, and zonisamide. Levetiracetam may also have efficacy in myoclonic epilepsies.
Focal and focal to bilateral tonic-­clonic seizures can be treated
with oxcarbazepine, levetiracetam, carbamazepine, phenobarbital,
topiramate, lacosamide, zonisamide, valproic acid, lamotrigine, clobazam, perampanel, or clonazepam (see Table 633.1). Oxcarbazepine and
levetiracetam are often used first.
Vigabatrin is the preferred treatment for infantile spasms due to
tuberous sclerosis. The FDA also approved CBD and everolimus to
treat a seizure in tuberous sclerosis in patients older than 2 years of age.
For children with ESES and SWS, nighttime benzodiazepine and
daily or pulsed-­dose steroids are preferentially used. Alternatively,
other AEDs like valproate, clobazam, levetiracetam, and acetazolamide
and ketogenic therapy have been used.

CHOICE OF DRUG: OTHER CONSIDERATIONS

Because there are many options for each patient, the choice of which
drug to use is always an individualized decision based on comparative effectiveness data from randomized controlled trials and on several
other considerations delineated next:
• Comparative effectiveness (Tables 633.13 and 633.14 list dosages)
and the potential for paradoxical seizure aggravation by some
AEDs (e.g., precipitation of myoclonic seizures by lamotrigine in
Dravet syndrome and exacerbation of absence seizures by carbamazepine and tiagabine) must be considered. Although many antiseizure medications have not been studied in the pediatric population, off-­label use of these medications in children is common, and
there are studies that have shown that, in general, their efficacy in
adults is predictive of their efficacy in children with the same seizure
types.

• Comparative tolerability (Table 633.15): Adverse effects can vary
according to the profile of the patient. The most prominent example
is the increased risk of liver toxicity for valproate therapy in children
who are younger than 2 years of age, taking polytherapy, and/or have
metabolic disorders. Thus if metabolic disorders are suspected, other
drugs should be considered first, and valproate should not be started
until the metabolic disorders are ruled out by normal amino acids,
organic acids, acylcarnitine profile, lactate, pyruvate, liver function
tests, and perhaps gene testing for mitochondrial disorders (see the
paragraph on the presence of comorbid conditions later). The choice
of an AED can also be influenced by the likelihood of occurrence
of nuisance side effects, such as weight gain (valproate, carbamazepine), gingival hyperplasia (phenytoin), alopecia (valproate), hyperactivity (benzodiazepines, barbiturates, levetiracetam, valproate,
gabapentin), or irritability/anger (levetiracetam and perampanel).
Children with behavior problems and/or with attention-­
deficit
disorder can become particularly hyperactive with the GABAergic
drugs mentioned earlier. This often affects the choice of medications.
In general, newer-­generation antiepileptic medications provide a
better side effect profile than older medications.
• Cost and availability: The cost of the newer AEDs often precludes
their use, particularly in developing countries. Many drugs are not
available in all countries (1) because they are too expensive; (2) because, paradoxically, they are too inexpensive (lower profit margin);
or (3) because of regulatory restrictions. AEDs have a narrow therapeutic range, and thus switching from brand name to generic formulations or from one generic to another can result in changes in levels
that could result in breakthrough seizures or side effects.
• Ease of initiation of the AED: Medications started very gradually,
such as lamotrigine and topiramate, should not be chosen in situations when there is a need to quickly achieve a therapeutic level. In
such situations, medications that have intravenous preparations or

Table 633.13  Comparison of Recommendations for the Treatment of Pediatric Epilepsy
FDA APPROVED†

SEIZURE TYPE OR EPILEPSY SYNDROME

ILAE (2013)* †

Focal-­onset

CBZ, ezogabine, lacosamide, LEV, LTG, OXC,
PB, PER, PHT, TPM, VGB

A: OXC
B: None
C: CBZ, PB, PHT, TPM, VGB, VPA
D: CLB, CZP, LTG, ZNS

BCECT

None

A, B: None
C: CBZ, VPA
D: GBP, LEV, OXC, STM

Childhood absence epilepsy

ESM, VPA

A: ESM, VPA
B: None
C: LTG
D: None

Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy

LEV, LTG, TPM

A, B, C: None
D: TPM, VPA

Lennox-­Gastaut syndrome

CLB, FLB, LTG, rufinamide (atonic), TPM

Not reviewed

Infantile spasms

ACTH, VGB

Not reviewed

Primary generalized tonic-­clonic seizures

LEV, LTG, TPM, PER

A: None
B: None
C: CBZ, PB, PHT, TPM, VPA
D: OXC

*ILAE recommendations are listed according to levels of evidence supporting the efficacy of the options. Level A: one or more class I randomized controlled trials (RCTs) or two or
more class II RCTs; Level B: one class II RCT or two or more class III RCTs; Level C: two or more class III RCTs; Level D: one class III double-­blind or open-­label study or one class IV
clinical study or data from expert committee reports, opinions from experienced clinicians.
†More recent data are available after FDA approval and ILAE review, and the implications of these data have been incorporated as much as possible into Table 633.13. Together,
these two tables aim to provide as complete a picture as possible of the state of the art and the approved indications for the therapy of pediatric epilepsy.
ACTH, Adrenocorticotropic hormone; BCECT, benign childhood epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes; CBZ, carbamazepine; CLB, clobazam; CZP, clonazepam; ESM, ethosuximide;
FDA, Food and Drug Administration; FLB, felbamate; GBP, gabapentin; ILAE, International League Against Epilepsy; LEV, levetiracetam; LTG, lamotrigine; OXC, oxcarbazepine; PB,
phenobarbital; PER, perampanel; PHT, phenytoin; STM, sulthiame; TPM, topiramate; VGB, vigabatrin; VPA, valproic acid; ZNS, zonisamide.
Modified and updated from Perucca E, Tomson T. ILAE Subcommission on AED Guidelines: updated ILAE evidence review of antiepileptic drug efficacy and effectiveness as initial
monotherapy for epileptic seizures and syndromes. Epilepsia. 2013;54(3):551–563.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 633 u Seizures in Childhood 3609
Table 633.14  Dosages of Selected Antiepileptic Drugs

FDA APPROVAL
(AGE APPROVED)

MEDICATION

MAINTENANCE ORAL
DOSAGE (mg/kg/day)
UNLESS OTHERWISE
SPECIFIED

USUAL
DOSING

THERAPEUTIC
LEVELS

Acetazolamide

Absence seizures
(adults)

1-­12 mo: 10
>1 yr: 20-­30

bid or tid

Brivaracetam

Focal sz (age >16 yr)

50-­200 mg/day

bid

50-­100

bid or qd

10-­15 mEq/L, other
references 75-­
352 mg/dL

Supplied as triple bromide soln
(240 mg/mL or 500 mg/mL of
bromide salt)

Bromide

10-­15 mg/L

PREPARATIONS
125, 250, 500 mg tabs
10, 25, 50, 75, 100 mg tabs;
10 mg/mL oral and IV solns

Carbamazepine*

Focal and GTC (all
ages)

10-­20

tid or qid
SR usually
bid

3-­12 mg/L

150, 300 mg ER caps;
100, 200, 400 mg ER tabs
100 mg chewable tabs;
200 mg tabs;
100 mg/5 mL susp

Cenobamate

Focal in adults
≥18 yr

200-­400 mg/day final dose

Once per
day

—

12.5, 25, 50, 100, 150, 200 and 400
mg tabs

Clobazam†

LGS (all ages above
2 yr)

10-­40 mg/day

bid

60-­200 μg/L

10 mg, 20 mg tabs;
2.5 mg/mL soln

Clonazepam†

Absence sz, LGS,
myoclonic sz (all
ages)

0.05

bid or tid

25-­85 μg/L

0.5, 1, 2 mg tabs;
0.125, 0.25, 0.5 mg orally
disintegrating tabs

Diazepam

Focal sz (all ages
>6 mo)

0.25-­1.5
0.01-­0.25 IV
0.2-­0.5 mg/kg rectal
(according to age)

bid or tid

100-­700 μg/L

2, 5, 10 mg tabs
5 mg/mL, 5 mg/5 mL soln;
rectal gel that can be dialed to
dispense 2.5, 5, 7.5, 10, 12.5, 15,
17.5, 20 mg

Eslicarbazepine

Focal sz (adult)

800-­1600 mg/day

qd

Ethosuximide

Absence sz (>3 yr)

20-­30

bid or tid

40-­100 mg/L

250 mg caps;
250 mg/5 mL soln

Felbamate

LGS (>2 yr) Focal sz
(>14 yr)

15-­45

bid or tid

50-­110 mg/L

400, 600 mg tabs;
600 mg/5 mL susp

Gabapentin‡

Focal sz (>3 yr)

30-­60

tid

2-­20 mg/L

100, 300, 400 mg caps; 300, 600,
800 mg tabs; 250 mg/5 mL soln;
25 mg/mL susp

Lacosamide

Focal sz (>17 yr)

4-­12

bid

≤15 μg/L

50, 100, 150, 200 mg tabs
10 mg/mL oral soln

Lamotrigine

LGS, focal and
tonic-­clonic sz
(age >2 yr)

5-­15§
1-­5¶

tid
bid

1-­15 mg/L

25, 100, 150, 200 mg tabs
5, 25 mg chewable dispersible tabs
25, 50, 100, 200 mg ODTs
25, 50, 100, 200, 250, 300 mg ER
tabs

Levetiracetam†

Focal-­onset (age
≥1 mo), tonic-­
clonic sz (age
≥6 yr), myoclonic
(age ≥12 yr)

20-­60

bid or tid

6-­40 mg/L

250, 500, 750 mg tabs
100 mg/mL soln
500, 750 mg SR (ER) tabs

Lorazepam

Status epilepticus
(all ages)

0.05-­0.1

bid or tid

20-­30 μg/L

0.5, 1, 2 mg tabs
2 mg/mL soln

200, 400, 600, 800 mg tabs

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3610 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 633.14  Dosages of Selected Antiepileptic Drugs—cont’d

MEDICATION

FDA APPROVAL
(AGE APPROVED)

MAINTENANCE ORAL
DOSAGE (mg/kg/day)
UNLESS OTHERWISE
SPECIFIED

USUAL
DOSING

THERAPEUTIC
LEVELS

PREPARATIONS

Methsuximide

Absence sz
(children and
older)

10-­30

bid or tid

10-­50 mg/L

150, 300 mg caps

Nitrazepam

—

0.25-­1

bid or tid

<200 μg/L

5 mg tabs

Oxcarbazepine*

Focal sz (>2 yr)

20-­60

bid

13-­35 mg/L

150, 300, 600 mg tabs
300 mg/5 mL susp

Perampanel

Focal sz (>12 yr)

2-­12 mg per day (>12 yr)

qhs

20-­800 ng/mL

2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12 mg tabs; 0.5 mg/
mL soln

Phenobarbital

Myoclonic, focal
and tonic-­clonic
sz and status (all
ages)

<5 yr, 3-­5
>5 yr, 2-­3

bid or qd

10-­40 mg/L

15, 30, 60, 90, 100 mg tabs
4 mg/mL soln

Phenytoin

Focal, tonic-­clonic
sz and status (all
ages)

<3 yr, 8-­10
>3 yr, 4-­7

tabs, susp:
tid
caps: qd

5-­20 mg/L

50 mg tabs
30,100 mg caps
125 mg/5 mL susp

Pregabalin

Focal sz (adults)

2-­14

bid

Up to 10 μg/mL

25, 50, 75, 100, 150, 200, 225,
300 mg caps
20 mg/mL soln

Primidone

Focal and tonic-­
clonic sz (all ages)

10-­20

bid or tid

4-­13 mg/L

50, 250 mg tabs, susp

Rufinamide†

LGS (age >4 yr)

30-­45

bid

<60 μg/mL

200, 400 mg tabs

5-­15

bid or tid

1.5-­20 μg/mL

50, 200 mg caps

Sulthiame**
Tiagabine

Focal sz (age >2 yr)

0.5-­2

bid, tid, qid

80-­450 μg/L

2, 4, 12, 16 mg tabs

Topiramate†

LGS, focal and
tonic-­clonic sz (all
ages)

3-­9, slow titration

bid or tid

2-­25 mg/L

25, 100, 200 mg tabs
15, 25 mg sprinkle caps

Valproate

Absence,
myoclonic, focal
and tonic-­clonic
sz (age >2 yr)

15-­40; higher doses are used
if patient is on enzyme
inducers (≤60 mg/kg/day)

Sprinkle
caps: bid
Soln: tid

50-­100 mg/L

250 mg caps
125 mg sprinkle caps
125, 250, 500 mg tabs
250 mg/5 mL soln

Vigabatrin

Infantile spasms
and focal sz (age
>1 mo)

50-­150

bid

20-­160 μg/mL
500 mg tabs
(following levels is 500 mg powder for soln
not useful for this
drug)

Zonisamide

Focal sz (age >16 yr)

4-­8

bid or qd

10-­40 mg/L

100 mg caps

*Usually start with one-­fourth maintenance dose and increase by one-­fourth every 2-­3 days to full dose.
†Usually start with one-­fourth maintenance dose and increase by one-­fourth every 7 days to full dose.
‡Usually start with one-­fourth maintenance dose and increase by one-­fourth every day to full dose.
§Child receiving enzyme inducers.
**Available in some European countries.
¶Child receiving valproate.
Unless specified otherwise earlier, one would usually target the lower range of the therapeutic dose and then adjust it as needed, depending on the response, side effects, and/
or levels. The dosing schedule (e.g., bid or tid) can depend on if a sustained-­release preparation is available and if the patient is taking enzyme inducers (e.g., carbamazepine) or
inhibitors (e.g., valproic acid) that could affect the drug (as indicated in the dosing schedule in the table and in the text).
cap, Capsule; ER, extended release; GTC, generalized tonic-­clonic; LGS, Lennox-­Gastaut syndrome; ODT, orally disintegrating tablet; soln, solution; SR, sustained release; susp,
suspension; sz, seizure(s); tab, tablet.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 633 u Seizures in Childhood 3611
Table 633.15  Some Adverse Effects of Antiepileptic Drugs*
ANTIEPILEPTIC DRUG

SIDE EFFECTS

Acetazolamide

Nuisance: dizziness, polyuria, electrolyte imbalance
Serious: Stevens-­Johnson syndrome, renal calculi

Benzodiazepines

Nuisance: dose-­related neurotoxicity (drowsiness, sedation, ataxia), hyperactivity, drooling, increased secretions
Serious: apnea

Brivaracetam

Dizziness, nausea/vomiting, fatigue, depressed mood

Bromide

Nuisance: irritability, spurious hyperchloremia (falsely high chloride due to bromide)
Serious: psychosis, rash, toxicity developing slowly owing to the very long half-­life

Carbamazepine

Nuisance: tics, transient leukopenia; hyponatremia, weight gain, nausea; dizziness
Serious: Stevens-­Johnson syndrome, agranulocytosis, aplastic anemia, liver toxicity

Cenobamate

Drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS), short QT, sedation, H/A
Contraindicated in familial short QT syndrome

Clobazam

Nuisance: drowsiness, sedation, drooling
Serious: Stevens-­Johnson syndrome, toxic epidermal necrolysis

Eslicarbazepine

Dizziness, ataxia, nausea/vomiting, diplopia, tremor, somnolence, headache, fatigue

Felbamate

Nuisance: anorexia, vomiting, insomnia, hyperactivity, dizziness
Serious: major risks for liver and hematologic toxicity requiring close monitoring (1 in 500 in children >2 yr with
complex neurologic disorders)

Gabapentin

In children: acute onset of aggression, hyperactivity
In adults: euphoria and behavioral disinhibition, weight gain

Lacosamide

Nuisance: diplopia, headache, dizziness, nausea
Serious: possibly cardiac arrhythmias (if predisposed)

Lamotrigine

Nuisance: CNS side effects: headache, ataxia, dizziness, tremor, but usually less than other AEDs
Serious: Stevens-­Johnson syndrome, ECG abnormalities (both have FDA warning about them), rarely liver toxicity

Levetiracetam

CNS adverse events: somnolence, asthenia, dizziness, but usually less than other AEDs
In children: anger, irritability, other behavioral symptoms
In adults: depressive mood

Oxcarbazepine

Somnolence, headache, dizziness, nausea, apathy, rash, hypertrichosis, gingival hypertrophy, hyponatremia

Perampanel

Aggression, homicidal ideation, suicidal thoughts/behavior

Phenobarbital and other
barbiturates

Nuisance: neurotoxicity, insomnia, hyperactivity, signs of distractibility, fluctuation of mood, aggressive outbursts
Serious: liver toxicity, Stevens-­Johnson syndrome

Phenytoin and other
hydantoins

Nuisance: gingival hyperplasia, coarsening of the facies, hirsutism, cerebellovestibular symptoms (nystagmus and
ataxia)
Serious: Stevens-­Johnson syndrome, liver toxicity

Pregabalin

Nuisance: dizziness, peripheral edema, blurred vision, weight gain, thrombocytopenia
Serious: hypersensitivity reactions

Primidone

Nuisance: CNS toxicity (dizziness, slurred speech, giddiness, drowsiness, depression)
Serious: liver toxicity, Stevens-­Johnson syndrome

Rufinamide

Nuisance: somnolence, vomiting
Serious: contraindicated in familial short QT interval

Succinimides

Nuisance: nausea, abdominal discomfort, anorexia, hiccups
Serious: Stevens-­Johnson syndrome, drug-­induced lupus

Tiagabine

Nuisance: dizziness, somnolence, asthenia, headache and tremor, precipitation of absence or myoclonic seizures
Serious: precipitation of nonconvulsive status epilepticus

Topiramate

Nuisance: cognitive dysfunction, weight loss, hypohidrosis, fever
Serious: precipitation of glaucoma, renal calculi

Valproic acid

Nuisance: weight gain, hyperammonemia, tremor, alopecia, menstrual irregularities
Serious: hepatic and pancreatic toxicity

Vigabatrin

Nuisance: hyperactivity
Serious: irreversible visual field deficits, retinopathy that requires frequent ophthalmologic evaluations and follow-­up

Zonisamide

Fatigue, dizziness, anorexia, psychomotor slowing, ataxia, rarely hallucinations, hypohidrosis and fever, renal calculi

*Essentially all AEDs can cause CNS toxicity and potentially rashes and serious allergic reactions. For a full list of side effects, please review the drug’s FDA-­approved packet insert.
AED, Antiepileptic drug; CNS, central nervous system.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3612 Part XXV u The Nervous System
that can be started and titrated more quickly, such as levetiracetam,
phenytoin, lacosamide, or valproate, should be considered instead.
• Drug interactions and the presence of background medications: An
example is the potential interference of enzyme-­inducing drugs with
many chemotherapeutic agents. In those cases, medications such as
gabapentin or levetiracetam are used. Also, valproate inhibits the
metabolism and increases the levels of lamotrigine, phenobarbital, and felbamate; it also displaces protein-­bound phenytoin from
protein-­binding sites, increasing the free fraction; and thus the free
and not the total level needs to be checked when both medications
are used together. Enzyme inducers such as phenobarbital, carbamazepine, phenytoin, and primidone reduce levels of lamotrigine,
valproate, and, to a lesser extent, topiramate, zonisamide, and perampanel. Medications exclusively excreted by the kidney, such as
levetiracetam and gabapentin, are not subject to such interactions.
• The presence of comorbid conditions: The presence of migraine in
a patient with epilepsy can lead to the choice of a medication that
is effective against both conditions, such as valproate, topiramate,
or zonisamide. In an obese patient, a medication such as valproate
might be avoided, and a medication that decreases the appetite, such
as topiramate or zonisamide, might be used instead. In adolescent
females of child-­bearing potential, enzyme-­inducing AEDs are often avoided because they can interfere with birth control pills; other
AEDs, particularly valproate, can increase risks for fetal malformations. Valproic acid may unmask or exacerbate certain underlying
metabolic disorders; these include nonketotic hyperglycinemia,
DNA polymerase γ pathogenic variant (POLG) with mitochondrial
DNA depletion (also known as Alpers-­Huttenlocher syndrome),
other mitochondrial disorders (Leigh syndrome; MELAS; myoclonic epilepsy with ragged red fibers; myoclonic epilepsy–myopathy–sensory ataxia syndrome), and hyperammonemic encephalopathies. Manifestations may include hepatotoxicity or encephalopathy.
Attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a common comorbid condition in children with epilepsy. The presence of epilepsy
should not necessarily discourage treatment with stimulants if indicated.
• Coexisting seizures: In a patient with both absence and generalized
tonic-­clonic seizures, a drug that has a broad spectrum of antiseizure
effects, such as lamotrigine or valproate, could be used rather than
medications that have a narrow spectrum of efficacy, such as phenytoin and ethosuximide.
• History of prior response to specific AEDs: For example, if a patient
or a family member with the same problem had previously responded to levetiracetam, levetiracetam could be a desirable choice.
• Mechanism of drug actions: At present, in most patients the current
understanding of the pathophysiology of epilepsy does not allow a
specific choice of AEDs based on the assumed pathophysiology of
the epilepsy. However, it is believed that it is better to avoid combining medications that have similar mechanisms of action, such as
phenytoin and carbamazepine (both work on sodium channels). A
number of medications, such as lamotrigine and valproate or topiramate and lamotrigine, are reported to have synergistic effects, possibly because they have different mechanisms of action.
• Ease of use: Medications given once or twice a day are easier to use
than medications given 3 or 4 times a day. Availability of a pediatric
liquid preparation, particularly if palatable, also plays a role. Some
drugs are also available as sprinkles and biofilm formulation for use
in children.
• Ability to monitor the medication and adjust the dose: Some medications are difficult to adjust and to follow, requiring frequent blood
levels. The prototype of such medications is phenytoin, but many
of the older medications, such as valproate and phenobarbital, also
require blood level monitoring for optimal titration. Monitoring can
represent a practical or patient satisfaction disadvantage for the older drugs compared with the newer AEDs, which generally require
less blood level monitoring most often to check for compliance.
• Patient’s and family’s preferences: The choice between two or more
acceptable alternative AEDs might also depend on the patient’s or
family’s preferences. For example, some patients might want to avoid

gingival hyperplasia and hirsutism as side effects but might tolerate
weight loss or vice versa.
• Genetics and genetic testing: A genetic predisposition to developing
AED-­induced side effects is another factor that may be a consideration. There is a strong association between the human leukocyte
antigen HLA-­B*1502 allele and severe cutaneous reactions induced
by carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, phenytoin, or lamotrigine in Chinese Han patients and, to a lesser extent, Southeast Asian populations; hence, these AEDs should be avoided in genetically susceptible
persons after testing for the allele. Pathogenic variants of the SCN1A
sodium channel gene indicating Dravet syndrome could also lead to
avoiding lamotrigine, carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, and phenytoin
and to the use of the more appropriate valproate, clobazam, or stiripentol.
• Teratogenic profiles: Based on available evidence, levetiracetam and
lamotrigine are FDA pregnancy category C drugs and probably the
safest AEDs to use during pregnancy. Valproate is a category X drug
that is associated with neural tube defects, hypospadias, and cardiovascular malformations. The use of valproate should thus be avoided
during pregnancy if possible. Topiramate, phenobarbital, and phenytoin are category D drugs with birth defects associated with their use
reported in humans. The decision to transition to a less teratogenic
AED rather than continuing with an existing regimen must be made
on a case-­by-­case basis and consider the risk of seizures during pregnancy versus the risk of teratogenicity.
• Underlying etiology: The cause for the patient’s epilepsy must be
considered and can lead to more specific therapy choices, such as
the use of immune-­modulating therapy for autoimmune encephalopathy or personalized and precision therapies for specific epileptic
channelopathies or vitamin-­responsive epilepsies.

INITIATING AND MONITORING THERAPY

In nonemergency situations or when loading is not necessary, the
maintenance dose of the chosen AED is started (see Table 633.14).
With some medications (e.g., oxcarbazepine, carbamazepine, topiramate, and perampanel), even smaller doses are initially started and
then gradually increased up to the maintenance dose to build a tolerance to adverse effects such as sedation. The starting dose of oxcarbazepine is usually 8-­10 mg/kg/day. Increments of 5 mg/kg/day can be
added every 3 days until a therapeutic level is achieved and therapeutic response is established or until unacceptable adverse effects occur.
With other medications such as zonisamide, phenobarbital, phenytoin,
or valproate, starting at the maintenance dose is usually tolerated. With
some, such as levetiracetam and gabapentin, either approach can be
used. Patients should be counseled about potential adverse effects, and
these should be monitored during follow-­up visits (see Table 633.15).

Titration

Levels of many AEDs should usually be determined after initiation
to ensure compliance and therapeutic concentrations. Monitoring is
most helpful for the older AEDs, such as phenytoin, carbamazepine,
valproate, phenobarbital, and ethosuximide. After starting the maintenance dosage or after any change in the dosage, a steady state is not
reached until 5 half-­lives have elapsed, which, for most AEDs, is 2-­7
days (half-­life: 6-­24 hours). For phenobarbital, it is 2-­4 weeks (mean
half-­life: 69 hours). For zonisamide, it is 14 days during monotherapy
and less than that during polytherapy with enzyme inducers (half-­life:
63 hours in monotherapy and 27-­38 hours during combination therapy
with enzyme inducers). If a therapeutic level has to be achieved faster,
a loading dose may be used for some drugs, usually with a single dose
that is twice the average maintenance dose per half-­life. For valproate,
it is 20 mg/kg; for phenytoin, it is 20 mg/kg; and for phenobarbital, it
is 10-­20 mg/kg. A lower loading dosage of phenobarbital is sometimes
given in older children (5 mg/kg, which may be repeated once or more
in 24 hours) to avoid excessive sedation.
Only one drug should be used initially, and the dose increased
until complete control is achieved or until side effects prohibit further increases. Then, and only then, may another drug be added and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 633 u Seizures in Childhood 3613
the initial drug subsequently tapered. Control with one drug (monotherapy) should be the goal, although some patients eventually need to
take multiple drugs. When appropriate, levels should also be checked
upon addition (or discontinuation) of a second drug because of potential drug interactions. During follow-­up, repeating the EEG every
few months may be helpful to evaluate changes in the predisposition
to seizures. This is especially true in situations where tapering off of
medication is contemplated in any seizure type and during follow-­up
to assess the response for absence seizures because the EEG mirrors the
response in such patients.

Monitoring

For the older AEDs, before starting treatment, baseline laboratory
studies, including complete blood count, platelets, liver enzymes, and
possibly kidney function tests and urinalysis, are often obtained and
repeated periodically. Laboratory monitoring is more relevant early
on because idiosyncratic adverse effects such as allergic hepatitis and
agranulocytosis are more likely to occur in the first 3-­6 months of therapy. These laboratory studies are usually initially checked once or twice
during the first month, then every 3-­4 months after that. Significant
concerns have been raised about the usefulness of routine monitoring
in the absence of clinical signs because the yield of significant adverse
effects is low. There are currently many advocates of less frequent routine monitoring.
In approximately 10% of patients, a reversible dose-­related leukopenia may occur in patients taking carbamazepine or phenytoin. This
adverse effect responds to decreasing the dose or stopping the medication and is distinguished from the much less common idiosyncratic
aplastic anemia or agranulocytosis. One exception requiring frequent
(even weekly) monitoring of liver function and blood counts throughout the therapy is felbamate, owing to the high incidence of liver and
hematologic toxicity (1 in 500 children under 2 years of age with complex neurologic disorders who are taking the drug). The gum hyperplasia that is seen with phenytoin necessitates good oral hygiene (brushing
teeth at least twice per day and rinsing the mouth after taking the phenytoin); in a few cases, it may be severe enough to warrant surgical
reduction and/or a change of medication. An allergic rash can occur
with any medication but is probably most common with lamotrigine,
carbamazepine, and phenytoin.
Because of the risk of valvular heart disease and pulmonary arterial hypertension with fenfluramine and irreversible peripheral vision
loss with vigabatrin, these drugs are available only through a restricted
distribution REMS program. In addition, the FDA has circulated a
warning about factoring in the possibility of cardiac arrhythmias when
deciding on lamotrigine use, particularly in cardiac patients and the
need to monitor ECG during its use.

SIDE EFFECTS

Occasionally, a Stevens-­Johnson–like syndrome develops, probably
most commonly with lamotrigine but also with other medications like
clobazam; it also has been found to be particularly common in Chinese
patients who have the allele HLA-­B*1502 and are taking oxcarbazepine, carbamazepine, and/or lamotrigine.
Other potential side effects are rickets from phenytoin, phenobarbital, primidone, and carbamazepine (enzyme inducers that reduce
the 25-­hyrdroxy-­vitamin D level by inducing its metabolism) and
hyperammonemia from valproate. Skeletal monitoring is warranted in
patients taking chronic AED therapy because it is often associated with
osteopenia independent of or secondary to vitamin D deficiency (low
bone density, rickets, and hypocalcemia), particularly in patients taking enzyme-­inducing medications. Thus counseling the patient about
sun exposure and vitamin D intake, monitoring vitamin D levels, and,
in most cases, giving vitamin D supplementation are recommended.
There is currently no consensus on the dose to be used for supplementation or prophylaxis, but starting doses of 2,000 IU/day with follow-­up
of the levels are reasonable.
Irreversible hepatic injury and death are particularly feared in young
children (<2 years old) who are receiving valproate in combination
with other AEDs, particularly those who might have inborn errors of

metabolism such as aminoacidopathies and mitochondrial disease.
Virtually all AEDs can produce sleepiness, ataxia, nystagmus, and
slurred speech with toxic levels.
The FDA has determined that the use of AEDs may be associated
with an increased risk of suicidal ideation and action and has recommended counseling about this side effect before starting these
medications.
When adding a new AED, the doses used are often affected by the
background medications. If the patient is receiving enzyme inducers,
the doses needed of valproate, lamotrigine, topiramate, zonisamide,
and perampanel are often higher, sometimes 1.5-­2 times, than the usual
maintenance doses. On the other hand, if the patient is taking valproate
(an enzyme-­inhibiting AED), the doses of phenobarbital or lamotrigine are approximately half of what is usually needed. Changes in the
dosing of the background medication are often done as the interacting
medication is being started or stopped. Genetic variability in enzymes
that metabolize AEDs and in the presence of inducible multidrug-­
resistance genes (pharmacogenomics) might account for some of the
variation among individuals in responding to certain AEDs and for the
variability in the drug dose necessary for seizure control.

ADDITIONAL TREATMENTS

The principles of monotherapy indicate that a second medication
needs to be considered after the first either is pushed as high as tolerated and still does not control the seizures or results in intolerable
adverse effects. In those cases, a second drug is started and the first is
tapered and then discontinued. The second drug is then again pushed
to the dose that controls the seizure or that results in intolerable side
effects. If the second drug fails, monotherapy with a third drug and
dual (combination) therapy are considered.
Patients with drug-­resistant (previously referred to as intractable or
refractory) epilepsy (those who have failed at least two trials of appropriate medications) warrant a careful diagnostic reevaluation to look
for degenerative, metabolic, or inflammatory underlying disorders (e.g.,
mitochondrial disease, Rasmussen encephalitis; see Chapter 633.2) and
to investigate drug-­resistant patients for candidacy for epilepsy surgery. Treatable metabolic disorders that can manifest as drug-­resistant
epilepsy include pyridoxine-­
dependent and pyridoxal-­
responsive
epilepsy; cerebral folate deficiency; other vitamin-­
responsive conditions (such as biotin/thiamine-­
responsive basal ganglia disease and
riboflavin-­responsive epilepsy); neurotransmitter disorders; biotinidase
deficiency; glucose transporter 1 deficiency (responds to the ketogenic
diet); serine synthesis defects; creatine deficiency syndromes; untreated
phenylketonuria; developmental delay, epilepsy, and neonatal diabetes;
and hyperinsulinemia-­hyperammonemia. Often patients who do not
respond to AEDs are candidates for steroids, IVIG, or the ketogenic diet.
Steroids may be the first-­line treatment in certain cases (e.g., ACTH
use in West syndrome) but may also be used for other drug-­resistant
epilepsy syndromes such as Lennox-­Gastaut, myoclonic-­astatic, continuous spike waves in slow-­wave sleep, and Landau-­Kleffner syndromes. In these situations, steroid therapy is typically given as a
monthly intravenous infusion (pulse steroids) or as daily oral prednisone 2 mg/kg/day (or equivalent). This dose is maintained for 1-­2
months, then tapered off over 1-­3 months. Pulse steroids are usually
better tolerated than a daily steroid regimen, which can cause more
weight gain, hyperglycemia, hypertension, immunosuppression, and
other side effects. Because relapses occur commonly during tapering
and in such syndromes as Landau-­Kleffner and continuous spike waves
in slow-­wave sleep, therapy for longer than 1 year is often needed.
IVIG has also been reported to be similarly effective in nonimmunodeficient patients with West, Lennox-­Gastaut, Landau-­Kleffner, and
continuous spike waves in slow-­wave sleep syndromes and may also have
efficacy in partial seizures. One should check the IgA levels before starting the infusions (to assess the risk for allergic reactions because these
are increased in patients with complete IgA deficiency) and guard against
allergic reactions during the infusion that can occur even in the absence
of IgA deficiency. Low IgA, low IgG2, and male sex are reported to predict a possibly favorable response. The usual regimen is 2 g/kg divided
over 2-­4 consecutive days followed by 1 g/kg once a month for 6 months.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3614 Part XXV u The Nervous System
The mechanisms of action of steroids and IVIG are not known but are
presumed to be antiinflammatory because it has been demonstrated that
seizures increase cytokines and that these, in turn, increase neuronal
excitability by several mechanisms, including activation of glutamate
receptors. Steroids and ACTH might also stimulate brain neurosteroid
receptors that enhance GABA activity and might reduce corticotrophin-­
releasing hormone, which is known to be epileptogenic.
The ketogenic diet is considered effective in glucose transporter
protein 1 deficiency (GLUT-­1), pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency,
myoclonic-­astatic epilepsy, tuberous sclerosis complex, Rett syndrome,
severe myoclonic epilepsy of infancy (Dravet syndrome), and infantile spasms. There is also a suggestion of possible efficacy in selected
mitochondrial disorders—glycogenosis type V, Landau-­Kleffner syndrome, Lafora body disease, and subacute sclerosing panencephalitis.
The diet is absolutely contraindicated in carnitine deficiency (primary),
carnitine palmitoyltransferase I or II deficiency, carnitine translocase
deficiency, β-­
oxidation defects, medium-­
chain acyl dehydrogenase
deficiency, long-­
chain acyl dehydrogenase deficiency, short-­
chain
acyl dehydrogenase deficiency, long-­chain 3-­hydroxyacyl-­coenzyme
A deficiency, medium-­chain 3-­hydroxyacyl–coenzyme A deficiency,
pyruvate carboxylase deficiency, and porphyrias. Thus an appropriate
metabolic workup, depending on the clinical picture, usually needs to
be performed before starting the diet (e.g., acyl carnitine profile, total
and free carnitine levels). The diet has been used for refractory seizures
of various types (partial or generalized) and consists of an initial period
of fasting followed by a diet with a 3:1 or 4:1 fat:nonfat calorie ratio,
with fats consisting of animal fat, vegetable oils, or medium-­chain triglycerides. Many patients do not tolerate it, owing to diarrhea, vomiting, hypoglycemia, dehydration, or lack of palatability. Diets such as
the low-­glycemic-­index diet and the modified Atkins diet are easier to

institute, do not require hospitalization, and may also be effective in
treating epilepsy.
CBD is a nonpsychoactive extract of the cannabis plant that has
gained prominence as a possible adjunct (add-­on) therapy for drug-­
resistant epilepsies such as Dravet and Lennox-­Gastaut syndromes.
Precision genetic-­based therapy is defined as a patient-­specific, or
more accurately physiology-­specific, selection of therapy as determined
by the available information regarding the underlying pathophysiology
based on the primary specific genetic, metabolic, and/or other cause of
epilepsy in that patient. The use of precision therapies (Table 633.16) has
expanded as more epileptogenic gene pathogenic variants are identified
as part of routine genetic screening for drug-­resistant epilepsies. This has
allowed for targeted therapy based on the specific gene variant (see Table
633.16). Examples include the use of quinidine for gain-­of-­function
KCNT1 variants and retigabine for loss-­of-­function KCNQ2 variants.
Gain-­of-­function KCNQ2 variants do not respond to retigabine, a fact
that emphasizes the need for careful gene analysis that accounts for the
functional outcome of each particular gene. The same applies to pathogenic variants of sodium channels; patients with epilepsy caused by gain-­
of-­function variants show good response to sodium channel–blocking
agents, a response not shared by patients with epilepsy caused by loss-­of-­
function variants in the sodium channel gene.
Vitamin-­responsive epilepsies also warrant special attention because
if they are diagnosed early and precision therapy is given for them, the
therapy can significantly affect seizure control and neurodevelopmental
outcomes. Examples include the use of pyridoxine for antiquitin deficiency–associated epilepsies, biotin for biotinidase deficiency, folate for
cerebral folate deficiency, and biotin/thiamine for biotin thiamine–
responsive basal ganglia disease, which can have coexisting epilepsy
and is caused by defects in a cerebral thiamine transporter.

Table 633.16  Precision Therapy: Treatment Considerations for Genetic Epilepsies and Other Syndromes with a High
Prevalence of Epilepsy
GENE MUTATION

EPILEPTIC DISORDER

TREATMENT CONSIDERATIONS

ALDH7A1

Pyridoxine-­dependent epilepsy

Pyridoxine

BTD

Biotinidase deficiency–associated epilepsy

Biotin

FOLR1

Cerebral folate deficiency

Folinic acid

GRIN2A

GRIN2A-­related epilepsy

Memantine and dextromethorphan for
gain-­of-­function variant

KCNQ2

Benign familial neonatal or infantile seizures; KCNQ2-­related
epileptic encephalopathy

Retigabine for loss-­of-­function variants*

KCNT1

Migrating focal seizures of infancy

Quinidine for gain-­of-­function variants

PNPO

Pyridoxal 5′-­phosphate dependent epilepsy

Pyridoxal 5′-­phosphate

PRRT2

Benign familial infantile epilepsy; paroxysmal dyskinesias;
hemiplegic migraine; episodic ataxia

Oxcarbazepine and carbamazepine

SCN1A

Dravet syndrome; GEFS+; other SCN1A-­related epilepsies

Avoid using sodium channel blockers
(carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, lamotrigine,
lacosamide, phenytoin) and vigabatrin

SCN2A

Benign neonatal or infantile seizures; Dravet syndrome;
GEFS+; infantile spasms; other early infantile epileptic
encephalopathies

Phenytoin and carbamazepine

SCN8A

Early infantile epileptic encephalopathies; benign infantile
seizures; movement disorders

High-­dose phenytoin

SLC2A1

Glucose transporter–deficiency syndrome

Ketogenic diet

SLC19A3

Biotin thiamine–responsive basal ganglia disease

Biotin and thiamine

TSC1; TSC2

Tuberous sclerosis complex

Vigabatrin for infantile spasms; possibly everolimus
for drug-­resistant seizures

*Withdrawn from market.
Data from Hani A, Mikati MA. Current and emerging therapies of severe epileptic encephalopathies. Semin Pediatr Neurol. 2016;23(2):180–186; Mudigoudar B, Weatherspoon S,
Wheeless JW. Emerging antiepileptic drugs for severe pediatric epilepsies. Semin Pediatr Neurol. 2016;23(2):167–179; and Smith LA, Ullman JFP, Olson HE, et al. A model program
for translational medicine in epilepsy genetics. J Child Neurol. 2017;32(4):429–436.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 633 u Seizures in Childhood 3615
APPROACH TO EPILEPSY SURGERY

If a patient has failed three drugs, the chance of achieving seizure freedom using AEDs is <10%. Therefore proper evaluation for surgery is
necessary when a patient fails two or three AEDs, usually within 2
years of the onset of epilepsy and often sooner than 2 years. Performing epilepsy surgery in children at an earlier stage (e.g., <5 years of
age) allows the transfer of function in the developing brain. Candidacy for epilepsy surgery requires proof of resistance to AEDs used at
maximum, tolerably nontoxic doses; absence of expected unacceptable
adverse consequences of surgery; and a properly defined epileptogenic
zone (the area that needs to be resected to achieve seizure freedom).
The epileptogenic zone is identified by careful analysis of the following
parameters: seizure semiology, video-­EEG long-­term monitoring, neuropsychologic profile, and brain MRI. 7-­Tesla MRI may, in some cases,
have some advantage over 3-­Tesla MRI. Other techniques, such as high-­
density EEG (HD-­EEG), invasive EEG (depth electrodes, subdural grid
or strips, intraoperative electrocorticography), single-­photon emission
CT (SPECT), magnetoencephalography (MEG), and positron emission
tomography (PET), are also needed if the epileptogenic zone is difficult
to localize or when it is close to the eloquent cortex. Stereo-­EEG is a
method of invasive EEG monitoring used to localize epileptic areas of
the cortex. It involves the stereotactic implantation of depth electrodes
through multiple burr holes in the skull using robot-­assisted implantations and computer-­based 3D localization. Several procedures can be
used to avoid resection of eloquent cortex, including the Wada test,
functional MRI, MEG, transcranial magnetic stimulation, and cortical
stimulation with subdural and depth electrodes. Developmental delay
or psychiatric diseases must be considered in assessing the potential
impact of surgery on the patient. The usual minimal presurgical evaluation includes video-­EEG monitoring, brain imaging, and age-­specific
neuropsychologic assessment.
Epilepsy surgery is often used to treat drug-­resistant epilepsy of a
number of etiologies, including cortical dysplasia, tuberous sclerosis, polymicrogyria, hypothalamic hamartoma, encephalomalacia

from prior cerebrovascular insult, mesial temporal sclerosis, Landau-­
Kleffner syndrome, and hemispheric syndromes such as Sturge-­Weber
syndrome, hemimegalencephaly, and Rasmussen encephalitis. Patients
with drug-­resistant epilepsy resulting from metabolic or degenerative
problems are not candidates for resective epilepsy surgery. Focal resection of the epileptogenic zone is the most common procedure. Hemispherectomy is used for diffuse hemispheric lesions in cases such as
Rasmussen encephalitis, hemimegalencephaly, large perinatal stroke,
Sturge-­Weber syndrome; multiple subpial transections, a surgical
technique in which the horizontal connections of the epileptic focus
are partially cut without resecting it, is sometimes used for unresectable foci located in the eloquent cortex, as in Landau-­Kleffner syndrome. In Lennox-­Gastaut syndrome, corpus callosotomy is used as
a palliative procedure for drop attacks.
Laser interstitial thermal therapy (LITT) is a less invasive surgical technique that uses a laser to ablate relatively small (<3 × 3 cm)
epileptic areas in the cortex; it has been used to treat mesial temporal
sclerosis, tuberous sclerosis, and hypothalamic hamartomas and for
corpus callosotomies. Other minimally invasive techniques include
gamma knife stereotactic radiosurgery that uses gamma radiation.
Focal resection and hemispherectomy result in a high rate (50–80%)
of seizure freedom. Corpus callosotomy and vagal nerve stimulation
result in lower rates of seizure freedom (5–10% for vagus nerve stimulation [VNS] and lower for callosotomy); however, these procedures
do result in significant reductions in the frequency and severity of seizures, decreases in medication requirements, and meaningful improvements in the patient’s quality of life in approximately half or more of
eligible patients.
VNS is often used for drug-­resistant epilepsies of various types (partial, generalized, Lennox-­Gastaut) and for seizures of diffuse focal or
multifocal anatomic origin that do not yield themselves to resective
surgery (Fig. 633.10). VNS is approved for age 4 years and above but
has also been used in even younger ages. This technique is considered
palliative rather than curative because it most often leads to seizure

RNS
Epileptogenic zone

RNS
ANT-DBS
Papez circuit:
anterior cingulate
Anterior nucleus
of the thalamus

VNS
Ventro-posterior medial
nucleus of the thalamus
Insular cortex

Mamillary bodies
Hippocampus

ANT-DBS

Hypothalamus
Amygdala
Periacqueductal gray matter
Parabrachial nucleus
Nucleus tractus solitarius

VNS

Fig. 633.10 Approved neuromodulation therapies in epilepsy. The brain targets for each neuromodulation approach according to sites of stimu-

lation and known primary anatomic pathways. This illustration is not meant to be comprehensive. VNS is expected to activate the nucleus tractus
solitarius, with downstream effects on its brainstem, subcortical, and cortical efferences; ANT-­DBS stimulation is expected to modulate the activity of
the anterior nucleus of the thalamus and the associated Papez circuit, and RNS stimulation is expected to inhibit the suspected cortical epileptogenic
zone. ANT-­DBS, Deep brain stimulation of the anterior nucleus of the thalamus; RNS, responsive neurostimulation; VNS, vagus nerve stimulation.
(From Ryvlin P, Rheims S, Hirsch LJ, et al. Neuromodulation in epilepsy: state-­of-­the art approved therapies. Lancet Neurol. 2021;20[12]:1038–1047,
Fig. 1, p. 1039.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3616 Part XXV u The Nervous System
frequency reduction rather than seizure cessation. By producing low-­
amplitude current stimulations, usually once every 5 minutes, this
device results in a reduction of seizures. Also, caretakers can activate
the device by swiping a magnet over it at the time of the seizure, which
can shorten seizure duration. Vagus nerve stimulators also have integrated heart rate monitoring that detects tachycardia patterns typically
associated with seizures and then activates the stimulator during these
times. Responsive neurostimulation (RNS) is a technique that has
been used in adults with epilepsy; it requires the implantation of subdural or depth electrodes to directly monitor seizure activity on a long-­
term basis to detect and abort the seizures. Once a seizure is detected,
electrical stimulation is delivered to that area of the brain to stop the
seizure. Deep brain stimulation (DBS) is approved for refractory partial epilepsy in adults. In DBS, the electrical stimulation is provided by
two stereotactically placed electrodes in bilateral thalamic nuclei (anterior nuclei for focal epilepsy and centromedian nuclei, as being studied,
in generalized epilepsies).

DISCONTINUATION OF THERAPY

Discontinuation of AEDs is usually indicated when otherwise well
children are free of seizures for at least 2 years. In more severe syndromes, such as temporal lobe epilepsy secondary to mesial temporal
sclerosis, Lennox-­Gastaut syndrome, or severe myoclonic epilepsy, a
prolonged period of seizure freedom with treatment is often warranted
before AEDs are withdrawn, if withdrawal is attempted at all. In self-­
limited (benign) epilepsy syndromes, the duration of therapy can often
be as short as 6 months.
Many factors should be considered before discontinuing medications, including the likelihood of remaining seizure-­free after drug
withdrawal based on the type of epilepsy syndrome and etiology; the
risk of injury in case of seizure recurrence (e.g., if the patient drives);
and the adverse effects of AED therapy. Most children who have not
had a seizure for 2 years or longer and who have a normal EEG when
AED withdrawal is initiated remain free of seizures after discontinuing
medication, and most relapses occur within the first 6 months.
Certain risk factors can help clinicians predict the prognosis after
AED withdrawal. The most important risk factor for seizure relapse
is an abnormal EEG before medication is discontinued. Children who
have remote structural (symptomatic) epilepsy are less likely to be able
to stop AEDs than are children who have a benign (idiopathic) epilepsy.
In patients with absences or in patients treated with valproate or other
medications for primary generalized epilepsy, the risk of relapse might
be high despite a normal EEG because valproate (and less so other AEDs
for primary generalized epilepsy) can normalize EEGs with generalized
spike-­wave abnormalities. Thus in these patients, repeating the EEG
during drug tapering may help identify a recurrence of the EEG abnormality and associated seizure risk before clinical seizures recur. Older
age of epilepsy onset, longer duration of epilepsy, presence of multiple
seizure types, and need to use more than one AED are all factors associated with a higher risk of seizure relapse after AED withdrawal.
AED therapy should be discontinued gradually, often over a period
of 3-­6 months, but many advocate for shorter periods down to 6 weeks.
Abrupt discontinuation can result in withdrawal seizures or in status
epilepticus. Withdrawal seizures are especially common with phenobarbital and benzodiazepines; consequently, special attention must be
given to a prolonged tapering schedule during the withdrawal of these
AEDs. Seizures that occur more than 2-­3 months after AEDs are completely discontinued indicate a relapse, and resumption of treatment is
usually warranted. Seizures that occur before that, such as during or
shortly after a medication taper, may be withdrawal seizures or may
indicate a relapse.
The decision to attempt AED withdrawal must be assessed mutually
by the clinician, the parents, and the child depending on the child’s
age. The American Academy of Neurology in collaboration with the
American Epilepsy Society has developed guidelines regarding such
withdrawals. In addition, there is an online risk calculator tool that
has been generated based on clinical nomograms from an independent
participant data meta-­analysis. This tool can be used, with caution, as
an aid to estimate risk of recurrence, but individualized decision based

Table 633.17  Measures in Clinical Practice to Reduce the
Risk of SUDEP
Counseling: Explaining SUDEP and risk factors is imperative, even if
the discussion may be uncomfortable. Emphasize modifiable risk
factors, such as compliance with taking medication.
Reduction of tonic-­clonic seizures: Optimum treatment, good drug
compliance, lifestyle advice (e.g., alcohol intake, sleep deprivation).
Treatment changes: Change in a gradually staged manner; when
switching drugs, introduce the new drug before withdrawing the
old drug; the patient should have access to immediate advice in
the event of worsening seizures during periods of change.
Supervision at night for patients at high risk: Attendance, use
of alarms (balancing the benefits of independent living and the
penalties of intrusive monitoring).
Choice of drugs: Caution with AEDs with potential cardiorespiratory
adverse effects.
Act on ictal warning signs: Tonic-­clonic seizures that are prolonged,
associated with marked cyanosis, severe bradycardia or apnea, and
postictal EEG suppression; complex partial seizures with marked
atonia (drop attacks); seizure in those with preexisting cardiac or
respiratory impairment.
Supervision after a tonic-­clonic seizure: Continuous attendance until
full consciousness is restored; call emergency services for high-­risk
seizures.
EEG, Electroencephalogram; SUDEP, sudden unexpected death in epilepsy.
From Shorvan S, Tomson T. Sudden unexpected death in epilepsy. Lancet.
2011;378:2028–2036.

on each case’s particulars and on the discussions with the caretakers
should be the final guide in planning the course of care. The patient and
family should be counseled fully on what to expect, what precautions
to take (e.g., cessation of driving for a period), and what to do in case
of relapse. A prescription for rectal diazepam or intranasal midazolam
to be given at the time of seizures that might occur during and after
tapering is usually warranted (see Table 633.23 for dosing).

SUDDEN UNEXPECTED DEATH IN EPILEPSY

SUDEP is the most common epilepsy-­related cause of mortality and
is responsible for up to 17% of deaths in patients with epilepsy. Risk
factors include polytherapy with more than three AEDs, male gender,
young age at epilepsy onset, developmental delay, poor AED compliance, nocturnal seizures, poorly controlled convulsive seizures (especially if >3 per year), high frequency of seizures (especially if >50 per
year), and having epilepsy for >30 years in adults. Patients are usually
found dead in their bed in a prone position, with evidence suggesting
a recent seizure.
Respiratory, cardiogenic, and mixed respiratory/cardiogenic mechanisms have been hypothesized to cause SUDEP. Respiratory models
include seizure-­induced central hypoventilation, neurogenic pulmonary edema, and disturbances in the brainstem serotonergic system
leading to respiratory arrest. Cardiogenic models include seizure-­
induced cardiac arrhythmia as well as cardiocerebral channelopathies
in which ion channels are expressed in both the brain and heart, causing cardiac dysfunction concurrent with the seizures. SCN1A, SNC8A,
ATP1A3, and KCNQ1 are examples of genes that encode for cardiocerebral ion channels known to cause epilepsy and that have also been
associated with SUDEP. Mixed respiratory/cardiogenic models include
seizure-­induced dysautonomia, high adenosine levels during seizure
causing cardiorespiratory collapse, and spreading depression in the
brainstem causing dysautonomia. More data are needed to determine
if safety pillows, seizure detection devices, or selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors may be of benefit in preventing SUDEP. It is currently
recommended to counsel the patients and family regarding SUDEP, even
if the topic is not comfortable to talk about. In addition to providing
them with important information, such counseling may also encourage
families to address modifiable risk factors such as AED compliance.
Table 633.17 lists other possible preventive measures.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 633 u Seizures in Childhood 3617

633.7 Neonatal Seizures
Mohamad A. Mikati and Monica E. Lemmon
Seizures are possibly the most important and common indicator of
significant neurologic dysfunction in the neonatal period. Seizure
incidence is higher during this period than in any other period of life:
seizures occur in 57.5 per 1,000 in infants with birthweights <1,500 g
and 2.8 per 1,000 in infants weighing between 2,500 and 3,999 g. The
etiology of neonatal seizures depends on postnatal age of onset (Fig.
633.11, Table 633.18) as well as EEG and clinical features (Fig. 633.12,
Table 633.18 and Table 633.19).

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

The immature brain has many differences from the mature brain that
render it more excitable and more likely to develop seizures. Based
predominantly on animal studies, these include a delay in Na+, K+-­
adenosine triphosphatase maturation and increased NMDA and
AMPA receptor density. In addition, the specific types of these receptors that are increased are those that are permeable to calcium (GLUR2
AMPA receptors). This contributes to increased excitability and to the
long-­term consequences associated with seizures, particularly those
resulting from perinatal hypoxia. Medications that block AMPA receptors, such as topiramate, may thus prove useful in this clinical scenario.
Another difference is delay in the development of inhibitory GABA­
ergic transmission. In fact, GABA in the immature brain has an excitatory function because the chloride gradient is reversed relative to the
mature brain, with higher concentrations of chloride being present
intracellularly than extracellularly. Thus opening of the chloride channels in the immature brain results in depolarizing the cell and not in
hyperpolarizing it. How applicable this is to human neonates and, if so,
at what conceptional ages, is not clear yet. This phenomenon, however,

Acute symptomatic neonatal seizures

D1

D2-3

D4-7

D8-14

D15-21

HIE

D22-28

Hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy (HIE) (35–45%)
Infarction and hemorrhage (20–30%)
Intraventricular hemorrhage

Brain malformations (5–10%)
Infections (5–20%)

Cerebral infarction

Metabolic disorders (7–20%)
Genetic epilepsy syndromes (6–10%)
Viral infection (herpes simplex virus)

Intrauterine infections

Acute bacterial infection (meningitis)
Acute metabolic disturbances
Cortical malformations

Neonatal epilepsy

Inborn errors of metabolism
Early myoclonic encephalopathy
Early infantile epileptic encephalopathy
Self-limited (familial)
neonatal seizures

Fig. 633.11 Etiologies of neonatal seizures according to seizure onset

timing. The most common causes of seizures occurring within the first 24
hr of life are hypoxic-­ischemic encephalopathy or vascular etiologies, followed by acute metabolic disturbances such as hypoglycemia or inborn
errors of metabolism such as pyridoxine dependency. Within the next
24-­72 hr, the main etiologies include infection, cortical malformations,
cerebral infarction, inborn errors of metabolism such as glycine encephalopathy, urea cycle disturbances, pyridoxine dependency, and benign
familial neonatal seizures. Over the next 72 hr to a week, causes include
cortical malformations, cerebral infarction or hemorrhage, or inborn errors of metabolism, such as urea cycle disturbances. In the next 1-­4 wk,
the differential includes cortical malformations, viral infections such as
herpes simplex, or genetic epilepsy syndromes. (From Kim EH, Shin J,
Lee BK. Neonatal seizures: diagnostic updates based on new definition
and classification. Clin Exp Pediatr. 2022;65[8]:387–397, Fig. 1, p. 389.)

appears to be more prominent in male neonates, perhaps explaining
their greater predisposition to seizures.

TYPES OF NEONATAL SEIZURES

There are two main neonatal seizure types: electroclinical and electrographic only. Electroclinical seizures can be categorized as motor,
nonmotor, and sequential. Motor seizures include automatisms, clonic
seizures, epileptic spasms, myoclonic seizures, and tonic seizures. Nonmotor seizures include autonomic seizures and behavioral arrest (see
Fig. 633.12 and Table 633.19). Differentiating seizure types based on
Table 633.18  Causes of Neonatal Seizures According to
Common Age of Presentation
AGES 1-­4 DAYS
Hypoxic-­ischemic encephalopathy
Drug withdrawal, maternal drug use of opiate or barbiturates
Drug toxicity: lidocaine, penicillin
Intraventricular hemorrhage
Sepsis
Acute metabolic disorders
• Hypocalcemia
• Maternal hyperthyroidism, or hypoparathyroidism
• Hypoglycemia
• Maternal diabetes
• Hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia
• Hypomagnesemia
• Hyponatremia or hypernatremia
• Iatrogenic or inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion
Inborn errors of metabolism
• Galactosemia
• Hyperglycinemia
• Urea cycle disorders
Pyridoxine dependency and pyridoxal-­5-­phosphate dependency
(must be considered at any age)
AGES 4-­14 DAYS
Infection
• Meningitis (bacterial)
• Encephalitis (enteroviral, herpes simplex)
Metabolic disorders
• Hypocalcemia related to diet, milk formula
• Hypoglycemia, persistent
• Inherited disorders of metabolism
• Galactosemia
• Fructosemia
• Leucine sensitivity
• Hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia, hyperinsulinism,
hyperammonemia syndrome
• Anterior pituitary hypoplasia, pancreatic islet cell tumor
• Beckwith syndrome
Drug withdrawal, maternal drug use of narcotics or barbiturates
Benign neonatal convulsions, familial and nonfamilial
Kernicterus, hyperbilirubinemia
Developmental delay, epilepsy, neonatal diabetes syndrome
AGES 2-­8 WK
Infection
• Herpes simplex or enteroviral encephalitis
• Bacterial meningitis
Head injury
• Subdural hematoma
• Child abuse
Inherited disorders of metabolism
• Aminoacidurias
• Urea cycle defects
• Organic acidurias
• Neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy
Malformations of cortical development
• Lissencephaly
• Focal cortical dysplasia
Tuberous sclerosis
Sturge-­Weber syndrome

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3618 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Critically ill or with clinical suspicion

Non-seizure episodes
(without ictal EEG pattern)

Video EEG /
amplitude integrated EEG

Presentation

Differential
diagnosis

Seizures*
(with EEG correlate)

Electro-clinical
(with clinical sign)

Electrographic only
(without clinical signs)

Seizure type

Fig. 633.12 Diagnostic framework of seizures in
the neonatal period, including classification of seizures. Adapted from 2017 ILAE seizure classification.
Neonates present with discrete events suspected to
be epileptic seizures or are critically ill (often ventilated, sedated, and treated with muscle relaxants
in intensive care). *If no EEG is available, refer to
global alignment of immunization safety assessment
in pregnancy levels of diagnostic certainty. (From
Pressler RM, Cilio MR, Mizrahi EM, et al, The ILAE
classification of seizures and the epilepsies: modification for seizures in the neonate. Position paper by
the ILAE Task Force on Neonatal Seizures. Epilepsia.
2021;62[3]:615–628, Fig. 2.)

Motor
Automatisms
Clonic
Epileptic spasms
Myoclonic
Tonic
Non-motor
Autonomic
Behavior arrest
Sequential
Unclassified

Table 633.19  Clinical Characteristics, Classification, and Presumed Pathophysiology of Neonatal Seizures
CLASSIFICATION

CHARACTERIZATION

Focal clonic

Repetitive, rhythmic contractions of muscle
groups of the limbs, face, or trunk
May be unifocal or multifocal
May occur synchronously or asynchronously in
muscle groups on one side of the body
May occur simultaneously but asynchronously
on both sides
Cannot be suppressed by restraint
Pathophysiology: epileptic

Focal tonic

Sustained posturing of single limbs
Sustained asymmetric posturing of the trunk
Sustained eye deviation
Cannot be provoked by stimulation or
suppressed by restraint
Pathophysiology: epileptic

Generalized tonic

Sustained symmetric posturing of limbs, trunk,
and neck
May be flexor, extensor, or mixed extensor/
flexor
May be provoked or intensified by stimulation
May be suppressed by restraint or repositioning
Presumed pathophysiology: nonepileptic

Myoclonic

Random, single, rapid contractions of muscle
groups of the limbs, face, or trunk: asymmetric
or symmetric
Typically not repetitive or may recur at a slow
rate
May be generalized, focal, multifocal, or
fragmentary
May be provoked by stimulation
Presumed pathophysiology: may be epileptic or
nonepileptic

CLASSIFICATION

CHARACTERIZATION

Spasms

May be flexor, extensor, or mixed extensor/
flexor
Unilateral or bilateral
May occur in clusters
Asymmetric or symmetric
Cannot be provoked by stimulation or
suppressed by restraint
Pathophysiology: epileptic
MOTOR AUTOMATISMS (UNILATERAL, BILATERAL, ASYMMETRIC
OR SYMMETRIC)
Ocular signs
Random and roving eye movements or
nystagmus (distinct from tonic eye deviation)
May be provoked or intensified by tactile
stimulation
Presumed pathophysiology: nonepileptic
Oral-­buccal-­lingual
movements

Sucking, chewing, tongue protrusions
May be provoked or intensified by stimulation
Presumed pathophysiology: nonepileptic

Progression
movements

Rowing or swimming movements
Pedaling or bicycling movements of the legs
May be provoked or intensified by stimulation
May be suppressed by restraint or repositioning
Presumed pathophysiology: nonepileptic

Complex
purposeless
movements

Sudden arousal with transient increased random
activity of limbs
May be provoked or intensified by stimulation
Presumed pathophysiology: nonepileptic

From Mizrahi EM, Kellaway P. Diagnosis and Management of Neonatal Seizures. Philadelphia: Lippincott-­Raven, 1998: Table 4, p. 21.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 633 u Seizures in Childhood 3619
clinical appearance alone is challenging. Thus in many cases, specifically in sick neonates with a history of suspected neurologic injury,
continuous bedside EEG is necessary to make this distinction.

These are most commonly associated with genetic epilepsies, including
KCNQ2 encephalopathy.

Motor Seizures
Automatisms

Jitteriness can be defined as rapid motor activities, such as a tremor or
shake, that can be ended by flexion or holding the limb. Seizures generally do not end with tactile or motor suppression. Jitteriness, unlike
most seizures, is usually induced by a stimulus. Unlike jitteriness, seizures often involve eye deviation and autonomic changes.

Automatisms include transient eye deviations, nystagmus, blinking,
mouthing, and abnormal extremity movements (rowing, swimming,
bicycling, pedaling, and stepping). Automatisms occur more commonly in premature than in full-­term infants.

Clonic Seizures

Clonic seizures can be focal or multifocal. Multifocal clonic seizures
incorporate several body parts and are migratory in nature. The migration follows a non-­Jacksonian trend; for example, jerking of the left
arm can be associated with jerking of the right leg. Generalized clonic
seizures that are bilateral, symmetric, and synchronous are uncommon
in the neonatal period, presumably because of decreased connectivity
associated with incomplete myelination at this age.

Epileptic Spasms

Epileptic spasms are sudden generalized jerks lasting 1-­2 seconds that
are distinguished from generalized tonic spells by their shorter duration and by the fact that spasms are usually associated with a single,
very brief, generalized discharge.

Myoclonic Seizures

Myoclonic seizures are divided into focal, multifocal, and generalized
types. Myoclonic seizures can be distinguished from clonic seizures by
the rapidity of the jerks (<50 milliseconds) and by their lack of rhythmicity. Focal myoclonic seizures characteristically affect the flexor muscles of the upper extremities and are sometimes associated with seizure
activity on EEG. Multifocal myoclonic movements involve asynchronous twitching of several parts of the body and are not commonly associated with seizure discharges on EEG. Generalized myoclonic seizures
involve bilateral jerking associated with flexion of the upper and occasionally lower extremities. The latter type of myoclonic jerks is more
commonly correlated with EEG abnormalities than the other types.

Tonic Seizures

Tonic seizures can be focal or generalized (generalized are more common). Focal tonic seizures include persistent posturing of a limb or
posturing of the trunk or neck in an asymmetric way, often with persistent horizontal eye deviation. Generalized tonic seizures are bilateral tonic limb extensions or tonic flexions of the upper extremities
often associated with tonic extension of the lower extremities and
trunk.

Nonmotor Seizures
Autonomic

Autonomic seizures involve fluctuations in autonomic system function, including alterations in the cardiovascular, vasomotor, pupillary, and thermoregulatory function. These seizures may include heart
rate changes, hypertension episodes, and apnea. Autonomic seizures
typically accompany additional seizure types and are rarely seen in
isolation.

Behavioral Arrest

Behavioral arrest seizures include cessation of activity or immobilization. This seizure type is rarely seen in isolation and can be seen as a
component of sequential seizures.

Sequential

Sequential seizures have been defined by the ILAE as a seizure type
for “events with a sequent of signs, symptoms, and EEG changes at different times.” An example would be a sequence of tonic, then clonic,
then automatisms, and autonomic manifestations with varying lateralization during one seizure. In these seizures, it can be challenging to
define the predominant semiology, and features present in a sequence.

Seizures Versus Jitteriness

ETIOLOGY

Table 633.18 and Table 633.20 and Figure 633.11 list causes of neonatal
seizures.

Hypoxic-­Ischemic Encephalopathy

This is the most common cause of neonatal seizures, accounting for
50–60% of patients. Seizures secondary to this encephalopathy occur
within 24 hours of birth. Abnormal EEG background, including excessive discontinuity, burst suppression, and extremely low voltage patterns, are strongly associated with the development of seizures.

Vascular Events

These include intracranial bleeds and ischemic strokes and account for
10–20% of patients. Three types of hemorrhage can be distinguished:
primary subarachnoid hemorrhage, germinal matrix–intraventricular
hemorrhage, and subdural hemorrhage. Patients with arterial strokes
or venous sinus thrombosis can present with seizure, and these can be
diagnosed by neuroimaging. Venous sinus thrombosis could be missed
unless MR or CT venography studies are requested.

Intracranial Infections

Bacterial and nonbacterial infections account for 5–10% of the cases of
neonatal seizures and include bacterial meningitis, TORCH (toxoplasmosis, other infections, rubella, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex virus)
infections, and, particularly, herpes simplex encephalitis.

Brain Malformations

Brain malformations account for 5–10% of neonatal seizure cases. An
example is Aicardi syndrome, which affects girls only and consists of
retinal lacunae, agenesis of the corpus callosum, and severe seizures,
including subsequent infantile spasms with hypsarrhythmia that is
sometimes initially unilateral on EEG.

Metabolic Disturbances

Metabolic disturbances include disturbances in glucose, calcium, magnesium, other electrolytes, amino acids, or organic acids and pyridoxine dependency (Table 633.21).
Hypoglycemia can cause neurologic disturbances and is common
in small neonates and neonates whose mothers are diabetic or prediabetic. The duration of hypoglycemia is very critical in determining the
incidence of neurologic symptoms.
Hypocalcemia occurs with two peaks. The first peak corresponds to low
birthweight infants and is evident in the first 2-­3 days of life. The second
peak occurs later in neonatal life and often involves large, full-­term babies
who consume milk that has an unfavorable ratio of phosphorus to calcium
and phosphorus to magnesium. Hypomagnesemia is often associated
with hypocalcemia. Hyponatremia can cause seizures and is often secondary to inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion or water intoxication.
Local anesthetic intoxication seizures can result from neonatal
intoxication with local anesthetics that are inadvertently administered
into the infant’s scalp.
Neonatal seizures can also result from disturbances in amino acid
or organic acid metabolism. These are usually associated with acidosis
and/or hyperammonemia. However, even in the absence of these findings, if a cause of the seizures is not immediately evident, then ruling out
metabolic causes requires a full metabolic workup (see Chapter 633.2),
including examination of serum amino acids, acyl carnitine profile,
lactate, pyruvate, ammonia, very long-­chain fatty acids (for neonatal
adrenoleukodystrophy and Zellweger syndrome), examination of urine

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3620 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 633.20  Clinical Characteristics and Genetic Variants of Neonatal Epilepsy Syndromes
SYNDROME

SEIZURE ONSET

TYPES OF SEIZURE

ETIOLOGY

EEG FEATURES

PROGNOSIS

Self-­limited familial
neonatal seizures

Days 2-­3

Focal tonic seizures,
often with apnea,
vocalization, or
autonomic change,
frequent brief
seizures

Autosomal dominant
variants in KCNQ2,
KCNQ3, SCN2A

Background: usually
normal
Interictal: a theta
pointu alternant
pattern or focal or
multifocal epileptiform
abnormalities

Favorable outcome,
typically resolved
seizures by 6 mo
of age

Self-­limited neonatal
seizures

Days 4-­6

Unilateral or bilateral
clonic seizures,
frequent seizure
clusters

Most unknown,
rare KCNQ2 variant

Ictal: focal rhythmic spike
or slow waves

Favorable outcome,
usually decreased
seizure within 48 hr

Early-­infantile
epileptic
encephalopathy

First 2 wk, up to
3 mo

Tonic seizures,
epileptic spasms

Structural brain
Background/interictal:
malformations,
suppression-­burst
genetic variants
patten: same asleep
in ARX, CDKL5,
and awake
SLC25A22, STXBP1, Ictal: diffuse attenuation
KCNQ2, SPTAN1,
with emergency of low-­
SCN2A, metabolic
voltage, high-­frequency
disorders
activity, or focal ictal
rhythms

Early myoclonic
encephalopathy

Hours to months

Multifocal erratic
myoclonus

Metabolic disorders,
genetic variants
in STXBP1,
TBC1D24, GABRA1

Background/interictal:
suppression-­burst
patten, enhanced by
sleep
Ictal: no ictal pattern but
followed by bursts, or
focal ictal rhythms

Epilepsy of infancy
with migrating focal
seizures

Days to months

Nearly continuous
focal clonic and/or
tonic, autonomic,
migrating seizures

Pathogenic variants
in KCNT1, SCN2A,
SCN1A, SLC25A22,
PLCB1, QARS

Background: normal or
diffuse slowing
Interictal: multifocal
discharges
Ictal: rhythmic alpha or
theta activities that
evolve simultaneously
from different brain
regions and migrate
to contiguous or
contralateral regions

Frequent early-­life
mortality, severe
developmental
disabilities

Generally poor
with refractory
seizures and severe
developmental
disabilities

From Kim EH, Shin J, Lee BK. Neonatal seizures: diagnostic updates based on new definition and classification. Clin Exp Pediatr. 2022;65(8):387–397. Table 1, p. 390.

for organic acids, α-­aminoadipic acid semialdehyde, and sulfocysteine,
as well as examination of CSF for glucose, protein, cells, amino acids,
lactate, pyruvate, α-­aminoadipic acid semialdehyde, pyridoxal phosphate, 5-­
methyltetrahydrofolate (5-­
MTHF), succinyladenosine, and
CSF neurotransmitter metabolites. This is because many inborn errors
of metabolism, such as nonketotic hyperglycinemia, can manifest with
neonatal seizures (often mistaken initially for hiccups, which these
patients also have) and can be detected only by performing these tests.
Definitive diagnosis of nonketotic hyperglycinemia, for example,
requires measuring the ratio of CSF glycine to plasma glycine.
Pyridoxine-­and pyridoxal-­dependency disorders can cause severe
seizures. These seizures, which are often multifocal clonic, usually start
during the first few hours of life. Cognitive impairment is often associated if therapy is delayed (see Chapter 633.4).

Drug Withdrawal

Seizures can rarely be caused by the neonate’s passive addiction and
then drug withdrawal after birth. Such drugs include narcotic analgesics, sedative-­hypnotics, and others. The associated seizures appear
during the first 3 days of life.

Neonatal Seizure Genetic Syndromes

Seizure syndromes include benign neonatal convulsions (fifth-­day
fits), which are usually apneic, and focal motor seizures that start around

the fifth day of life (see Table 633.20). Interictal EEG shows a distinctive
pattern called theta pointu alternant (runs of sharp 4-­to 7-­Hz activity),
and ictal EEG shows multifocal electrographic seizures. Patients have a
good response to medications and a good prognosis. Autosomal dominant benign familial neonatal seizures have an onset at 2-­4 days of age
and usually remit at 2-­15 weeks of age. The seizures consist of ocular
deviation, tonic posturing, clonic jerks, and, at times, motor automatisms. Interictal EEG is usually normal. These are caused by pathogenic
variants in KCNQ2 and KCNQ3. Approximately 16% of patients develop
later epilepsy. Early myoclonic encephalopathy and early infantile epileptic encephalopathy (Ohtahara syndrome) are discussed in Chapter
633.4.

Miscellaneous Conditions

Miscellaneous conditions include benign neonatal sleep myoclonus
and hyperekplexia, which are nonepileptic conditions (see Chapter
634).

DIAGNOSIS

Some cases can be correctly diagnosed by simply taking the prenatal and postnatal history and performing an adequate physical
examination; however, the American Clinical Neurophysiology Society
Guidelines for Neonatal EEG Monitoring recommend EEG monitoring in cases where there is a clinical concern for seizure and/or when

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 633 u Seizures in Childhood 3621
Table 633.21  Overview of Diagnostic Findings in Inborn Errors of Metabolism Presenting with Isolated Neonatal Seizures
DISORDER

MRI AND MRS FINDINGS

CSF FINDINGS

FURTHER DIAGNOSTIC
TESTING

Pyridoxine-­dependent seizures

Normal or hypoplasia of corpus
callosum and cerebellum

Increased levels of
α-­AASA, pipecolic acid,
and neurotransmitter markers

Urinary and serum α-­AASA or
pipecolic acid, ALDH7A1 gene
testing

Pyridoxal-­phosphate–dependent
seizures

Generalized atrophy

May be normal or nonspecific
changes

Pyridoxamine-­5-­phosphate
oxidase gene testing

Defects of serine biogenesis

Initially normal, progressing to
profound hypomyelination

Low levels of serine; may also
have low levels of glycine or
5-­MTHF

Skin biopsy for
3-­phosphoglycerate
dehydrogenase activity

GLUT-­1 deficiency

Normal or generalized atrophy

CSF glucose <40 mg/dL or <half
of serum glucose

FDG-­PET; 3-­OMG uptake in red
blood cells; gene testing for
SLC2A1

Nonketotic hyperglycinemia

Normal, or agenesis or thinning of
the corpus callosum

Increased levels of glycine, and
increased CSF/plasma glycine
ratio

Liver glycine cleavage complex
enzyme activity; gene testing for
nonketotic hyperglycinemia

Sulfite oxidase/molybdenum
cofactor deficiency

MRI findings can mimic those of
Normal or nonspecific changes in
hypoxic-­ischemic injury;
amino acid profile
MRS reveals increased levels of
lactate, myoinositol, and choline,
with decreased levels of NAA

Plasma homocysteine and uric
acid; urine sulfites, sulfocysteine,
and thiosulfates; sulfite oxidase
enzyme activity in skin or liver
biopsy

Congenital neuronal ceroid-­
lipofuscinosis

Generalized cerebral hypoplasia

Normal

Cathepsin D gene testing

γ-­Aminobutyric acid transferase
deficiency

MRI indicates leukodystrophy and
agenesis of the corpus callosum;
MRS indicates elevated levels of
γ-­aminobutyric acid in the basal
ganglia

Increased levels of homocarnosine

Enzyme activity in lymphocytes

Dihydropyrimidine
dehydrogenase deficiency

Diffuse atrophy

Increased levels of uracil and
thymine

Dihydropyrimidine
dehydrogenase gene testing

Creatine deficiency syndromes

MRI indicates delayed myelination
MRS reveals absent creatine peak

Normal

Serum creatine and
guanidinoacetate; urinary
creatine, creatinine, and
guanidinoacetate; fibroblast
enzyme activity; specific genetic
testing

For current information on the best locations to perform biochemical and genetic testing, see genereviews.org.
3-­OMG, 3-­O-­methyl-­D-­glucose; 5-­MTHF, 5-­methyltetrahydrofolate; α-­AASA, α-­aminoadipic emialdehyde; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; FDG-­PET, fluorodeoxyglucose–positron emission
tomography; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; MRS, magnetic resonance spectroscopy; NAA, N-­acetylaspartate.
From Ficicioglu C, Bearden D. Isolated neonatal seizures: when to suspect inborn errors of metabolism. Pediatric Neurol. 2011;45:283–291. Table 2.

an infant has a condition that predisposes the infant to seizures. EEG
monitoring can show epileptiform activity (e.g., sharp waves) between
the seizures (suggesting an increased risk for seizures) and confirm
electrographic seizure activity if a clinical seizure is recorded. Additionally, EEG monitoring is often necessary because electrographic
seizures can occur without observed clinical signs (electroclinical
dissociation). This is presumed to be caused by the immaturity of
cortical connections, resulting, in many cases, in no or minimal clinical manifestations.
Continuous bedside EEG monitoring in the neonatal intensive care
unit is the preferred clinical practice for neonates at risk for neonatal
seizures and brain injury. Amplitude-­integrated EEG (aEEG) monitoring is also used as an adjunct to conventional EEG monitoring and
provides a bedside graphic representation of a neonate’s electrocerebral
activity, which may aid in earlier seizure identification. Appropriately
trained nurses and providers can identify possible seizure activity
using aEEG and can then contact the neurophysiologist to confirm
the presence or absence of seizures. Examples of situations in which
continuous EEG monitoring should be used include cases of hypoxic-­
ischemic injury (particularly if an infant is undergoing therapeutic
hypothermia), intracranial infarct or hemorrhage, or CNS infection;

for seizure screening in infants receiving paralytics; in infants with
congenital cerebral malformations; and/or in infants in whom clinical
events suspected to be seizures need to be characterized.
Careful neurologic examination of the infant might uncover the
cause of the seizure disorder. Examination of the retina might show
the presence of chorioretinitis, suggesting a congenital TORCH infection, in which case titers of mother and infant are indicated. Aicardi
syndrome is associated with coloboma of the iris and retinal lacunae.
Inspection of the skin might show hypopigmented lesions characteristic of tuberous sclerosis (seen best on ultraviolet light examination)
or the typical crusted vesicular lesions of incontinentia pigmenti; both
neurocutaneous syndromes are often associated with generalized myoclonic seizures beginning early in life. An unusual body or urine odor
suggests an inborn error of metabolism.
Blood should be obtained for determinations of glucose, calcium,
magnesium, electrolytes, and blood urea nitrogen. If hypoglycemia is a
possibility, bedside serum glucose testing is indicated so that treatment
can be initiated immediately. Hypocalcemia can occur in isolation or
in association with hypomagnesemia. A lowered serum calcium level
is often associated with birth trauma or a CNS insult in the perinatal period. Additional causes include maternal diabetes, prematurity,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3622 Part XXV u The Nervous System
DiGeorge syndrome, and high-­phosphate feedings. Hypomagnesemia (<1.5 mg/dL) is often associated with hypocalcemia and occurs
particularly in infants of malnourished mothers. In this situation, the
seizures are resistant to calcium therapy but respond to intramuscular
magnesium 0.2 mL/kg of a 50% solution of MgSO4. Serum electrolyte
measurement can indicate significant hyponatremia (serum sodium
<115 mEq/L) or hypernatremia (serum sodium >160 mEq/L) as a
cause of the seizure disorder.
A lumbar puncture may be indicated in neonates with seizures,
unless the cause is obviously related to a metabolic disorder (such as
hypoglycemia or hypocalcemia) or attributable to a structural etiology such as hypoxic-­ischemic injury or intracranial hemorrhage. The
CSF findings can indicate a bacterial meningitis or aseptic encephalitis.
Prompt diagnosis and appropriate therapy improve the outcome for
these infants. Bloody CSF indicates a traumatic tap or a subarachnoid
or intraventricular bleed. Immediate centrifugation of the specimen
can assist in differentiating the two disorders. A clear supernatant
suggests a traumatic tap, and a xanthochromic color suggests a subarachnoid bleed. Mildly jaundiced normal infants can have a yellowish
discoloration of the CSF that makes inspection of the supernatant less
reliable in the newborn period.
Many inborn errors of metabolism cause generalized convulsions
in the newborn period. Because these conditions are often inherited
in an autosomal recessive or X-­linked recessive fashion, it is imperative that a careful family history be obtained to determine if there is
consanguinity or whether siblings or close relatives developed seizures
or died at an early age. Serum ammonia determination is useful for
screening for the hypoglycemic hyperammonemia syndrome and for
suspected urea cycle abnormalities. In addition to having generalized
clonic seizures, these latter infants present during the first few days of
life with increasing lethargy progressing to coma, anorexia and vomiting, and a bulging fontanel. If the blood gases show an anion gap and
a metabolic acidosis with the hyperammonemia, urine organic acids
should be immediately determined to investigate the possibility of an
organic acidemia such as methylmalonic or propionic acidemia.
Maple syrup urine disease should be suspected when a metabolic
acidosis occurs in association with generalized clonic seizures, vomiting, a bulging fontanel, and muscle rigidity during the first week of life.
The result of a rapid screening test using 2,4-­dinitrophenylhydrazine
that identifies keto derivatives in the urine is positive in maple syrup
urine disease.
Additional metabolic causes of neonatal seizures include nonketotic hyperglycinemia, an intractable condition characterized by
markedly elevated plasma and CSF glycine levels, prominent hiccups,
persistent generalized seizures, and lethargy rapidly leading to coma;
ketotic hyperglycinemia in which seizures are associated with vomiting, fluid and electrolyte disturbances, and a metabolic acidosis; and
Leigh disease, suggested by elevated levels of serum and CSF lactate
or an increased lactate:pyruvate ratio. Biotinidase deficiency should
also be considered. A comprehensive description of the diagnosis and
management of these metabolic diseases is discussed in Part IX, Metabolic Disorders.
Unintentional injection of a local anesthetic into a fetus during labor can produce intense tonic seizures. These infants are often
thought to have had a traumatic delivery because they are flaccid at
birth, have abnormal brainstem reflexes, and show signs of respiratory
depression that sometimes require ventilation. Examination may show
a needle puncture of the skin or a perforation or laceration of the scalp.
An elevated serum anesthetic level confirms the diagnosis. The treatment consists of supportive measures and promotion of urine output
by administering intravenous fluids with appropriate monitoring to
prevent fluid overload.
Benign familial neonatal seizures, an autosomal dominant condition, begins on the second to third day of life, with a seizure frequency of 10-­20/day. Patients are normal between seizures, which
stop in 1-­6 months. These are caused by pathogenic variants in the
voltage-­sensitive potassium channel genes Kv7.2 and Kv7.3 (KCNQ2
and KCNQ3). Other variants in Kv7.2 cause severe neonatal epileptic encephalopathy. Fifth-­day fits occur on day 5 of life (4-­6 days) in

normal-­appearing neonates. The seizures are multifocal and are often
present for <24 hours. The diagnosis requires exclusion of other causes
of seizures and sequencing of the previously mentioned genes. The
prognosis is good for the benign form.
Pyridoxine dependency, a rare disorder, must be considered when
seizures begin shortly after birth with signs of fetal distress in utero
and are resistant to conventional anticonvulsants such as phenobarbital or phenytoin even if there is an initial treatment response. The
history may suggest that similar seizures occurred in utero. When
pyridoxine-­dependent seizures are suspected, 100 mg of pyridoxine
should be administered intravenously during the EEG, which should
be promptly performed once the diagnosis is considered. The seizures
abruptly cease, and the EEG often normalizes in the next few hours or
longer. Not all cases of pyridoxine dependency respond dramatically to
the initial bolus of intravenous pyridoxine. Therefore a 6-­week trial of
oral pyridoxine (100-­200 mg/day) or, preferably, pyridoxal phosphate
(because pyridoxine does not help infants with the related but distinct
syndrome of pyridoxal dependency) is recommended for infants in
whom a high index of suspicion continues after a negative response
to intravenous pyridoxine. Measurement of serum pipecolic acid and
α-­aminoadipic acid semialdehyde (elevated) and CSF pyridoxal-­5-­
phosphate (decreased) needs to be performed before initiation of the
trials without delay. These children require lifelong supplementation
of oral pyridoxine (100 mg/day at times with folinic acid) or pyridoxal
phosphate (up to 50 mg/kg/day given every 6 hours). Cerebral folate
deficiency should also be ruled out by a medication trial (folinic acid
1-­3 mg/kg/day) and by CSF levels of 5-­methyltetrahydrofolate assay.
Gene sequencing can confirm the diagnosis (see Chapter 633.4). The
earlier the therapy is initiated in these vitamin-­responsive disorders,
the more favorable the outcome.
Drug withdrawal seizures can occur in the newborn nursery but
can take several weeks to develop because of prolonged excretion of
the drug by the neonate. Drugs include barbiturates, benzodiazepines,
heroin, buprenorphine, fentanyl, and methadone. The infant may be
jittery, irritable, and lethargic and can have myoclonus or frank clonic
seizures. The mother might deny the use of drugs; a serum or urine
drug screen might identify the responsible agent.
Infants with focal seizures, suspected stroke or intracranial hemorrhage, and severe cytoarchitectural abnormalities of the brain (including lissencephaly and schizencephaly) who clinically may appear
normal or microcephalic should undergo MRI or CT scan. Indeed, it is
appropriate to recommend imaging of all neonates with seizures unexplained by serum glucose, calcium, or electrolyte disorders.

PROGNOSIS

The prognosis of neonatal seizures has improved owing to advancements in obstetric and intensive neonatal care but depends on the
etiology and other organ system injury. Prematurity and high seizure
burden have been shown to be associated with early death. The correlation between EEG findings and prognosis is clear. An abnormal EEG
background is a powerful predictor of a less favorable later outcome.
In addition, prolonged electrographic seizures (>10 min/hr), multifocal periodic electrographic discharges, and spread of the electrographic
seizures to the contralateral hemisphere are also correlated with a
poorer outcome. Patients with seizures secondary to severe hypoxic-­
ischemic encephalopathy have a 50% chance of typical development,
whereas those with seizures caused by primary subarachnoid hemorrhage or hypocalcemia have a much better prognosis.

TREATMENT

A mainstay in the therapy of neonatal seizures is the diagnosis and
treatment of the underlying etiology (e.g., HIE, hypoglycemia, hypocalcemia, meningitis, drug withdrawal, trauma) whenever one can
be identified. There are conflicting approaches regarding the control
of neonatal seizures. Most experts advocate complete control of electroclinical and electrographic seizures. An important consideration
before starting anticonvulsants is deciding, based on the severity,
duration, and frequency of the seizures, if the patient needs to receive
intravenous therapy and loading with an initial bolus or can simply

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 633 u Seizures in Childhood 3623
be started on maintenance doses of a long-­acting drug. Patients may
require assisted ventilation after receiving intravenous or oral loading
doses of AEDs, and thus precautions for observations and for needed
interventions are necessary.

Lorazepam and Other Benzodiazepines

Lorazepam is often used in the acute treatment of neonatal seizures;
it is distributed to the brain very quickly and exerts its anticonvulsant
effect in less than 5 minutes. It is not very lipophilic and does not clear
out from the brain very rapidly. Its action can last 6-­24 hours. Usually,
it does not cause hypotension or respiratory depression. The dose is
0.1 mg/kg when used for acute treatment of seizures, and 0.05 mg/kg
(range: 0.02-­0.10 mg/kg) every 4-­8 hours when used as a scheduled
medication. Diazepam has also been used, and midazolam is often
started as a continuous infusion for refractory cases of neonatal seizures. Midazolam doses used have been in the range of 0.05-­0.15 mg/
kg as an initial intravenous bolus, with a continuous infusion of 0.5-­1
μg/kg/min intravenously that can then be gradually titrated upward, if
tolerated, every 5 minutes or longer, to a maximum of approximately
33 μg/kg/min (2 mg/kg/hr).

Phenobarbital

Consensus guidelines and existing data support the use of phenobarbital as the first-choice treatment of neonatal seizures. The usual loading
dose is 20 mg/kg. If this dosage is not effective, then additional doses
of 10-20 mg/kg can be given until a cumulative dose of 40 mg/kg is
reached. Respiratory support may be needed after phenobarbital loading. Twenty-­four hours after starting the loading dose, maintenance
dosing can be started at 3-­6 mg/kg/day, usually administered in two
separate doses. Phenobarbital is metabolized in the liver and is excreted
through the kidneys. Thus any abnormality in the function of these
organs alters the drug’s metabolism and can result in toxicity. In infants
with acidosis or critical illness that might alter the serum protein content, free (i.e., not protein bound) levels of the drug should be followed
carefully. The use of phenobarbital can be associated with electroclinical
dissociation, where electrographic seizures persist despite the resolution of clinical seizures, after the drug is given. Subsequent EEG monitoring is therefore imperative to rule out subclinical seizure activity.

Phenytoin and Fosphenytoin

Consensus guidelines support the use of fosphenytoin as a second
line anti-seizure medication in neonatal seizures. The only randomized controlled trial to compare the efficacy of phenobarbital versus
phenytoin did not find that one drug was superior to the other for the
treatment of neonatal seizures. Because of its reduced solubility, potentially severe local cutaneous reactions, interactions with other drugs,
and possible cardiac toxicity, intravenous phenytoin is not widely used,
and fosphenytoin is the preferred agent. Phenytoin is given at a loading dose of 20 mg/kg at a rate not to exceed 0.5-­1.0 mg/kg/min, so as
to prevent cardiac problems; the medication should be used with caution or avoided in patients with significant heart disease. The heart rate
should be monitored while the drug is administered. It is not possible
to mix phenytoin or fosphenytoin with dextrose solutions. Additionally, phenytoin and fosphenytoin should not be used in conjunction
with intravenous lidocaine owing to the concern that both drugs can
increase the risk of cardiac arrhythmias and hypotension.
As stated earlier, fosphenytoin, which is a phosphate ester prodrug, is preferable to phenytoin. It is highly soluble in water and can
be administered safely intravenously and intramuscularly, without
causing injury to tissues. Fosphenytoin is administered in phenytoin
equivalents (PE). The usual loading dose of fosphenytoin is 15-­20 PE/
kg administered over 30 minutes. Maintenance doses of 4-­8 PE/kg/day
can be given. As is the case for phenobarbital, free levels of the drug
should be monitored in neonates whose serum pH or protein content
might not be normal.

Other Medications

Approximately 45% of neonates respond to the first drug used if it is
phenobarbital or phenytoin, and an additional 15% respond to the

second agent. Levetiracetam (which can be given intravenously with
a later convenient conversion to oral solution) is commonly used as a
second-­or third-­line agent. In a randomized controlled trial of levetiracetam (40-­60 mg/kg) versus phenobarbital (20-­40 mg/kg) for neonatal seizures, 28% of infants responded to levetiracetam as a first-­line
agent, as compared with 80% of infants who received phenobarbital. The
maintenance dosages used are 40-­60 mg/kg/day of levetiracetam, dosed
3 times daily. Topiramate, a possible third line agent, can be given at a
dose of 5-­10 mg/kg/day (sometimes higher). There is growing evidence
that lidocaine is an effective second-­or third-­line agent, and some studies suggest it may be superior to benzodiazepines in treating neonatal
seizures. A bolus dose of 2 mg/kg is given, followed by an infusion at
a rate of 4-­6 mg/kg/hr. Cardiac arrhythmias and hypotension were not
reported at this dosing range but are potential side effects at higher
doses. Lidocaine should not be used in conjunction with phenytoin or
fosphenytoin owing to concern for cardiac side effects. A randomized
controlled trial suggested that bumetanide provided added reduction
in seizure burden when used as an adjunct agent without an increased
risk of adverse events. Studies of the efficacy and safety of lacosamide for
neonatal seizures are ongoing. Primidone, carbamazepine, lamotrigine,
or valproate use, although reported in some studies, is rarely warranted.
Valproate, for example, is more likely to be toxic in children younger
than 2 years of age than in older children.

Duration of Therapy

The duration of therapy is related to the risk of epilepsy developing
later in infants suffering from neonatal seizures, a risk that ranges from
10% to 30% and depends on the individual neurologic examination
and the etiology of the seizures. Existing data and consensus guidelines
support the discontinuation of anticonvulsant medications before hospital discharge in neonates with acute symptomatic seizures.

ADDRESSING FAMILY NEEDS

Over half of parents of newborns with seizures experience symptoms
of anxiety, one third experience symptoms of depression. Existing data
suggest that parents of newborns with seizures experience consistent
challenges, including prognostic uncertainty, concern about adapting
their family life, and the physical and emotional toll of caring for a
critically ill infant. Clinicians can help address these needs by attending
to parent psychosocial needs, connecting parents to peer support, and
communicating effectively.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

633.8 Status Epilepticus
Mohamad A. Mikati and Dmitry Tchapyjnikov
Status epilepticus (SE) is a medical emergency that should be anticipated in any patient who presents with an acute seizure. The ILAE has
refined the definition of SE to reflect the time at which treatment should
be initiated (t1) and time at which continuous seizure activity leads to
long-­term sequelae (t2) such as neuronal injury, depending on the type
of SE. For generalized tonic-­clonic seizures, SE is defined as continuous
convulsive activity or recurrent generalized convulsive seizure activity without regaining consciousness (t1 = 5 minutes, t2 ≥30 minutes).
The definition differs for SE consisting of focal seizures with impaired
awareness (t1 = 10 minutes, t2 = 30 minutes) and absence SE (t1 = 10-­15
minutes, t2 = unknown). The most common type of SE is convulsive
status epilepticus (generalized tonic, clonic, or tonic-­clonic), but other
types do occur, including nonconvulsive status (focal with impaired
awareness, absence), myoclonic status, epilepsia partialis continua, and
neonatal SE. The incidence of SE ranges between 10 and 60 per 100,000
population in various studies. SE is most common in children younger
than 5 years of age, with an incidence in this age-­group of ∼100 per
100,000 children.
Approximately 30% of patients presenting with SE are having their
first seizure, and approximately 40% of these later develop epilepsy.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3624 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Febrile status epilepticus is the most common type of SE in children.
Currently, with the recognition of SE as a medical emergency, the
mortality rate is 4–5%, most of it secondary to the underlying etiology
rather than to the seizures. SE carries an approximately 14% risk of new

Table 633.22  Clinical Features of Febrile Infection–Related
Epilepsy Syndrome (FIRES)
Age of onset: 2-­17 (median 8) yr
Medical history: febrile seizures in rare cases, no epilepsy or other
chronic disease, normal psychomotor development
Family history: uninformative (e.g., no allergies and especially no
other family member with FIRES)
Prodromal phase:
• Different types of febrile infections, often flulike
• Frequently followed by an afebrile and asymptomatic interval
of 1-­2 days resulting in a consistent neurologic syndrome
Neurologic syndrome:
• Peracute/explosive onset of multifocal or generalized seizures
of different types directly evolving into superrefractory status
epilepticus
• Without other neurologic features (pure seizure phenotype)
EEG: global slowing or multifocal discharges with bilateral
frontotemporal predominance, or both
CSF: normal or pleocytosis, normal protein concentration, no
oligoclonal bands
MRI (during the acute phase of status epilepticus):
• No or nonextensive bitemporal or diffuse abnormalities
• Sporadic involvement of the basal ganglia, diffuse cortical
edema, and/or hydrocephalus
Cause: extensive infectiologic (e.g., brain biopsies), metabolic (e.g.,
muscle biopsy), and genetic investigations (e.g., POLG, SCN1A,
PCDH19 genes, CNVs, exome sequencing) without causative
findings
Coexisting autoimmunities: some patients with autoantibodies (e.g.,
TPO or GluR antibodies)
Treatment: resistance to nearly all drugs and even anesthetics
Outcome:
• Almost always chronic epilepsy without silent period
• Often global brain atrophy after a few weeks with mild to
severe neuropsychologic impairments
CNVs, Copy number variants; GluR, glutamate receptor; TPO, thyroid peroxidase.
From van Baalen A, Vezzani A, Hausker M, et al. Febrile infection-­related epilepsy
syndrome: clinical review and hypotheses of epileptogenesis. Neuropediatrics.
2017;48:5–18, Table 1, p.6.

neurologic deficits, most of them (12.5%) secondary to the underlying
pathology.
Nonconvulsive status epilepticus (NCSE) can manifest as a confusional state, dementia, fluctuating mental status, hallucinations, paranoia, aggressiveness, catatonia, and/or psychotic symptoms. It should
be considered in all children who present to the hospital in an encephalopathic state or in the intensive care unit when a child’s mental status
fails to improve. Epilepsia partialis continua has been defined previously and can be caused by tumor, vascular etiologies, mitochondrial
disease (MELAS), and Rasmussen encephalitis.
Refractory status epilepticus is SE in which a child’s seizures fail
to resolve despite therapy with both a benzodiazepine and a non-­
benzodiazepine medication. Superrefractory status epilepticus is SE that
has failed to resolve, or recurs, within 24 hours or more despite therapy that
includes a continuous infusion such as midazolam and/or pentobarbital.
New-­onset refractory status epilepticus (NORSE) is defined as
SE without a clear etiology after initial investigations (typically brain
imaging as well as blood and CSF analysis) have ruled out common
causes for SE, including stroke, infection, and toxic/metabolic derangements. Children presenting with NORSE may sometimes have a prodromal flulike illness before developing seizures but are otherwise
often previously healthy with no history of seizures. A clear etiology is
ultimately determined only 50% of the time and includes inflammatory
and autoimmune causes (such as anti–NMDA receptor encephalitis),
rare infectious disorders, or genetic causes that predispose the child to
having prolonged seizures (such as pathogenic variants in PCDH19).
Children with NORSE almost always develop superrefractory status
epilepticus, and the prognosis is often poor with >10% mortality and
up to two thirds developing long-­term neurologic disability. Febrile
infection-­related epilepsy syndrome (FIRES) is a subtype of NORSE
in which the child also has a febrile illness 1-­14 days preceding seizure
onset (Table 633.22 and Fig. 633.13). A fever does not have to be present at the time of seizure onset as long as a fever was present in the preceding period. FIRES was thought to be a condition mostly affecting
children; however, it is recognized that NORSE and FIRES can occur
in both adults and children. An international group of pediatric epileptologists, pediatric neurointensivists, rheumatologists, and basic scientists with interest and expertise in FIRES published recommendations
regarding the approach to and management of FIRES (Figs. 633.14 and
633.15). FIRES should be considered in all previously healthy patients
older than 2 years of age who present with sudden-­onset refractory
SE within 2 weeks of a prior febrile illness (see Table 633.22). They
also recommended early use of the ketogenic diet and the IL-­1 receptor

Incidence (%)
Family
history

100 -

Antecedent
history

Female

Negative
family
history

Negative
antecedent
history

Male

80

-

60

-

40

-

20

-

10

-

•
•
•
•

Fever
URI
GTI
Headache

10

20

Prodromic phase

•
•
•
•
•

30

60

Focal/multifocal seizures
Focal to bilateral seizures
Myoclonic seizures
Tonic seizure
NCSE

80

Acute phase

100

150

•
•
•
•
•

200

250

Drug resistant epilepsy
Neurological deficit
Cognitive impairment
Behavioral disturbances
Death

Time (d)

Chronic phase

Fig. 633.13 Clinical findings in FIRES and NORSE, including family history, antecedents, and sex predominance. The graph shows the symptoms

during the prodromic phase, type of seizures in the acute phase, and clinical findings during the chronic phase. GTI, Gastrointestinal tract infections;
NCSE, nonconvulsive status epilepticus; URI, upper respiratory infection. (From Specchio N, Pietrafusa N. New-­onset refractory status epilepticus
and febrile infection-­related epilepsy syndrome. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2020;62:897–905, Fig. 1, p. 899.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 633 u Seizures in Childhood 3625
Standard workup
Most patients

MRI brain with
gadolinium contrast
(consider MRA/MRV),
cEEG, consider CT c/a/p

Blood and serum analysis
• CBC, electrolytes, LFT,
BUN, ESR, CRP
• Auto-antibody disease
workup incl. anti-neuronal
surface antigens, MOG,
GAD65, anti-thyroid,
paraneoplastic, SLE panel,
ANA, ANCA
• Cytokines, immunoglobulins,
consider DNA for genetic testing
(incl. mitochondrial disorders
and HLH)
• Viral serology: HIV, HSV,
enterovirus, SARS-CoV-2
• Bacterial serology: syphilis,
C. pneumonia, B. henselae,
M. pneumonia, C. burneti,
Shigella, C. psittaci blood
cultures for bacteria and fungi
• Infectious workup as determined
by region and season

CSF analysis
• Cells (count and cytology),
protein, glucose, lactate,
IgG/albumin ratio,
immunoelectrofocusing,
consider neopterin,
cytokines if available
• Autoimmune/paraneoplastic
antibody panel
• PCR for common viral and
bacterial causes of
meningoencephalitis
• Consider metagenomics
for rare infectious agents
• Bacterial and fungal statins,
VDRL

Toxicology
screen

Continued workup
Selected cases

Immunocompromised
patients
• Serology for
Cryptococcus species
(also Ag), Histoplasma
capsulatum,
Toxoplasma gondii
• CSF for Cryptococcus
species (Ag), fungi,
• PCR for Toxoplasma
gondii, JC virus, HHV6,
EEEV, WNV, parvovirus,
Mycobacterium
tuberculosis
• Consider metagenomics
together with ID consult

Risk of exposure to
specific pathogens
associated with
encephalitis
In collaboration with
ID consult: Serum and
CSF IgG panel and
PCR/cultures relevant
to region

Clinical or
immunological
suspicion of
paraneoplastic
encephalitis
Whole body
PET-CT,
pelvic/testicular
US and pelvic MRI

Suspicion of inborn
error of metabolism,
including
mitochondrial
disorders
• LDH, UA with
microscopy, ammonia,
porphyria screen,
VLCFA screen,
acylcarnitine,
orotic acid
• Plasma and
CSF: lactate,
pyruvate, organic
acids, amino acids
• MR spectroscopy,
muscle biopsy.
• Consider genetic
testing as at right.

Suspicion of
genetic disorder
(if not performed
during initial
workup)
Whole exome and
mitochondrial
genome
sequencing,
genetic consult

If cryptogenic
and lesion
on MRI
Brain biopsy

Fig. 633.14 Algorithm for diagnostic workup in NORSE, including FIRES. Ag, Antigen; ANA, anti-­nuclear antibodies, ANCA, anti-­neutrophil

cytoplasmic antibodies; B. henselae, Bartonella henselae; BUN, blood urea nitrogen; C. burnetii, Coxiella burnetii; C. pneumoniae, Chlamydia
pneumoniae; C. psittaci, Chlamydia psittaci; CBC, complete blood count; cEEG, continuous EEG; CRP, C-­reactive protein; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid;
DNA, deoxyribonucleic acid; EEEV, eastern equine encephalitis virus; EEG, electroencephalography; ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate; GAD,
glutamic acid decarboxylase; HHV, human herpesvirus; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; HLH, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis; HSV, herpes
simplex virus; ID, infectious disease; IgG, immunoglobulin G; JC, John Cunningham; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; LFT, liver function test; M. pneumoniae, Mycoplasma pneumoniae; MOG, myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein; MRA, magnetic resonance angiography; MRI, magnetic resonance
imaging; MRV, magnetic resonance venography; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; PET-­CT, positron emission tomography–computed tomography;
SARS-­CoV2, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus; UA, urine analysis; US; ultrasound; VLCFA, very
long-­chain fatty acid; VDRL, Venereal Disease Research Laboratory; VZV, varicella-­zoster virus; WNV, West Nile virus. (Adapted from NORSE Institute
website norseinstitute.org; and from Sculier C, Gaspard N. New onset refractory status epilepticus [NORSE]. Seizure. 2019;68:72–78, Fig. 1.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3626 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Timeline
0

Initial treatment of SE and RSE
• Seizure management with ASMs as per published recommendations and local guidelines
• Seizure management with anesthetic drugs as per published recommendations and local guidelines
• Management of possible infections (antibiotic, antiviral, antifungal)
Acute diagnostic workup
during initial 48–72 hours

48h

72h

NORSE with incomplete response to initiated treatment

Etiology identified

Initiate first-line immune therapies (within 72 h since onset of status epilepticus)
• IV (not oral) methylprednisolone 20–30 mg/kg (max 1 g) per day for 3–5 days
OR
• IVlG 2 g/kg over 2–5 days

• Manage according to etiology

Therapeutic plasma exchange may be used but should not delay subsequent steps
If incomplete response

7d

In all children, consider in adults if available
Initiate ketogenic diet (within one week since onset of status epilepticus)
Oral or parenteral administration
AND

7d

Initiate second-line immune therapies
(within one week since onset of status epilepticus)
If antibody mediated (confirmed or
phenotype highly suggestives of AE):
• IV rituximab

If cryptogenic (or antibodies not
available within one week):
• II-1R antagonists: IV anakinra OR
• II-6 antagonists: IV tocilizumab

Anakinra or tocilizumab may be added sequentially to rituximab if
ineffective. Caution due to increased infectious risk and avoid concurrent use.
Try to minimize the exposure to anesthetic drugs, especially barbiturates, and monitor the patient closely for complications of prolonged sedation

Fig. 633.15 Suggested treatment algorithm for NORSE, including FIRES (expert opinion). AE, Autoimmune encephalitis; ASM, antiseizure medica-

tion; IV, intravenous; IVIG, intravenous immunoglobulins; RSE, refractory status epilepticus; SE, status epilepticus. (From Wickström R, Taraschenko
O, Dilena R, et al. International consensus recommendations for management of new onset refractory status epilepticus [NORSE] including febrile
infection-­related epilepsy syndrome [FIRES]: summary and clinical tools. Epilepsia. 2022;63:2827–2839, Fig. 2, p. 2836.)

antagonist that blocks IL-­1β activity, anakinra, in FIRES patients (see
Fig. 633.15).

ETIOLOGY

Etiologies of SE include new-­onset epilepsy of any type; drug intoxication (e.g., tricyclic antidepressants) in children and drug and alcohol
misuse in adolescents; drug withdrawal or overdose in patients taking
AEDs; hypoglycemia; hypocalcemia; hyponatremia; hypomagnesemia;
acute head trauma; encephalitis; meningitis; autoimmune encephalitis
(anti–NMDA receptor; steroid-­responsive encephalopathy associated
with autoimmune thyroiditis [SREAT], and anti–voltage-­gated potassium channel complex antibody syndromes); ischemic (arterial or
venous) stroke; intracranial hemorrhage; folinic acid and pyridoxine-­
and pyridoxal-­phosphate dependency (these usually present in infancy,
but childhood onset is also possible); inborn errors of metabolism (see
Chapter 633.2) such as nonketotic hyperglycinemia in neonates and
MELAS in infants, children, and adolescents; ion channel–related epilepsies (e.g., sodium and potassium channel mutations reviewed in the
sections earlier); hypoxic-­ischemic injury (e.g., after cardiac arrest);
systemic conditions (such as hypertensive encephalopathy, posterior
reversible encephalopathy, renal or hepatic encephalopathy); brain

tumors; and any other disorder that can cause epilepsy (such as brain
malformations, neurodegenerative disorders, different types of progressive myoclonic epilepsy, and storage diseases).
A rare condition called hemiconvulsion-­hemiplegia-­epilepsy
syndrome consists of prolonged febrile SE presumably caused by
focal acute encephalitis with resultant atrophy in the involved hemisphere, contralateral hemiplegia, and chronic epilepsy. It should be
suspected early on to attempt to control the seizures as early as possible. This and the somewhat similar condition FIRES are likely to have
a parainfectious-­autoimmune etiology. In addition, hemophagocytic
lymphocytic histiocytosis has been reported to cause FIRES. Rasmussen encephalitis often causes epilepsia partialis continua (see
Chapter 633.3) and sometimes convulsive SE. Several types of infections are more likely to cause encephalitis with SE, such as herpes
simplex (complex partial and convulsive status), Bartonella (particularly nonconvulsive status), Epstein-­Barr virus, and mycoplasma
(postinfectious encephalomyelitis with any type of status epilepticus).
Postinfectious encephalitis and acute disseminated encephalomyelitis are common causes of SE, including refractory SE. HHV-­6 can
cause a distinct epileptic syndrome with limbic SE in immunosuppressed patients.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 633 u Seizures in Childhood 3627
including glucose, sodium, calcium, magnesium, complete blood count,
basic metabolic panel, CT scan, and continuous EEG, are needed for all
patients. Blood and spinal fluid cultures, toxic drug screens, and tests
for inborn errors of metabolism are often needed. AED levels need to
be determined in all patients known already to be taking these drugs.
EEG is helpful in ruling out pseudo–status epilepticus (psychologic
functional neurologic disorder mimicking SE) or other movement disorders (chorea, tics), rigors, clonus with stimulation, and decerebrate/
decorticate posturing. The EEG can also be helpful in identifying the
type of SE (generalized vs focal), which can guide further testing for the
underlying etiology and further therapy. EEG can also help distinguish
between postictal depression and later stages of SE in which the clinical
manifestations are subtle (e.g., minimal myoclonic jerks) or absent (electroclinical dissociation) and can help in monitoring the therapy, particularly in patients who are paralyzed and intubated. Neuroimaging must be
considered after the child has been stabilized, especially if it is indicated
by the clinical manifestations, by an asymmetric or focal nature of the
EEG abnormalities, or by lack of knowledge of the underlying etiology.
The initial emergent therapy should be started for convulsive seizures lasting longer than 5 minutes and involves the use of a benzodiazepine medication (Fig. 633.16). The American Epilepsy Society SE

MECHANISMS

The mechanisms leading to the establishment of sustained seizure
activity seen in SE appear to involve (1) failure of desensitization of
AMPA glutamate receptors, thus causing the persistence of increased
excitability, and (2) reduction of GABA-­mediated inhibition as a result
of intracellular internalization of GABAA receptors. This explains the
clinical observation that SE is often less likely to stop in the next specific period the longer the seizure has lasted and why benzodiazepines
appear to be decreasingly effective the longer seizure activity lasts.
During SE, there is an increased cerebral metabolic rate and a compensatory increase in cerebral blood flow that, after approximately 30
minutes, is not able to keep up with the increases in cerebral metabolic
rate. This leads to a transition from adequate to inadequate cerebral
oxygen tensions and, together with other factors, contributes to neuronal injury resulting from SE.

THERAPY

SE is a medical emergency that requires initial and continuous attention
to securing the airway, breathing, and circulation (with continuous monitoring of vital signs including ECG) and determination and management of the underlying etiology (e.g., hypoglycemia). Laboratory studies,

Interventions for emergency department, in-patient setting, or prehospital setting with trained paramedics

Time line
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

0-5 min
stabilization
phase

6.

Stabilize patient (airway, breathing, circulation, disability-neurologic exam)
Time seizure from its onset, monitor vital signs
Assess oxygenation, give oxygen via nasal cannula/mask, consider intubation if respiratory assistance needed
Initiate ECG monitoring
Collect finger stick blood glucose. If glucose < 60 mg/dl then
Adults: 100 mg thiamine IV then 50 mL D50W IV
Children ≥ 2 years: 2 mL/kg D25W IV
Children < 2 years: 4 mL/kg D12.5W
Attempt IV access and collect electrolytes, hematology, toxicology screen, (if appropriate) anticonvulsant drug levels
Yes

No
If patient at baseline,
then symptomatic
medical care

A benzodiazepine is the initial therapy of choice (Level A):
Choose one of the following 3 equivalent first-line options with dosing and frequency:
Intramuscular midazolam (10 mg for > 40 kg, 5 mg for 13−40 kg, single dose, Level A) OR
Intravenous lorazepam (0.1 mg/kg/dose, max: 4 mg/dose, may repeat dose once, Level A) OR
Intravenous diazepam (0.15−0.2 mg/kg/dose, max 10 mg/dose, may repeat dose once, Level A)
If none of the 3 options above are available, choose one of the following:
Intravenous phenobarbital (15 mg/kg/dose, single dose, Level A) OR
Rectal diazepam (0.2−0.5 mg/kg, max: 20 mg/dose, single dose, Level B) OR
Intranasal midazolam (Level B), buccal midazolam (Level B)

5-20 min
initial therapy
phase

Yes

20-40 min
second therapy
phase

Does seizure
continue?

No

If patient at baseline,
then symptomatic
medical care

There is no evidence based preferred second therapy of choice (Level U):
Choose one of the following second-line options and give as a single dose
Intravenous fosphenytoin (20 mg PE/kg, max: 1500 mg PE/dose, single dose, Level U) OR
Intravenous valproic acid (40 mg/kg, max: 3000 mg/dose, single dose, Level B) OR
Intravenous levetiracetam (60 mg/kg, max: 4500 mg/dose, single dose, Level U)
If none of the options above are available, choose one of the following (if not given already)
Intravenous phenobarbital (15 mg/kg, max dose, Level B)
Yes

40-60 min
third therapy
phase

Does seizure
continue?

Does seizure
continue?

No

There is no clear evidence to guide therapy in this phase (Level U):
Choices include: repeat second-line therapy or anesthetic doses of either thiopental, midazolam,
pentobarbital, or propofol (all with continuous EEG monitoring).

If patient at baseline,
then symptomatic
medical care

Fig. 633.16 Proposed treatment algorithm for status epilepticus. Disclaimer: This clinical algorithm/guideline is designed to assist clinicians by

providing an analytic framework for evaluating and treating patients with status epilepticus. It is not intended to establish a community standard of
care, replace a clinician’s medical judgment, or establish a protocol for all patients. The clinical conditions contemplated by this algorithm/guideline
will not fit or work with all patients. Approaches not covered in this algorithm/guideline may be appropriate. (From Glauser T, Shinnar S, Gloss D,
et al. Evidence-­based guideline: treatment of convulsive status epilepticus in children and adults: report of the guideline committee of the American
Epilepsy Society. Epilepsy Curr. 2016;16[1]:48–61, Fig.1.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3628 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 633.23  Doses of Commonly Used Antiepileptic Drugs in Status Epilepticus
DRUG*

ROUTE

DOSAGE

Lorazepam

Intravenous
Intranasal

0.1 mg/kg up to maximum of 4 mg, may repeat in 5-­10 min
0.1 mg/kg up to maximum of 5 mg

Midazolam

Intravenous
Intramuscular
Intranasal
Buccal

0.2 mg/kg up to 10 mg total dose, may repeat in 5-­10 min
Continuous infusion maintenance: 0.05-­2 mg/kg/hr
0.2 mg/kg
0.2 mg/kg
0.5 mg/kg

Intravenous

0.15 mg/kg up to a maximum total dose of 10 mg; may repeat in 5-­10 min

Rectal

2-­5 yr: 0.5 mg/kg
6-­11 yr: 0.3 mg/kg
≥12 yr: 0.2 mg/kg

Fosphenytoin

Intravenous

Loading: 20 mg/kg PE, infusion rate maximum 50 mg PE/min
Maintenance: 4-­8 mg/kg/24 hr divided tid

Ketamine

Intravenous

Loading: 1 mg/kg
Maintenance: 0.5-­2 mg/kg/hr

Phenobarbital

Intravenous

Loading: 15-­20 mg/kg (maximum 1,000 mg)
Maintenance: 3-­5 mg/kg/24 hr divided bid

Pentobarbital coma

Intravenous

Loading: 5-­15 mg/kg
Maintenance: 1-­5 mg/kg/hr

Propofol

Intravenous

Loading: 1-­2 mg/kg
Maintenance infusion: 1.2 -­3.9 mg/kg/hr

Thiopental

Intravenous

Loading: 2-­7 mg/kg, infusion rate maximum 50 mg/min
Maintenance infusion: 0.5-­5 mg/kg/hr

Valproate

Intravenous

Loading: 20-­40 mg/kg
Maintenance: 30-­60 mg/kg/24 hr divided bid

Lacosamide†

Intravenous

Loading: 4-­8 mg/kg (maximum 400 mg)
Maintenance: 4-­12 mg/kg/day divided bid (maximum 400 mg/day)

Levetiracetam

Intravenous

Loading: 30-­60 mg/kg (maximum 4,500 mg)
Maintenance: 30-­60 mg/kg/24 hr divided bid (maximum 3,000 mg/day)

Topiramate

Enterally

Loading: 5-­10 mg/kg
Maintenance: 5-­12 mg/kg/day divided bid (maximum 400 mg/day)

Diazepam

*Reflects current trends in use that may not be FDA approved. For FDA indications, see Table 633.13.
†May cause PR prolongation.
PE, Phenytoin sodium equivalents.

Guidelines recommend using either intravenous lorazepam, intravenous diazepam, or intramuscular midazolam as a first-­line agent. The
Neurocritical Care Society SE Guidelines recommend intravenous
lorazepam as a first-­line agent and, if the patient does not have intravenous access, using intramuscular midazolam. Table 633.23 outlines
the drugs and dosages typically used in SE. If intravenous access is not
available, other options besides intramuscular midazolam include buccal or intranasal midazolam, intranasal lorazepam, or rectal diazepam.
With all options, respiratory depression is a potential side effect for
which the patient should be monitored and managed as needed. If seizures persist 5 minutes after the initial benzodiazepine dose, a second
dose of the drug should be given. Less evidence supports the use of
phenytoin/fosphenytoin, phenobarbital, valproate, or levetiracetam
as alternative first-­line agents. Additionally, in some infants, a trial of
pyridoxine may be warranted.
If the emergency therapy with a benzodiazepine is unsuccessful (persistent seizures 5 minutes after the second benzodiazepine
dose), fosphenytoin, valproate, or levetiracetam is the recommended option for urgent therapy. Fosphenytoin is given at a loading dose of 20 mg/kg, and a level is usually taken 2 hours later to
ensure achievement of a therapeutic concentration. Depending on
the level and response, a maintenance dose can be started right
away or, more commonly, 6 hours after the initial bolus. Valproate

is given at a loading dose of 40 mg/kg, but its use should be avoided
in patients younger than 2 years of age and in those with hepatic
dysfunction or mitochondrial disease. Levetiracetam is given at
loading doses of 60 mg/kg and is well tolerated. Several prospective
studies have compared the efficacy of these second-­line agents in
treating SE that failed to respond to benzodiazepines. One demonstrated the noninferiority of levetiracetam, fosphenytoin, and
valproate. Others demonstrated the noninferiority of levetiracetam
to phenytoin. In all of these studies, roughly half the patients have
seizure resolution with a second-­line agent.
Intravenous phenobarbital is an alternative option if valproate, fosphenytoin, or levetiracetam is not available but is not recommended as
a first-­line urgent therapy because of its side effects. The phenobarbital
dose used in neonates is usually 20 mg/kg as a loading dose, but in
infants and children the dose is often lower to avoid respiratory depression, with the dose repeated if there is not an adequate response. If
seizures persist after administration of the urgent therapy medication,
a decision must be made regarding redosing with another second-­line
agent or proceeding to a continuous infusion. This decision is case-­
dependent. The Neurocritical Care Society Guidelines on SE suggest
that definitive seizure control should be achieved within 60 minutes
of seizure onset, which may prompt opting for the more aggressive
therapy (i.e., proceeding to continuous infusion and intubation) in a

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 633 u Seizures in Childhood 3629
patient who has already had convulsive seizures for more than 30-­60
minutes.
After the second or third medication is given, and sometimes before
that, the patient might need to be intubated. All patients with SE, even
the ones who respond, need to be admitted to the intensive care unit for
completion of therapy and monitoring. Ideally, emergent and urgent
therapies should have been received within less than 30 minutes so as
to initiate the subsequent therapy soon, thus reducing the chances of
sequelae. For refractory status epilepticus treatment, an intravenous
bolus followed by continuous infusion of midazolam, propofol, pentobarbital, or thiopental is used. Subsequent boluses and adjustment
of the rate of the infusion are usually made, depending on clinical and
EEG responses. Because most of these patients need to be intubated
and paralyzed, the EEG becomes the method of choice by which to
monitor response to therapy. The goal is to stop electrographic seizure
activity before reducing the therapy. Usually this implies achievement
of complete flattening of the EEG, a pattern called burst suppression. Some consider that achieving a burst suppression pattern may
be enough, and the periods of flattening in such a case need to be 8-­20
seconds to ensure interruption of electrographic seizure activity. Evidence suggests that patients who receive higher doses of intravenous
anesthetic therapy earlier and achieve EEG voltage suppression sooner
are more likely to have fewer complications and shorter duration for
need for mechanical ventilation.
Patients receiving these therapies require careful attention to blood
pressure and to systemic complications, and some develop multiorgan
failure. It is not unusual for patients put into pentobarbital coma to
have to be given multiple vasopressors to maintain their blood pressure
during therapy.
The choice among these options to treat refractory and superrefractory SE often depends on the experience of the specific center.
Midazolam probably has fewer side effects but is less effective, and
barbiturate coma is more effective but carries a higher risk of side
effects. Some patients taking propofol develop propofol infusion
syndrome with lactic acidosis, hemodynamic instability, and rhabdomyolysis with higher infusion rates (>67 μg/kg/min). This limits
the use of propofol in the pediatric population. Electrolytes, creatine
phosphokinase, and organ function studies need to be monitored
if a patient is being given propofol infusion therapy. Often, barbiturate coma and similar therapies are maintained for one or more
days before it is possible to gradually taper the therapy, usually over
a few days. However, in some cases, including cases of NORSE, such
therapies need to be maintained for several weeks or even months.
Even though the prognosis in NORSE (and FIRES) cases is often poor
and many patients do not survive, meaningful recovery despite a prolonged course is still possible.
Patients with superrefractory status epilepticus (SRSE) have persistent seizure activity or seizure recurrence despite 24 hours of general
anesthesia with medications such as midazolam, pentobarbital, and/or
propofol. In addition to these continuous infusions, polytherapy with
other AEDs is usually initiated, although data are lacking regarding
the optimal treatment strategy. The most commonly used drugs are
fosphenytoin, valproate, phenobarbital, levetiracetam, topiramate, and
lacosamide.
Ketamine infusion is a recognized treatment option for SRSE. It is an
NMDA receptor antagonist and may be of particular benefit because
NMDA receptors are upregulated in SE. The ketogenic diet has also been
found to be effective in children, although the response may take up to a
week after diet initiation and ketosis may be more difficult to achieve if
the patient is receiving pentobarbital, which has a carbohydrate-­rich carrier fluid. Immunotherapy with intravenous steroids, immunoglobulins,
and/or plasma exchange is often used in cases of SRSE of unclear etiology. In specific situations such as anti–NMDA receptor encephalitis or
CNS vasculitis, immunotherapy may be the first-­line therapy. Because
it can take some time to definitively diagnose autoimmune encephalitides, immunotherapy is often initiated empirically if the clinical history
is consistent with the diagnosis. Inhaled anesthetics such as isoflurane
have been used for SRSE but are associated with a number of adverse
reactions and require the presence of an anesthesiologist at bedside,

which limits their use. Induced hypothermia has also been used, but
further studies are needed to assess its safety and efficacy. In select cases
of lesional SRSE, emergent neurosurgery may be an option. Such cases
include performing hemispherectomy for Rasmussen encephalitis or
focal resection if the seizures are secondary to an area of cortical dysplasia. The use of VNS, electroconvulsive therapy, and transcranial magnetic stimulation (for epilepsia partialis continua) has also been reported.
Allopregnanolone, a neurosteroid, has shown promise in the treatment
of pediatric and adult SRSE, and clinical trials are currently underway to
better determine its efficacy.
For nonconvulsive status epilepticus and epilepsia partialis continua, therapy needs to be tailored according to the clinical manifestations
and often consists of trials of sequential oral or sometimes parenteral
AEDs without resorting to barbiturate coma or overmedication that
could result in respiratory compromise. The approach to focal SE with
impaired awareness is sometimes similar to the approach to generalized
convulsive SE and sometimes intermediate between the approach for
epilepsia partialis and that for convulsive status, depending on severity.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

633.9 Reflex Seizures (Stimulus-­Precipitated
Seizures)
Mohamad A. Mikati, Dmitry Tchapyjnikov, and
Kevin M. Rathke
Many patients with epilepsy can identify precipitating or provoking
events that predispose them to having a seizure. Common precipitants
in these patients include stress, lack of sleep, fever, or fatigue.
However, there is another group of patients who have seizures in
response to a specifically identifiable sensory stimulus or activity and
are considered to have reflex seizures. Because no known reflex may
be involved, more appropriate terms may be sensory-­precipitated or
stimulus-­sensitive seizures. Stimuli may be external (light, patterns,
music, brushing teeth) or internal (math, reading, thinking, self-­
induced). Reflex seizures may be generalized, focal, nonconvulsive,
absence, or myoclonic. One pattern is photosensitive seizures in which
repetitive photic stimulation induces photoparoxysmal epileptogenic
discharges on EEG and sometimes seizures.
Photosensitive seizures are a well-­recognized disorder stimulated by
bright or flashing lights (TV, video games, discotheques, concert light
shows) or by patterns (TV, video games, lines on the road while traveling). Visual sensitivity may occur in 0.3–3% of the population, whereas
photosensitive or pattern-­induced seizures may occur in 1 in 4,000
people in the at-­risk age-­group of 5-­25 years. When Japanese children
were exposed to a Pokémon cartoon that induced seizures in many, only
24% of those had a history of prior spontaneous seizures. Some children
with photosensitive epilepsies stimulate seizures purposefully by rapidly
blinking or waving a hand in front of their face (sunflower syndrome).
Patients tend to outgrow photosensitive or pattern-­induced seizures in
their 30s. Photoparoxysmal responses, with an abnormal EEG response
to photic stimulation, are more common than photic-­induced seizures.
For patients with isolated photosensitive or pattern-­induced seizures, avoidance or modification of stimuli is the initial approach. Such
activities may include wearing blue or polarized sunglasses, avoiding high-­contrast flashing-­light video games, avoiding discotheques,
watching television in a well-­lit room at a distance of >8 feet, and covering one eye when in a provocative situation. A number of genes have
been associated with certain patients with reflex epilepsy such as CHD2
with photosensitive or self-­induced seizures caused by fixation-­off sensitivity, LGI1 or SCN1A with musicogenic seizures, MECP2 with eating
seizures in Rett syndrome, and SYN1, GPR56, or SYNGAP1 with hot
water or bathing epilepsy. Not all patients with these reflex seizures
have these pathogenic variants, nor do all patients with variants in
these genes have reflex seizures.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3630 Part XXV u The Nervous System

633.10 Nodding Syndrome
Michael J. Boivin and Itziar Familiar-­Lopez
Nodding syndrome (NS) is form of epilepsy that mainly affects children
between 3 and 18 years of age who live in distinct regions of Uganda,
Liberia, Tanzania, the Democratic Republic of Congo, and southern
Sudan. The prevalence is approximately 6.8 per 1,000 children. The first
clinical symptom is usually an involuntary nodding of the head in a
previously healthy child. These nodding episodes are characterized by
at least daily rapid, paroxysmal, forward head-­bobbing spells lasting
several minutes; some patients are unresponsive, whereas others may
respond to commands or continue what they were doing before the
episode. Nodding episodes may be triggered during meals while eating
hot foods or drinking cold liquids; cold environmental temperatures
may also trigger a nodding episode. Head nodding has been determined to be a type of atonic seizure, although other types of seizures,
including generalized tonic-­clonic or absence seizures, may develop.
Given the extent of the brain pathogenesis in NS, it is not surprising
that it is accompanied by lifelong profound cognitive neurodisability,
severe behavior and psychiatric difficulties, growth stunting, delayed
puberty, and high mortality rates (Table 633.24 lists case definitions).
Although the diagnosis remains largely based on clinical presentation, the EEG demonstrates a disorganized slow background and interictal generalized 2.5-­to 3.0-­Hz spike–and–slow waves, with generalized
electrodecrement and paraspinal electromyography dropout suggestive of an atonic seizure. NS is characterized by stunted brain growth,
which includes significant brain atrophy near the hippocampal and
glial matter of the brain and significant cerebellar involvement. Routine CSF analyses are usually negative, but brain MRI shows cerebral
and cerebellar atrophy. An MRI study of Tanzanian nodding disease
patients revealed that the most frequent abnormality was generalized
atrophy, followed by intraparenchymal pathologies such as changes in
the hippocampus, gliotic lesions, and subcortical signal abnormalities.
Treatment of seizures is indicated, and choice of AED should be
based on the type of seizure presented. Sodium valproate is indicated
for atonic seizures and may be a good option to simultaneously treat
behavioral difficulties like aggression and impulsive behavior. The
suggested starting dose is 10 mg/kg/day in two divided doses and
increase the dose by 5 mg/kg/day until seizure control is achieved or

the maximum dose is reached (40 mg/kg/day). Other antiepileptic
medications used for NS include phenytoin and phenobarbitone, either
individually or combined. Management of behavioral and psychiatric
difficulties, nursing care, nutritional, and subsequently, physical and
cognitive rehabilitation should also be considered.
Despite extensive investigations, the etiology of NS remains
unknown. A systematic review using the Bradford Hill criteria for causality identified Onchocerca volvulus as the most likely trigger of NS
and other forms of onchocerciasis-­associated epilepsy. O. volvulus is a
nematode carried by the blackfly, the bites of which can cause onchocerciasis, a highly prevalent type of blindness caused by infection.
High prevalence of NS overlaps with onchocerciasis-­endemic areas
with high rates of O. volvulus transmission and low or no coverage of
community-­directed treatment with ivermectin. However, the pathophysiologic mechanism through which O. volvulus could directly cause
the neurologic damage observed in NS patients remains unknown, as
microfilariae are not known to invade the brain.
Studies in Uganda support the hypothesis that NS may be an autoimmune epileptic disorder caused by molecular mimicry with O. volvulus
antigens. Histologic postmortem examination of brains has revealed polarizable material in the majority of specimens, but it has proved difficult to
characterize or identify. There is evidence of autoantibodies to leiomodin­1 in both the sera and CSF of Ugandan patients with nodding syndrome.
Because leiomodin-­1 antibodies cross react with O. volvulus proteins, nodding syndrome may be an autoimmune epilepsy initiated by the infection
caused by this parasite. Therefore it may be preventable by treatment with
antiparasitic strategies, such as the drug ivermectin. It may also perhaps be
treatable in its early stages with immunomodulatory therapies.
Onchocerciasis tends to have the highest prevalence in rural east and
central African areas with poorly developed healthcare and social service
infrastructures. Because of this, families with children affected by nodding disease, often existing on the margins of their resources in impoverished areas, have little in the way of caregiving resources needed to cope
with the profound disability that results from this disease. This further
diminishes the prognosis for these children because of further risk to
their health from accidental injury (e.g., burns from cooking fires), malnutrition because of difficulty in feeding, and/or neglect.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Table 633.24  Consensus Case Definition and Modified Consensus Case Definition for Nodding Syndrome, Uganda, 2012–2013*
TYPE OF CASE

CONSENSUS CASE DEFINITION

Suspected case

Reported head nodding (repetitive involuntary drops of
the head toward the chest on two or more occasions) in
a previously normal person

Reported head nodding (repetitive involuntary drops of
the head toward the chest on two or more occasions) in a
previously normal person

Probable case

Suspected case of head nodding, with both major criteria:
Age of onset of nodding ranging from 3 to 18 yr
Frequency of nodding 5-­20 per min
Plus at least one of the following minor criteria:
Other neurologic abnormalities (cognitive decline,
school dropout because of cognitive or behavioral
problems, other seizures or neurologic abnormalities)
Clustering in space or time with similar cases
Triggering by food or cold weather
Stunting or wasting
Delayed physical development/absence of
development of secondary sexual characteristics
Psychiatric symptoms

Suspected case of head nodding, with one major criterion:
Age of onset of nodding ranging from 3 to 18 yr

Probable case, with documented nodding episode
Observed and recorded by a trained healthcare worker, or
Videotaped nodding episode, or
Video/EEG/EMG documenting head nodding as atonic
seizures

Probable case, with documented nodding episode
Observed and recorded by a trained healthcare worker, or
Videotaped nodding episode, or
Video/EEG/EMG documenting head nodding as atonic
seizures

Confirmed case

MODIFIED CONSENSUS CASE DEFINITION

Plus at least one of the following minor criteria:
Other neurologic abnormalities (cognitive decline, school
dropout because of cognitive or behavioral problems,
other seizures or neurologic abnormalities)
Clustering in space or time with similar cases
Triggering by food or cold weather
Stunting or wasting
Psychiatric symptoms

*The consensus case definition was drafted at the first International Scientific Meeting on Nodding Syndrome, held July 30 to August 1, 2012, in Kampala, Uganda. Meeting report
available at http://www.who.int/neglected_diseases/diseases/Nodding_syndrom_Kampala_Report_2012.pdf. The modified consensus case definition was developed during
the March 2013 single-­stage cluster survey conducted by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the Ugandan Ministry of Health to assess the prevalence of
nodding syndrome in Uganda.
EEG, Electroencephalographic; EMG, electromyographic.
From Iyengar PJ, Wamala J, Ratto J, et al. Prevalence of nodding syndrome–Uganda, 2012-­2013. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2014;63:603–606, Table 1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 634 u Conditions That Mimic Seizures

Chapter 634

Conditions That Mimic
Seizures
Mohamad A. Mikati and Makram M. Obeid
The misdiagnosis of epilepsy is estimated to be as high as 5–40%. Often
all that is needed to differentiate nonepileptic paroxysmal disorders
from epilepsy is a careful and detailed history in addition to a thorough
clinical examination, but sometimes an electroencephalogram (EEG)
or more advanced testing may be necessary. The ready availability of
video recording on mobile phones can provide invaluable information. Nonepileptic paroxysmal disorders can be classified according
to the age at presentation and the clinical manifestations: (1) syncope
and other generalized paroxysms, (2) movement disorders and other
paroxysmal movements and postures, (3) oculomotor and visual
abnormalities and visual hallucinations, and (4) sleep-­related disorders
(Table 634.1 and Fig. 634.1).

SYNCOPE AND OTHER GENERALIZED PAROXYSMS
Apnea

Apneic episodes (cessation of breathing >20 seconds) in neonates and
apnea caused by brainstem compression are usually associated with

3631

bradycardia. In contrast, apnea associated with seizures is usually
accompanied by tachycardia. Exceptions are seen because bradycardia
can occur during some epileptic seizures, and severe apnea of any cause
can be followed by anoxic seizures. The term brief resolved unexplained
event (BRUE) is defined as an event in an infant reported as a sudden,
brief, self-­resolving episode consisting of one or more of the following:
(1) cyanosis or pallor; (2) absent, decreased, or irregular breathing; (3)
a marked change in tone (hyper-­or hypotonia); and (4) an altered level
of responsiveness (see Chapter 424). A BRUE, which usually lasts less
than 1 minute, is diagnosed only when no explanation is evident after
an appropriate history and physical examination have been conducted.
Apnea can either be obstructive or central, most commonly in premature
neonates. Central apnea also occurs in the context of certain neurogenetic syndromes, the prototype of which is congenital central hypoventilation syndrome secondary to pathogenic variants in PHOX2B. Ondine’s
curse (idiopathic congenital central alveolar hypoventilation syndrome)
consists of an inadequate respiratory drive in sleep with periods of prolonged apnea requiring tracheostomy and mechanical ventilation (see
Chapter 468.2). Apnea can also be secondary to near cerebral herniation and intermittent brainstem compression in the context of increased
intracranial pressure or Chiari malformations.

Breath-­Holding Spells

The term breath-­holding spells is actually a misnomer, because they are not
necessarily self-­induced but result from the immaturity of the autonomic
system and occur in two different forms. The first type is the pallid breath-­
holding spell, which is caused by reflex vagal-­cardiac bradycardia and asystole. The second type is the cyanotic, or blue, breath-­holding spell, which
does not occur during inspiration but results from prolonged expiratory

Table 634.1  Conditions that Mimic Seizures According to Age of Presentation
SYNCOPE AND OTHER
GENERALIZED PAROXYSMS

MOVEMENT DISORDERS AND
OTHER ABNORMAL MOVEMENTS

OCULOMOTOR AND
VISUAL ABNORMALITIES

Neonate

Apnea
Paroxysmal extreme pain
disorder

Jitteriness, tremor, increased startle
reflex, hiccups
Hyperekplexia, paroxysmal dystonic
choreoathetosis

Paroxysmal tonic upgaze
Alternating hemiplegia
of childhood, staring,
daydreaming, and time-­
out “unresponsiveness”

Benign neonatal sleep
myoclonus
Sleep transition
disorders, REM

Infants

Reflex anoxic seizures
Breath-­holding spells
Benign paroxysmal vertigo
Paroxysmal extreme pain
disorder

Jitteriness
Sandifer syndrome
Paroxysmal dystonic choreoathetosis
Benign myoclonus of early infancy
Pathologic startle
Shuddering attacks, infantile head
atonic attacks
Benign paroxysmal torticollis
Psychologic disorders
Alternating hemiplegia of childhood
Jactatio capitis (head banging)
Drug reactions

Paroxysmal tonic upgaze
Oculomotor apraxia
Spasmus nutans
Opsoclonus-­myoclonus
syndrome, staring,
daydreaming, and time-­
out “unresponsiveness”

Non-­REM partial arousal
disorders
REM sleep disorders
Narcolepsy
Sleep transition
disorders
(somnambulism,
somniloquy)

Children and
adolescents

Benign paroxysmal vertigo
Compulsive Valsalva-­like
maneuver
Familial hemiplegic migraine
Syncope (long QT, vasovagal,
orthostatic, migraine-­induced)
Psychogenic seizures
Transient global amnesia
Hyperventilation spells,
factitious disorder

Tics
Tremor
Pathologic startle
Paroxysmal dyskinesias
Alternating hemiplegia of childhood
Benign paroxysmal torticollis
Episodic ataxia
Psychologic disorders, including
factitious disorder imposed on
another, malingering
Masturbation
Psychogenic seizures
Cataplexy
Jactatio capitis (head banging)
Episodic rage, drug reactions,
factitious disorder

Staring, daydreaming,
and time-­out
“unresponsiveness”
Drug reactions,
hallucinations, visual snow
Conversion reactions,
factitious disorder

Non-­REM partial arousal
disorders
REM sleep disorders
Narcolepsy
Sleep transition
disorders
(somnambulism,
somniloquy)
Sleep myoclonus
Restless legs syndrome,
conversion reactions,
factitious disorder

AGE

SLEEP DISORDERS

REM, Rapid eye movement.
From Obeid M, Mikati MA. Expanding spectrum of paroxysmal events in children: potential mimickers of epilepsy. Pediatr Neurol. 2007;37(5):309–316.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3632 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Hemiplegic
migraine
Paroxysmal kinesigenic
choreoathetosis
Alice in Wonderland syndrome
Paroxysmal nonepileptic seizures
Staring spells
Tics (1/3 fluctuate into adulthood)
Cyclic vomiting
Stereotypies (severity improves over time)
Benign paroxysmal
vertigo
Breath holding spells
Benign
myoclonus
of infancy
Alternating hemiplegia of childhood
Infantile
masturbation
Benign torticollis of infancy
Sandifer syndrome
Hyperekplexia
Excess startle into adulthood

Benign neonatal
sleep myoclonus
Jitteriness
0–6m

6m–1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

Fig. 634.1 Age ranges (months and years) of seizure mimics, typical
onset, and resolution. (From Stainman RS, Kossoff EH. Seizure mimics
in children: an age-­based approach. Curr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health
Care. 2020;50:100894, Fig. 1.)

apnea and intrapulmonary shunting (see Chapter 43). Episodes usually start
with a cry (often, in the case of the pallid type, a silent cry with marked pallor) and progress to apnea and cyanosis. Spells usually begin between 6 and
18 months of age. Syncope, tonic posturing, and even reflex anoxic seizures
may follow the more severe episodes, particularly in breath-­holding spells of
the pallid type. Injury (such as even a minor bump on the head), pain, and
frustration, particularly with surprise, are common triggers. There usually
is a family history of vasovagal syncope or breath-­holding spells. Education
and reassurance of the parents are usually all that is needed because these
episodes are, as a rule, self-­limited and are outgrown within a few years.
However, screening for anemia and for electrical cardiac disturbances with
an electrocardiogram is recommended because the spells are worsened by
iron-­deficiency anemia and can rarely be the presenting sign of long QT
(LQT) syndromes. Anticholinergic drugs, for the selected cases of pallid
breath-holding spells (e.g., atropine sulfate 0.03 mg/kg/day in two to three
divided doses with a maximum daily dose of 1.2 mg) or antiseizure drug
therapy for coexisting anoxic seizures that are recurrent, prolonged, and not
responding to other measures may rarely be needed. If antiseizure medications are needed, it is ill-­advised to use medications that may increase irritability, such as levetiracetam. It is important also to educate parents on how
to handle more severe spells with first aid measures or even basic cardiopulmonary resuscitation when needed. Extremely severe episodes resulting in
marked bradycardia and asystole have been reported to respond to a cardiac
pacemaker. All parents should be taught not to provide secondary gain when
the episodes occur, because this can reinforce them. Also, preparation for
unpleasant experiences (such as receiving a shot) rather than surprising the
child with them can help limit the number of spells.

Compulsive Valsalva-­Like Maneuver

In children with intellectual disability, including Rett syndrome, syncopal convulsions may be self-­induced by maneuvers such as the Valsalva maneuver. In this case, true breath holding occurs, and it usually
lasts for approximately 10 seconds during inspiration. Some clinicians
advocate the use of naloxone in such cases. In the authors’ experience,
a compulsive Valsalva-­like maneuver can rarely be a feature of a panic
attack or conversion disorder. When clinically stereotyped, a prolonged
EEG and a careful workup by a pediatric epileptologist are needed in
order to rule out epileptic seizures.

Neurally Mediated Syncope

Syncope can present with drop attacks and can also lead to generalized
convulsions, termed anoxic seizures. These convulsions, triggered by a
sudden reduction of oxygen to the brain, are clinically similar to, and can

be misdiagnosed as, generalized epileptic seizures. Vasovagal (neurocardiogenic) syncope is usually triggered by dehydration, heat, standing for a long time without movement, hot showers, the sight of blood,
pain, swallowing, vomiting, sudden exposure to cold as with cold water
immersion, and a sudden episode of stress (see Chapter 84). The history is usually the clue to distinguishing syncope from epileptic seizures:
there is initially pallor and sweating followed by blurring of vision, dizziness, and nausea and then a gradual collapse with loss of consciousness.
Of importance is the fact that such prodromal features have an insidious
onset and build up gradually, often arising from a state of malaise when
they precede syncope. However, in epilepsy, when auras with similar features precede an epileptic seizure, such features are usually sudden, short
in duration, and followed by other manifestations of complex partial
seizures such as stereotyped automatisms. Abdominal pain, a common
aura in temporal lobe epilepsy, occurs in vasovagal syncope and can be
a trigger or a consequence of that process (intestinal vagal hyperactivity). Urinary incontinence and a brief period of convulsive jerks are not
uncommon in vasovagal syncope. These occur with a frequency of 10%
and 50%, respectively. Postictal confusion only rarely occurs, and the
rule is the occurrence of only brief postictal tiredness with a subsequent
remarkable ability to resume planned activities. Most children with vasovagal syncope have an affected first-­degree relative; reports demonstrate
autosomal dominant inheritance at least in some families. The EEG is
normal, and the tilt test has been used for diagnostic purposes in selected
cases. In most cases with a typical history, this test is not needed. In addition, exercise-­induced anaphylaxis has rarely been reported. In stretch
syncope, which occurs mostly in adolescents while stretching the neck
and the trunk backward and the arms outward or during flexion of the
neck, the presumed mechanism is mechanical disruption of brain perfusion caused by compression of the vertebral arteries. In some other
cases, this may be associated with an abnormally prolonged stylomastoid process compressing the carotids. If the latter condition is suspected,
neuroimaging with cranial CT or MRI is required for proper diagnosis of the stylomastoid anomaly. Migraine can also induce vasovagal
syncope. Other causes of syncope include primary autonomic failure,
which is rare in children, and familial dysautonomia is the only relatively
common form. Familial dysautonomia, a disease found in Ashkenazi
Jews, is characterized by absence of overflow emotional tears, depressed
patellar reflexes, and lack of a flare reaction after intradermal histamine.
Dopamine β-­hydroxylase deficiency is a rare cause of primary autonomic failure and is characterized by a complicated perinatal course
(hypotension, hypotonia, hypothermia), ptosis, highly arched palate,
hyperflexible joints, nocturia, and later impaired ejaculation.

Postural Tachycardia Syndrome
See Chapter 84.1.

Cardiac Syncope

See Chapters 84 and 485.
LQT syndromes can cause life-­
threatening pallid syncope.
Accompanying this are ventricular arrhythmias and, usually, torsades de pointes or even ventricular fibrillation. When accompanied
by congenital deafness, it is part of the autosomal recessive Jervell
and Lange-­Nielsen syndrome (type 1, LQT 1, associated with the
KvLQT1 potassium channel pathogenic variant). Romano-­Ward syndrome is an autosomal dominant syndrome with incomplete penetrance (LQT 2 associated with an HERG potassium channel variant).
LQT 3 is associated with an SCN1A sodium channel variant, LQT 4
with an ankyrin protein mutation, LQT 5 (milder form) with KCNE1
variants, LQT 6 with KCNE2 potassium channel gene variants, LQT
9 with caveolin sodium channel–related protein variants, and LQT
10 with SCN4B sodium channel variants. LQT 7 and LQT 8 have
associated clinical and neurologic manifestations. LQT 7 (Andersen-­
Tawil) syndrome is associated with periodic paralysis, skeletal developmental abnormalities, clinodactyly, low-­set ears, and micrognathia
(variants in KCNJ2). LQT 8, or Timothy syndrome (variants in the
calcium channel gene CACNA1C), manifests with congenital heart
disease, autism, syndactyly, and immune deficiency. All family members of an affected child should be investigated. Affected individuals

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 634 u Conditions That Mimic Seizures
need insertion of cardiac defibrillators, and their families should be
taught cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Children with a new-­onset
seizure disorder of unclear etiology should get an electrocardiogram to rule out LQT syndrome masquerading as a seizure disorder.
Cardiac syncope is usually sudden, without the gradual onset and
symptoms that accompany vagal syncope. Aortic stenosis can cause
sudden syncope at the height of exercise (usually hypertrophic) or
directly at the end (usually valvular) and, if suspected, warrants an
echocardiogram.

Migraine and Migraine Variants

Familial hemiplegic migraine (FHM) is a rare type of autosomal
dominant migraine with the prominent feature of transient motor
weakness. Attacks begin as early as 5-­7 years of age. In a genetically
susceptible child, attacks may be precipitated by head trauma, exertion, or emotional stress. The three genes commonly identified are
CACNA1A in FHM1 (neuronal calcium channel subunit), ATP1A2
in FHM2 (sodium potassium adenosine triphosphatase subunit), and
SCN1A in FHM3 (neuronal sodium channel subunit). Pathogenic variants of other genes such as PRRT2 may also cause FHM. However, at
least a quarter of the affected families and most of the sporadic patients
do not carry a pathogenic variant in these genes. Headaches occur
in all attacks in most patients. The presence of negative phenomena
(e.g., numbness, visual scotomas) in addition to positive phenomena
(pins and needles, flickering lights) and the progressive and successive
occurrence of visual, sensory, motor, aphasic, and basilar signs and
symptoms, in that order, help differentiate these attacks from epileptic
seizures. Persistent cerebellar deficits (e.g., nystagmus, ataxia) may be
present. Verapamil, acetazolamide, and lamotrigine have been successfully used to prevent attacks, and verapamil and ketamine have been
used for the acute episode; ergot derivatives, nimodipine, Midrin (isometheptene mucate, dichloralphenazone, and paracetamol), and probably triptans and propranolol are to be avoided because of concerns of
exacerbating the attacks. Interestingly, the co-­occurrence of epileptic
seizures has been reported in a minority of patients with hemiplegic
migraine. It is important also to note that recurrent attacks akin to
hemiplegic migraine can be symptomatic of Sturge-­Weber syndrome
or various metabolic diseases (e.g., mitochondrial encephalopathy with
lactic acidosis and strokelike episodes, as well as alternating hemiplegia
of childhood).
Benign paroxysmal vertigo of childhood is a common migraine
equivalent that consists of brief seconds-­to-­minutes episodes of vertigo that are often accompanied by postural imbalance and nystagmus. It is important to note that vertigo does not always refer to a
spinning motion; it can also refer to a backward or forward motion
(vertigo titubans) where children sometimes report that objects
seem to be moving toward them. The child appears frightened during the episode. Diaphoresis, nausea, vomiting, and, rarely, tinnitus
may be present. Episodes usually remit by 6 years of age. MRIs and
EEGs are normal, but caloric testing, if done, can show abnormal
vestibular function. Diphenhydramine 5 mg/kg/day (maximum of
300 mg/day) may be used for a cluster of attacks. Preventive therapy
with cyproheptadine may rarely be needed for frequent attacks.
Cyclic vomiting syndrome (CVS) is another related periodic
migraine variant that can respond to antimigraine or antiepileptic
drugs. Recurrent vomiting can also be caused by neuromyelitis optica,
juvenile Alexander disease, brainstem pathology, inborn errors of
metabolism with intermittent presentations, and seizures, usually from
the nondominant temporal lobe. With the latter, there is, as a rule,
impaired consciousness. Prophylaxis for CVS has included medications such as amitriptyline, propranolol, cyproheptadine, sumatriptan,
erythromycin, coenzyme Q, fluoxetine, or antiepileptics. Acute therapy
usually consists of 10% dextrose intravenously with ondansetron and
an antihistamine or benzodiazepine.
Alice in Wonderland syndrome (see “Visual Hallucinations,” later),
confusional migraine, and abdominal migraine are also migraine variants. One should note that many patients with migraine or migraine
variants (including FHM) have coexisting epilepsy, and children with

3633

epilepsy have a higher incidence of migraine headaches compared with
the general population, so providers should be aware that such patients
may have symptoms attributable to either.

Nonepileptic Seizures (Formerly, Functional Disorders)

Nonepileptic seizures are a form of functional neurologic disorder that can be diagnosed clinically based on the characteristics of
the spells (Tables 634.2 and 634.3). A video of the event is usually
possible because most of the events are witnessed and tend to be
more prolonged than epileptic seizures. If needed, a diagnosis can
be confirmed by video-­EEG with capture of an episode to eliminate
any residual doubts about its nature because these functional paroxysms can often occur in patients who also have epileptic seizures.
A social history is very important because psychogenic nonepileptic
seizures (PNESs) are often a reaction to physical or sexual abuse or
to the inability to cope with psychosocial tasks. They are best managed acutely by reassurance about their relatively benign nature
and by a supportive attitude while at the same time avoiding positive reinforcement of the episodes; an early accurate diagnosis and
timely management result in more favorable outcomes. The use of
terms such as nonepileptic stress seizures facilitates communication
with families, given the often-­perceived negative connotation of the
term psychogenic. Psychiatric evaluation and follow-­up are needed to
uncover an underlying psychopathology and to establish continued
support because psychogenic seizures can persist over long periods.
Malingering and factitious disorder imposed on another (formerly
called Munchausen syndrome by proxy) are often difficult to diagnose,
but an approach similar to that for psychogenic seizures, including
video-­EEG monitoring, is often helpful. Sad cases of loss of consciousness related to suffocation by caregivers in infants and toddlers
have also been reported.

Paroxysmal Extreme Pain Disorder

Paroxysmal extreme pain disorder, previously called familial rectal
pain syndrome, is caused by an autosomal dominant gain-­of-­function
variant in a sodium channel (Nav1.7) encoded by the SCN9A gene.
Paroxysmal extreme pain disorder usually starts in infancy and persists throughout life. Autonomic manifestations predominate initially, with skin flushing in all cases and harlequin color change and
tonic attacks in most. Dramatic syncope with bradycardia and sometimes asystole occurs. Later, the disorder is characterized by attacks
of excruciating, deep burning pain often in the rectal, ocular, or jaw
areas, but also diffusely in some. Attacks are triggered by defecation,
cold, wind, eating, and emotion. Carbamazepine is used, but the
response is often incomplete. Neurologically impaired children can
often have irritability without clear etiology even after investigations,
and this has been reported to respond to gabapentin (for neurologic
irritability).

Autonomic Storms

Autonomic storms are also referred to as diencephalic seizures,
paroxysmal sympathetic hyperactivity, sympathetic storms, paroxysmal autonomic instability with dystonia, dysautonomia, and
central autonomic dysfunction. Spells of hyperhidrosis and changes
in blood pressure, temperature, and autonomic instability occur in
patients with severe diffuse brain injury or localized hypothalamic
injury and have been termed autonomic storms. The term diencephalic seizures is discouraged because the episodes are not truly
seizures. Therapy is difficult and has included, with mixed results,
clonidine, propranolol, baclofen (oral or intrathecal), benzodiazepines (particularly clonazepam), bromocriptine, chlorpromazine, hydralazine, methadone, cyproheptadine, morphine, and
sympathectomy.
Serotonin syndrome caused by antidepressants, stimulants, opioids,
certain herbs such as St. John’s wort, and some other medications can
produce similar symptoms, and if not recognized, can at times be fatal,
as can the similar neuroleptic malignant syndrome caused by antipsychotic medications.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3634 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 634.2  Comparison of Generalized Seizures and Some Disorders That Can Mimic Them
PRECIPITANTS (MAY NOT
APPLY TO ALL PATIENTS)

PRODROME

ICTAL SYMPTOMS

POSTICTAL
SYMPTOMS

Generalized seizures

Sleep deprivation, television,
video games, visual
patterns, and photic
stimulation

Rarely irritability
or nonspecific
behavioral
changes

Usually 2-­3 min
Consciousness might be preserved if atonic
or, in some, tonic seizures
Synchronous bilateral movements
Tongue biting

Delayed recovery
with postictal
depression,
incontinence (may
be ictal also)

Syncope: vasovagal

Fatigue, emotional stress,
dehydration, vomiting,
choking, swallowing

Loss of consciousness for seconds, pallor,
and rarely reflex anoxic seizures

Rapid recovery
with no postictal
depression

Syncope with reflex
anoxic seizures

Minor bump to head,
upsetting surprises

Syncope: trigeminal
vagal

Cold water on face

Blurring of
vision, tinnitus,
dizziness,
nausea,
sweating
Crying in
breath-­holding
spells

Syncope: orthostatic

Standing up, bathing,
awakening

Hyperekplexia

Auditory and tactile stimuli

None

Tonic stiffening, cyanosis if severe,
nonfatigable nose-­tap–induced startles

Depending on
severity, may have
postictal depression

Cardiac

Exercise

None

Loss of consciousness, often only for a few
seconds, pallor

Rarely

Nonepileptic seizures
(formerly, functional
disorders)

Suggestion, stress

None; some
have headache,
nausea,
palpitations,
poor
concentration,
panic-­like attack

Eyes closed, with active opposition to
attempts to open them
Asynchronous (nonrhythmic) flailing or
tremulous limb movements that vary
between attacks
Motor activity stops and starts during a spell
Weeping and crying
No injury
May respond to suggestion during “loss of
consciousness”
Usually longer than 5 min, decrease in
intensity when provider places hand on
patient’s shoulder

No postictal
depression

CONDITION

Adapted from Obeid M, Mikati MA. Expanding spectrum of paroxysmal events in children: potential mimickers of epilepsy. Pediatr Neurol. 2007;37(5):309–316.

Table 634. 3  Positive Diagnostic Features and Biomarkers of Nonepileptic Seizures and Functional Movement Disorder
ESTABLISHED DIAGNOSTIC FEATURES

NEW DIAGNOSTIC FEATURES*

NONEPILEPTIC SEIZURES
Seizures
Eyes closed; prolonged attacks; hyperventilation;
awareness during generalized shaking; ictal or
postictal weeping

Suggestive seizure induction; qualitative conversation analysis; use
of smartphone video; wrist-­worn accelerometers; postictal plasma
proteins

FUNCTIONAL MOVEMENT DISORDER
Tremor
Tremor entrainment or cessation to externally
cued rhythm; variability of frequency and
amplitude of tremors

“Whack-­a-­mole” sign: holding down a tremulous body part induces
tremor in another body part; coherence between antagonist
muscles measured with standard coherence or wavelets

Dystonia

Fixed inverted or plantar flexed ankle; fixed
clenched fist

Dystonia of the face: downward lip pulling, orbicularis oculi spasm,
platysma spasm; sustained facial movement to evoke a spasm;
functional hemifacial spasm lacks the “other Babinski sign” (i.e.,
raising of eyebrow on affected side)

Gait and balance

Variability of gait performance; gait performance
shows excellent balance; “walking-­on-­ice” gait,
dragging monoplegic gait, or knee-­buckling gait

Classification of gait types into seven types: ataxic, spastic, weak
gait, antalgic, parkinsonian, hemiparetic, and dystonic; “huffing
and puffing” sign: huffing, grunting, grimacing, and breath holding
after small amounts of exercise; posturographic improvement with
distraction (guessing numbers written on back or cognitive task)

Jerks or myoclonus

Truncal jerking, especially with facial movement†;
positive bereitschaftspotential before movement
using back averaging

Increased startle; event-­related desynchronization using back
averaging

Limb weakness and
generic motor
dysfunction

Hoover sign; hip abductor sign; drift without
pronation

Absence of amplitude suppression of median nerve somatosensory
evoked potential; decreased prepulse inhibition of the blink reflex
by stimulation of the index finger; absence of contingent negative
variation in reaction time task

*Described in the past 10 years.
†The diagnosis of functional jerks can be difficult, but 104 (58%) of 179 patients with truncal myoclonus had functional neurologic disorder in one series.
From Hallett M, Aybek S, Dworetzky BA, et al. Functional neurological disorder: new subtypes and shared mechanisms. Lancet Neurol. 2022;21:537–550, p. 539.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 634 u Conditions That Mimic Seizures
MOVEMENT DISORDERS AND OTHER
PAROXYSMAL MOVEMENTS AND POSTURES
Neonatal Jitteriness and Clonus

Jitteriness consists of recurrent tremors. These movements manifest as
equal backward-­and-­forward movements of the limbs, either occurring spontaneously or triggered by touch or loud sounds. Movement
suppression by stimulus removal or by relaxing the affected limbs, the
lack of autonomic symptoms, and the clear difference from the two-­
phased (fast contraction, slow relaxation) clonic activity and the very
quick myoclonic jerks point to a nonepileptic event. Hypocalcemia,
hypoglycemia, drug withdrawal, and hypoxic-­ischemic encephalopathy are possible etiologies, but jitteriness is also often seen in normal neonates. Clonus as a result of corticospinal tract injury usually
occurs in later infancy and childhood and can be stopped by a change
in position. Two to three beats of clonus can be within normal in
some neonates.

Hyperekplexia (Stiff Baby Syndrome) and Pathologic
Startles

Hyperekplexia is a rare, sporadic, or dominantly inherited (less often
recessive or X-­linked) disorder with neonatal onset of life-­threatening
episodes of tonic stiffening that precipitate apnea and convulsive
hypoxic seizures. It is characterized by a triad of generalized stiffness,
nocturnal myoclonus, and later a pathologic startle reflex. Stiffness
may result in difficulty in swallowing, choking spells, hip dislocations, umbilical or inguinal hernias, and delayed motor development.
Stiffness in the neonatal form improves by 1 year of age and may disappear during sleep. The genetic cause is a defect in the α or β subunits of the strychnine-­sensitive glycine receptors. However, other
less common pathogenic variants that disrupt the glycine receptor
signaling complex have also been described. Pathogenic variants in
GLRA1 or SLC6A5 are the most common genes followed by GLRB,
GPHM, and ARHGEF9 (X-­linked). A specific diagnostic sign can be
elicited by tapping the nose, which produces a nonfatigable startle
reflex with head retraction. Bathing, sudden awakening, and auditory or tactile stimuli can induce attacks. The differential diagnosis
includes congenital stiff person syndrome, startle epilepsy, myoclonic
seizures, neonatal tetany, phenothiazine toxicity, and Schwartz-­
Jampel syndrome. Making a prompt diagnosis is extremely important
so that treatment with clonazepam can be initiated, because hypoxic
brain injury can result from a prolonged episode. Other antiepileptics have also been effective. Repeatedly flexing the baby at the neck
and hips (the Vigevano maneuver) can abort the episodes. Rare challenging cases of children with hyperekplexia and concomitant epileptic seizures (including myoclonic seizures) have been reported. In
other children after brain injury, and in many patients with cerebral
palsy, an exaggerated startle reflex can occur; this is more common
than hyperekplexia. In Tay-­Sachs disease and similar gangliosidoses,
an exaggerated startle to sound occurs and has been inappropriately
interpreted as hyperacusis. Hiccups can occur normally in newborns
but can be a feature of nonketotic hyperglycinemia, citrullinemia,
and neuromyelitis optica syndromes, with the latter presenting during later childhood and adolescence rather than in neonates. In addition, in children with neurologic diseases, a related limited repertoire
of movements and behaviors, startle, arousal, or signs of distress may
be clinically expressed with stereotyped movements that can mimic
epileptic seizures.

Benign Paroxysmal Torticollis of Infancy

This condition typically presents as morning episodes of painless retrocollis and, later, torticollis, often triggered by changes in
posture. Attacks may start with abnormal ocular movements and
progress to stillness in an abnormal posture. Vomiting, malaise,
irritability, and ataxia may be present during the spells that usually
last minutes (paroxysmal) or, more commonly, hours and, at times,
days (periodic). Neurologic exam between attacks, EEG, and neuroimaging studies are normal. The condition affects girls more than
boys (3:1), often begins in infancy, and spontaneously remits before

3635

the age of 5 years. However, some children, particularly those with
migrainous features during attacks, develop migraine later in life.
Indeed, this condition is considered to be a migraine equivalent
and cosegregates with migraine in families. Medical therapy is supportive during the attacks, especially when vomiting is a prominent
feature.

Sandifer Syndrome and Rumination

Gastroesophageal reflux in infants may cause paroxysmal episodes
of generalized stiffening and opisthotonic posturing that may be
accompanied by apnea, staring, and minimal jerking of the extremities. Episodes often occur 30 minutes after a feed. In older children,
this syndrome manifests with episodic dystonic or dyskinetic movements consisting of laterocollis, retrocollis, or torticollis, the exact
pathophysiology of which remains elusive. Reflux can also present
with rumination consisting of contraction of abdominal muscles
followed by mouthing and swallowing movements and at times
vomiting.

Alternating Hemiplegia of Childhood

This is a rare, often severe, disorder that consists of attacks of flaccid
hemiplegia affecting one or both sides lasting minutes to days, starting in the first 18 months of life. Earlier manifestations include paroxysmal nystagmus, which is often monocular and ipsilateral to the
hemiplegia or dystonia. Dystonic spells are the rule also. Patients can
have episodes of reduced consciousness and confusion that are not
epileptic. Most affected children also have ataxia and developmental
delay, and many have choreoathetosis and behavioral problems. Most
of the patients are initially misdiagnosed as having refractory focal
epilepsy with Todd paralysis. About half of them also have epileptic seizures, which makes the differential diagnosis even more difficult. Flunarizine 2.5-­20 mg/day reduces the frequency and severity
of the attacks. This condition is most commonly caused by variants in
ATP1A3, but it can also result from variants in ATP1A2 or the glucose
transporter 1 (GLUT-­1/SLC2AI), variants that are notoriously associated with diagnostically challenging protean manifestations ranging
from epilepsy, usually in early life, to movement disorders thereafter.
The ATP1A3 gene has also been reported in a syndrome of relapsing
encephalopathy with cerebellar ataxia (RECA) during febrile illnesses. Another syndrome is benign nocturnal alternating hemiplegia, which manifests during sleep and is generally outgrown and has
been linked to PRRT2 variants.

Paroxysmal Dyskinesias and Other Movement
Disorders

These disorders are characterized by sudden attacks that consist of
choreic, dystonic, ballistic, or mixed movements (Table 633.4 and see
Table 634.3). Despite their historical classification into distinct entities, emerging insight into their clinical features and their underlying
genetic causes is revealing a significant overlap with phenotypic pleiotropy whereby a pathogenic variant in a single gene may be associated
with multiple types of dyskinesias and paroxysms, including epileptic
seizures even in the same child. A sensation of fatigue or weakness
confined to one side may herald an attack. Consciousness is preserved
and patients may be able to perform a motor activity, such as walking, despite the attack. The variability in the pattern of severity and
localization between different attacks may also help in differentiating
them from seizures. The frequency of attacks increases in adolescence
and steadily decreases in the third decade. Neurologic examination
between attacks, laboratory investigations, and imaging studies are
usually normal. Because the co-­occurrence of movement disorders
and epileptic seizures is not uncommon, the nature of each type of paroxysmal event has to be characterized as epileptic or not, often with
a cautiously analyzed video-­EEG, as movement-­related artifact may
be misread as epileptiform. Chorea consists of involuntary rapid fast
movements that are slower than myoclonus and not rhythmic. Common causes are poststreptococcal Sydenham chorea, antiphospholipid antibody syndrome, and systemic lupus erythematosus. Action

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3636 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 634.4  Differential Diagnoses of Various Types of Paroxysmal Dyskinesia
PNKD
FEATURES

PKD

PNKD1 (MR1+ VE)

PNKD2 (MR1- VE)

PED

PHD (EPILEPSY
WITH DYSTONIC
EPILEPTIC
SEIZURES)

Nomenclature

PKC

PDC, FPC

PDC, FPC

PEDt

ADNFLE

Inheritance

AD–16q

AD–2q35

AD–2q13

AD/AR

AD–20q13, 15q24,
1q21, 8p21

Gene

PRRT2 (most common),
SCN8A, DEPDC5

MR1 (now called
PNKD)

Not well characterized
KCNMA1, ATP1A3

SLC2A1

CHRNA4, CHRNB2,
KCNT1

Age at onset (yr)

1-­20

<1-­12

1-­23

Usually childhood

Usually childhood

Triggers

Sudden whole-­body
movement

Coffee, alcohol,
stress

Exercise

After 10-­15 min of
exercise

Sleep

Clinical features

Chorea, athetosis,
ballismus, dystonia

Chorea, athetosis,
dystonia, ballismus

Chorea, athetosis,
dystonia, ballismus

Mainly leg dystonia

Wakes up with
dystonic posture

Usual duration

<1-­5 min

10 min to 1 hr

10 min to 2-­3 hr

10-­15 min

<1 min

Frequency

1-­20/day

1/wk

1/wk

Daily, weekly, or
monthly

Several/night

Associations

Infantile seizures (ICCA),
migraine, writer’s
cramp, essential tremor

Migraine

Epilepsy

RE-­PED-­WC

Medication

Carbamazepine
Phenytoin
Oxcarbazepine

Benzodiazepines,
mainly clonazepam

Prognosis

Excellent

Excellent, worse than
PKD

Benzodiazepines,
mainly clonazepam

Minimally worse than
PNKD MR1+

Acetazolamide
L-­DOPA
Antiepileptics
Trihexyphenidyl
Ketogenic diet in
SLC2A1 mutation
cases

Carbamazepine
Oxcarbazepine

Poor medication
response

Excellent

AD, Autosomal dominant; ADNFLE, autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy; AR, autosomal recessive; FPC, familial paroxysmal choreoathetosis; ICCA, infantile
convulsions choreoathetosis syndrome; MR1+, myofibrillogenesis regulator 1–positive; MR1−, myofibrillogenesis regulator 1–negative; PDC, paroxysmal dystonic choreoathetosis;
PED, paroxysmal exercise-­induced dyskinesia; PEDt, paroxysmal exercise-­induced dystonia; PHD, paroxysmal hypnogenic dyskinesia; PKC, paroxysmal kinesigenic choreoathetosis;
PKD, paroxysmal kinesigenic dyskinesia; PNKD, paroxysmal nonkinesigenic dyskinesia; RE-­PED-­WC, rolandic epilepsy–paroxysmal exercise-­induced dystonia–writer’s cramp.
From Friedman NR, Ghosh D, Moodley M. Syncope and paroxysmal disorders other than epilepsy. In: Swaiman KF, Ashwal S, Ferriero DM, et al, eds. Swaiman’s Pediatric Neurology,
5th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2012: Table 65-­1.

myoclonus and paroxysmal lower body action dystonia occur in children with myoclonus dystonia—a syndrome caused by pathogenic
variants in SGCE or RELN. Drug reactions can result in abnormal
movements; they include oculogyric crisis with many antiemetics
and lamotrigine toxicity, choreoathetosis with phenytoin, dystonia and
facial dyskinesias with antidopaminergic drugs, and tics with carbamazepine. Strokes, focal brain lesions, connective tissue disorders (e.g.,
systemic lupus erythematosus), vasculitis, or metabolic and genetic
disorders can also cause movement disorders. Indeed, paroxysmal dyskinesia may be secondary to basal ganglia lesions, and various forms of
nonepileptic paroxysms, including dystonic posturing, bicycling, and
rhythmic boxing, may occur in children with decompensated maple
syrup urine disease.

Episodic Ataxias

Episodic ataxias form a clinically and genetically heterogeneous
group of diseases that manifest with recurrent truncal ataxia and
incoordination. Of the nine syndromes described so far, only two
(types 1 and 2) have been reported in a large number of families from
different ethnic groups. Type 1 is caused by pathogenic variants in
KCNA1 that encodes the voltage-­gated potassium channel Kv1.1. It
consists of brief episodes (seconds to minutes) of cerebellar ataxia
and occasional seizures with interictal myokymia as a main diagnostic feature. Type 2 is characterized by longer attacks (minutes to
hours) and interictal cerebellar signs. It is caused by variants in the
voltage-­gated calcium channel gene CACNA1A. This type is more

responsive than type 1 to acetazolamide; the drug can reduce the frequency and severity of attacks but not the interictal signs and symptoms. The other types of episodic ataxia are not well-­characterized,
but types 5, 6, and 9 have been associated with variants in CACNB4,
SLC1A3, and FGF14, respectively. Spells of episodic ataxia may also
occur in children with paroxysmal dyskinesia secondary to variants
in CACNA1A or PRRT2, in line with the previously discussed phenotypic pleiotropy of these conditions. Although epileptic seizures have
been primarily described in episodic ataxia type 1, they have also
been reported with the other types, specifically types 2 and 6. Glucose
transporter deficiency can at times present as episodic ataxia.

Motor Tics

These are movements that are under partial control and are associated
with an urge to do them and with subsequent relief. They are usually
exacerbated by emotions and often change in character over time.
Simple tics, which occur at some time in about one in five children,
involve one or two muscle groups; complex tics involve multiple tics
or muscle groups; and Tourette syndrome consists of multiple motor
tics and vocal tics for more than a year. In patients with tics who
have Tourette syndrome, there is often a family history of tics and/or
obsessive-­compulsive disorder or personality traits. Some rare cases
appear to occur after preceding streptococcal infections and have
been termed PANDAS (pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorder associated with streptococcal infections). PANS, on the other
hand, refers to an acute onset of obsessive-­compulsive symptoms

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 634 u Conditions That Mimic Seizures
with other behavioral problems and often with tics but without the
association of streptococcal infections (acute-­onset neuropsychiatric
syndrome).

Benign Motoric Paroxysms in Infancy

Benign myoclonus of infancy consists of myoclonic jerks of the
extremities in wakefulness and sometimes also in sleep with no
concurrent epileptic EEG changes in a neurologically normal child.
Shuddering attacks are characterized by rapid tremors of the head,
shoulder, and trunk lasting a few seconds, often associated with eating, and recurring many times a day. Others have considered shuddering as an early manifestation of essential tremor because a family
history of essential tremor is often present. Infantile head atonic
attacks consist of repeated head drops, hundreds to thousands per
day, usually appearing at 3-­6 months of life and spontaneously subsiding by the first year of life, without concurrent EEG epileptic
activity. Spontaneous remission occurs in all three syndromes, usually within a few months. Video-­EEG is normal ictally and interictally in these syndromes but should be performed to differentiate
them from infantile spasms and epileptic myoclonus. Hereditary
chin trembling at a frequency faster than 3 Hz starting shortly
after birth and precipitated by stress has been described in several
families.

Brainstem Dysfunction

3637

stress, an epileptic disorder, migraine, a vascular disorder, or a drug-­
related reaction.

OCULOMOTOR AND VISUAL ABNORMALITIES
Paroxysmal Tonic Upgaze of Childhood

This usually starts before 3 months of age and consists of protracted
attacks (hours to days) of continuous or episodic upward gaze deviation, during which horizontal eye movements are preserved. A
downbeating nystagmus occurs on downward gaze. Symptoms are
reduced or relieved by sleep, exacerbated by fatigue and infections,
and spontaneously remit after a few years. Up to 50% of patients
may have psychomotor and language delay. Although imaging and
laboratory tests were nonrevealing in the seminal cases, white matter lesions have been later reported in some patients. An association
with CACNA1A gene variants in a few patients who also suffered
from ataxia has been reported, pointing to etiologic and clinical
heterogeneity. The differential diagnosis includes drug reactions,
tics, Chediak-­Higashi disease, Rett syndrome, and Wilson disease.
Most of those, however, occur at a later age. Therapy with carbonic
anhydrase inhibitors or low-­dose levodopa/carbidopa may be helpful in severe cases. Concomitant absence epilepsy has been reported
in few cases.

Oculomotor Apraxia and Saccadic Intrusions

Decorticate or decerebrate posturing that mimics epileptic tonic seizures may be secondary to decompensated hydrocephalus, intracranial
hemorrhage, brainstem tumors, Chiari malformation, or other causes
of sudden rises in intracranial pressure that lead to brainstem dysfunction. The term cerebellar fits has been used to describe drop attacks,
extensor posturing with varying degrees of altered consciousness and
respiratory compromise secondary to crowding of the posterior fossa,
and near herniation in decompensated cerebellar tumors and certain
cases of Chiari malformation.

In oculomotor apraxia, saccadic eye movements are impaired. Sudden head turns compensating for lateral gaze impairment mimic seizures. This disorder may be idiopathic (Cogan congenital oculomotor
apraxia) or may occur in the context of Joubert syndrome, ataxia telangiectasia, spinocerebellar ataxias, or lysosomal storage diseases. A
selective loss of Purkinje cells required to suppress omnipause neurons
and initiate saccadic eye movement is believed to occur in some of the
disorders. Saccadic intrusions are involuntary, sudden, conjugate eye
movements away from the desired eye position. These are not necessarily pathologic.

Behavioral Conditions

Spasmus Nutans

Many behavioral disorders can be mistaken for epileptic seizures.
Pleasurable behaviors similar to masturbation may occur from
infancy onward and may consist of rhythmic rocking movements in
the sitting or lying position or rhythmic hip flexion and adduction.
Infantile gratification (masturbation), which is more common in
females, usually occurs at 2-­3 years of age and is often associated with
perspiration, irregular breathing, and grunting but no loss of consciousness. Occasionally this is associated with child abuse or with
other psychopathology. Stereotypies, or repetitive movements that
are more complex than tics and do not change and wax and wane as
do tics (e.g., head banging, head rolling, body rocking, and hand flapping), usually occur in neurologically impaired children. A mannerism is a pattern of socially acceptable, situational behavior that is seen
in particular situations such as gesturing when talking. Mannerisms
should not be confused with stereotypies, which are generally pervasive over almost every other activity, such as head shaking or hand
flapping in multiple situations. Stereotypies, unlike mannerisms,
increase with stress. Unlike tics and mannerisms, stereotypies usually start before the age of 3 years, involve more body parts, are more
rhythmic, and most importantly occur when a child is engrossed with
an object or activity of interest; children rarely try to suppress stereotypies. Panic and anxiety attacks have been described in children; at
times, these may be clinically indistinguishable from actual epileptic
seizures and therefore may necessitate video-­EEG monitoring. Rage
attacks usually occur in patients with a personality disorder and are
usually not seizures, although rare cases of partial seizures can manifest as rage attacks. Hyperventilation spells can be precipitated by
anxiety and are associated with dizziness, tingling, and, at times, carpopedal spasm. Transient global amnesia consists of isolated short-­
term memory loss for minutes to hours that occurs mostly in adults
but has been reported in children. The etiology can be emotional

This disorder presents with a triad of nystagmus, head tilt, and
head nodding. If diurnal fluctuation occurs, symptoms may look
like those of epileptic seizures. A brain MRI should be performed
because the triad has been associated with masses in the optic chiasm and third ventricle. Retinal disease should also be ruled out. In
the absence of these associations, remission occurs before 5 years
of age.

Opsoclonus-­Myoclonus Syndrome

In opsoclonus-­myoclonus syndrome, the term dancing eyes refers
to continuous, random, irregular, and conjugate eye movements
that may fluctuate in intensity. The finding usually accompanies
myoclonus and ataxia (dancing feet). Neuroblastoma (more commonly), encephalitis, and a presumed postinfectious etiology are
possible causes. In addition to treating the underlying etiology,
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), corticosteroids, rituximab,
and clonazepam are often needed. Recurrences are not infrequent,
and developmental delay is common. The opsoclonus and myoclonus may recur after treatment. The long-­term neurologic prognosis
remains poor, yet the presence of this syndrome is associated with
a favorable treatment response of a coexisting neuroblastoma. Opsoclonus with epileptic myoclonus has also been described in a child
with GLUT-­1 deficiency.

Daydreaming and Behavioral Staring

Staring may be a manifestation of absence seizures, which should be
differentiated from daydreaming and from behavioral staring because
of fatigue and inattention. This is common in children with attention-­
deficit disorder because these patients are often referred to rule out
absence seizures. Hyperventilation in the office precipitates absences
and is a useful clinical test. Episodes of staring only in certain settings

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3638 Part XXV u The Nervous System
(e.g., school) are unlikely to be seizures. In addition, responsiveness
to stimulation such as touch and lack of interruption of playing activity characterize nonepileptic staring. Daydreaming occurs often in
children, and time-­out staring occurs in children when they are overwhelmed with external stimuli or with demands and shut down, ignoring their surroundings and staring.

Visual Hallucinations

Temporal lobe seizures can be associated with complex visual auras,
such as seeing people and places, often with subsequent focal seizure
manifestations. Occipital lobe seizures usually cause simple visual
hallucinations and may occur as isolated auras or may be accompanied by headache and nausea (Gastaut type of benign occipital
epilepsy), making them difficult to differentiate from migraine. Hallucinations in occipital seizures are characterized by colorful shapes,
circles, and spots seen for seconds and confined to one hemifield,
whereas migrainous auras usually last minutes and consist of black-­
and-­
white lines, scotomas, and/or fortification spectra that start
in the center of the vision. Visual snow is a phenomenon that can
be confused with occipital seizures and a migraine aura. It consists
of dynamic continuous tiny dots in all of the visual field lasting >3
months with at least two to four additional specific visual symptoms
(afterimages [i.e., palinopsia], enhanced visual phenomena [i.e.,
entotopic phenomena such as excessive floaters and photopsias],
photophobia, and impaired night vision [i.e., nyctalopia]). Although
it can occur in patients with migraine or with psychologic stress, the
underlying pathology is not clear. Unlike migraine, it is associated
with increased, rather than decreased, metabolism on PET scans of
the lingual gyrus, which is the visual memory area, and patients usually do not respond to antimigraine therapies. Alice in Wonderland
syndrome consists of the visual distortion of one’s body or surroundings (bigger, smaller, closer, or more distant) and has been associated
with migraine, epilepsy, acute infection such as Epstein-­Barr virus,
or fever. Hallucinations can also be secondary to other causes: drug
exposure, midbrain lesions, and psychiatric illnesses. In addition,
retinal-­associated hallucinations can occur in the form of flashes of
light in the context of inflammatory etiologies, trauma, or optic nerve
edema. Charles Bonnet syndrome is the occurrence of visual hallucinations caused by ocular-­origin visual loss or, at times, intracranial
pathology.

SLEEP-­RELATED DISORDERS (SEE ALSO
CHAPTER 31)

Paroxysmal nonepileptic sleep events are more common in epileptic
patients than in the general population, which makes their diagnosis difficult. The EEG pattern of frontal lobe epileptic seizures may
be similar to the one seen in normal arousals, making their diagnosis challenging, especially because they have nonspecific hypermotor
manifestations such as thrashing, body rocking, kicking, boxing, pedaling, bending, running, and various vocalizations. The diagnosis of
such epileptic seizures is made on the basis of highly stereotyped, usually brief (<1 minute) events arising several times a night from non–
rapid eye movement sleep.

Benign Sleep Myoclonus and Neonatal Sleep
Myoclonus

Physiologic sleep myoclonus consists of repetitive, usually bilateral,
rhythmic jerks involving the upper and lower limbs during non–rapid
eye movement (REM) sleep, sometimes mimicking clonic seizures.
Although the rule is that it is not stimulus sensitive, a slow (1-­Hz) rocking of the infant in a head-­to-­toe direction is a specific diagnostic test
that may sometimes reproduce the neonatal sleep myoclonus. The lack
of autonomic changes, occurrence only in sleep, and suppression by
awakenings may help in differentiating these events from epileptic seizures. Remission is spontaneous, usually at 2-­3 months of age. In older
children and adults, sleep myoclonus consists of random myoclonic
jerks of the limbs.

Non–Rapid Eye Movement Partial Arousal
Disorders

Brief nocturnal confusional arousals occur during slow-­wave sleep
and are normal in children. Such episodes can vary from chewing,
sitting up, and mumbling to agitated sleepwalking and usually last for
10-­15 minutes. With somnambulism, there is often a positive family
history, and it usually occurs 1-­3 hours after sleep onset. Night terrors similarly occur in deep sleep, most often at 2-­7 years of age and
more so in males. Stress increases the risk of both. In night terrors,
the child screams; appears terrified; has dilated pupils, tachycardia,
tachypnea, unresponsiveness, agitation, and thrashing that increase
with attempts to be consoled; is difficult to arouse; and may have little
or no vocalization. In older children with persistent night terrors,
an underlying psychologic etiology may be present. The diagnosis is
based on the history. However, rarely, video-­EEG monitoring may be
needed, especially if stereotyped motoric features are suggested by
the history. At times, the use of bedtime diazepam (0.2-­0.3 mg/kg)
or clonazepam (0.125-­0.5 mg) may help control the problem while
psychologic factors are being investigated. Restless legs syndrome
can cause painful leg dysesthesias that cause nocturnal arousals and
insomnia. It can be either genetic or associated with iron deficiency,
systemic illness, or some drugs such as antidepressants. Therapy
depends on treating the underlying cause and, if needed, on dopaminergic drugs, such as levodopa/carbidopa, or antiepileptics, such
as gabapentin.

Rapid Eye Movement Sleep Disorders

Unlike night terrors, nightmares tend to occur later during the night
and the child has a memory of the event. REM sleep behavior disorder consists of loss of atonia during REM sleep, enabling patients
to act out their dreams and thus mimicking nocturnal frontal or
temporal lobe seizures. It is more common in adults. Children with
autism and developmental delay are more likely to have it than other
children.

Sleep Transition Disorders

Nocturnal head banging (jactatio capitis nocturna), rolling, repetitive
limb movements, or body rocking often occur in infants and toddlers
as they are trying to fall asleep and can be mistaken for seizures or
spasms. They usually remit spontaneously by 5 years of age. No specific therapy is needed, but in exceptional cases, clonazepam at bedtime
may be used.

Narcolepsy-­Cataplexy Syndrome

Narcolepsy is characterized by excessive daytime sleepiness, cataplexy, sleep paralysis, hypnogogic hallucinations, and disturbed
nighttime sleep (see Chapter 31). The persistence of REM sleep atonia upon awakening or its intrusion during wakefulness leads to
sleep paralysis or cataplexy, respectively. Loss of tone in cataplexy
occurs in response to strong emotions and spreads from the face
downward, leading to a fall in a series of stages rather than a sudden
one. Consciousness is maintained in cataplexy. A selective loss of
hypocretin-­secreting neurons in the hypothalamus is at the origin
of this disorder. The fact that DQB1*0602 is a predisposing human
leukocyte antigen (HLA) allele identified in 85–95% of patients
with narcolepsy-­cataplexy suggests an autoimmune-­mediated neuronal loss. Secondary narcolepsy has also been described in children
with brain lesions affecting the brainstem or hypothalamic regions
subserving wakefulness. The diagnosis is based on the multiple
sleep latency test. Therapy relies on scheduled naps; medications
such as amphetamines, methylphenidate, tricyclic antidepressants,
modafinil, or sodium oxybate; and counseling about precautions in
work and driving.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 635 u Headaches

Chapter 635

Headaches
Andrew D. Hershey, Marielle Kabbouche,
and Joanne Kacperski
Headache is a common complaint in children and adolescents. Headaches can be a primary problem or occur as a symptom of another disorder (a secondary headache). Recognizing this difference is essential
for choosing the appropriate evaluation and treatment to ensure successful management of the headache. Primary headaches should be
thought of as a disease themselves and are most often present as recurrent, episodic headaches, and for most children are sporadic in their
presentation. This oftentimes creates confusion when patients and providers focus on the events (i.e., the headache, calling it a “migraine”)
rather than the disease itself.
The most common forms of primary headache in childhood are
migraine and tension-­type headache (Table 635.1). Other forms of
primary headache, including the trigeminal autonomic cephalalgias
and cluster headaches, occur much less commonly. Primary headache
disorders can progress to very frequent or even daily headaches, with
chronic migraine and chronic tension-­type headache being recognized
as a problem for children and adolescents. These more frequent headaches can have an enormous impact on the life of the child and adolescent, as reflected in school absences and decreased school performance,
social withdrawal, and changes in family interactions. To reduce this
impact, a treatment strategy that incorporates acute treatments, preventive treatments, and biobehavioral therapies must be implemented.
Secondary headache is a headache that is a symptom of an underlying
illness (see Table 635.1). The underlying illness should be clearly present as a direct cause of the headaches with close association of timing
and symptomatology. This is often difficult when two or more common
conditions occur in close temporal association. This frequently leads to
the misdiagnosis of a primary headache as a secondary headache. This
is the case when the headaches caused by migraine are misdiagnosed as
sinus headaches. The key components of a secondary headache are the
likely direct cause-­and-­effect relationship between the headache and
the precipitating condition. In this regard, when the presumed cause
of the secondary headache has been treated (antibiotics) or given adequate time to recover (posttraumatic headache), the headache symptoms should resolve. If this does not occur, either the diagnosis must be
reevaluated or the effectiveness of the treatment reassessed.
In all instances of primary headaches, the neurologic examination
should be normal. If it is not normal or a secondary headache is suspected, this raises a red flag. The presence of an abnormal neurologic
examination (including fundoscopic) or unusual neurologic symptoms is
a key clue that additional investigation is warranted.

635.1 Migraine
Andrew D. Hershey, Marielle Kabbouche, and
Joanne Kacperski
Migraine is a disease that has a genetic basis (Table 635.2) and represents the most frequent reason recurrent headaches are brought to the
attention of parents and primary care providers, but it remains underrecognized and undertreated, particularly in children and adolescents.
Migraine is characterized by episodic attacks. These attacks are typically thought of as headaches, but in children there are also periodic
syndromes that may represent attacks of migraine. The headaches may
be moderate to severe in intensity, be focal in location, have a throbbing quality, and be associated with nausea, vomiting, light sensitivity,
and/or sound sensitivity. Compared with migraine in adults, migraine

3639

in children and adolescents may be shorter in duration and has a
bilateral, often bifrontal, location. The headaches can also be associated with an aura that may be typical (visual, sensory, or dysphasic) or
atypical (hemiplegic, Alice in Wonderland syndrome) (Tables 635.3-­
635.7). Migraine may present with a number of variants in children,
including abdominally related symptoms without headache and components of the periodic syndromes of childhood—also called episodic
disorders associated with migraine (see Table 635.1). Treatment of
migraine requires the incorporation of an acute treatment plan, a preventive treatment plan if the migraine occurs frequently or is disabling
or long lasting, and a biobehavioral plan to help cope with both the
acute attacks and frequent or persistent attacks if present.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Up to 75% of children report having a significant headache by the
time they are 15 years of age. Recurrent headaches are less common
but remain highly frequent. Migraine has been reported to occur in
up to 10.6% of children between the ages of 5 and 15 years and up to
28% of older adolescents. When headaches are occurring more than
15 days per month, they are termed chronic migraine and may occur in
up to 1% of children and adolescents. The risk of conversion to a daily
headache becomes more likely as the frequency increases or ineffective
acute treatments are used. This explains the necessity to treat the headaches aggressively or prevent the headaches altogether, trying to block
transformation to chronic migraine.
Migraine can affect a patient’s life through school absences, limitation of home activities, and restriction of social activities. This can be
assessed through simple tools such as PedMIDAS (pediatric migraine
disability assessment tool). When headaches become more frequent,
their negative impact increases in magnitude. This can lead to further
complications, including anxiety and school avoidance, requiring a
more extensive treatment plan.

CLASSIFICATION AND CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Criteria have been established to guide the clinical and scientific study
of headaches; these are summarized in The International Classification
of Headache Disorders, 3rd edition (ICHD-­3). Table 635.1 contrasts the
different clinical types of migraine; Tables 635.3-­635.7 list the specific
criteria for migraine types.

Migraine Without Aura

Migraine without aura is the most common form of migraine in both
children and adults. The ICHD-­3 (see Table 635.3) requires this to be
recurrent (at least five headaches that meet the criteria, typically over
the past year, but no firm period is required). The recurrent episodic
nature helps differentiate this from a secondary headache and separates migraine from tension-­type headache. Because headaches may
first start in young childhood, this may limit the diagnosis in children
as they are just beginning to develop headaches.
The duration of the headache is defined as 4-­72 hours for adults.
It has been recognized that children may have shorter-­duration headaches, so an allowance has been made to reduce this duration to 2-­72
hours in children and adolescents under the age of 18 years. Note that
this duration is for the untreated or unsuccessfully treated headache.
Furthermore, if the child falls asleep with the headache, the entire sleep
period is considered part of the duration. These duration limits help
differentiate migraine from both short-­duration headaches, including
the trigeminal autonomic cephalalgias, and prolonged headaches, such
as those caused by idiopathic intracranial hypertension (pseudotumor cerebri). Some prolonged headaches may still be migraine, but a
migraine that persists beyond 72 hours is classified as a variant termed
status migrainosus.
The quality of migraine pain is often, but not always, throbbing or
pounding. This may be difficult to elicit in young children, and drawings or demonstrations may help confirm the throbbing quality.
The location of the pain has classically been described as unilateral (hemicrania); in young children it is more commonly bilateral.
A more appropriate way to think of the location would therefore be
focal to differentiate it from the diffuse pain of tension-­type headaches.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3640 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 635.1  Classification of Headaches (ICHD-­3 Code Diagnosis)
MIGRAINE
Migraine with or without aura
Migraine with typical aura (with or without headache)
Migraine with brainstem aura
Hemiplegic migraine (sporadic or familial types 1, 2, 3 or other
genetic loci)
Retinal migraine
Chronic migraine
Complications of Migraine
Status migrainosus
Persistent aura without infarction
Migrainous infarction
Migraine aura–triggered seizure
Episodic Syndromes that May Be Associated with Migraine
Recurrent gastrointestinal disturbance
Cyclical vomiting syndrome
Abdominal migraine
Benign paroxysmal vertigo
Benign paroxysmal torticollis
Episodic colic
TENSION-­TYPE HEADACHE (TTH)
Infrequent episodic TTH associated with or without pericranial
tenderness
Frequent episodic TTH associated with or without pericranial
tenderness
Chronic TTH associated with or without pericranial tenderness
Probable TTHs
TRIGEMINAL AUTONOMIC CEPHALALGIAS (TACS)
Cluster headache (episodic or cluster)
Paroxysmal hemicrania (episodic or cluster)
Short-­lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache attacks with or
without conjunctival injection and tearing (SUNCT)
Episodic SUNCT
Chronic SUNCT
Short-­lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache attacks with or
without cranial autonomic symptoms (SUNA)
Episodic SUNA
Chronic SUNA
Hemicrania continua
Probable trigeminal autonomic cephalalgias
OTHER PRIMARY HEADACHE DISORDERS
Primary cough headache
Primary exercise headache
Primary headache associated with sexual activity
Primary thunderclap headache
Cold-­stimulus headache (external application, ingestion, or
inhalation)
External-­pressure headache
External-­compression headache
External-­traction headache
Primary stabbing headache
Nummular headache
Hypnic headache
New daily persistent headache (NDPH)
HEADACHE ATTRIBUTED TO TRAUMA OR INJURY TO THE HEAD
AND/OR NECK
Acute headache attributed to traumatic (mild, moderate, or severe)
injury to the head
Persistent headache attributed to traumatic (mild, moderate, or
severe) injury to the head
Acute or persistent headache attributed to whiplash
Acute or persistent headache attributed to craniotomy

HEADACHE ATTRIBUTED TO CRANIAL OR CERVICAL VASCULAR
DISORDER
Headache attributed to ischemic stroke or transient ischemic attack
Headache attributed to nontraumatic intracerebral hemorrhage
Headache attributed to nontraumatic subarachnoid hemorrhage
Headache attributed to nontraumatic acute subdural hemorrhage
Headache attributed to unruptured vascular malformation
Headache attributed to unruptured saccular aneurysm
Headache attributed to arteriovenous malformation
Headache attributed to dural arteriovenous fistula
Headache attributed to cavernous angioma
Headache attributed to encephalotrigeminal or leptomeningeal
angiomatosis (Sturge-­Weber syndrome)
Headache attributed to arteritis
Headache attributed to giant cell arteritis
Headache attributed to primary angiitis of the central nervous
system
Headache attributed to secondary angiitis of the central nervous
system
Headache attributed to cervical carotid or vertebral artery disorder
Headache or facial or neck pain attributed to cervical carotid or
vertebral artery dissection
Postendarterectomy headache
Headache attributed to carotid or vertebral angioplasty
Headache attributed to cerebral venous thrombosis
Headache attributed to other acute intracranial arterial disorder
Headache attributed to an intracranial endovascular procedure
Angiography headache
Headache attributed to reversible cerebral vasoconstriction
syndrome
Headache attributed to intracranial arterial dissection
Headache attributed to genetic vasculopathy
Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts
and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL)
Mitochondrial encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, and strokelike
episodes (MELAS)
Headache attributed to another genetic vasculopathy
Headache attributed to pituitary apoplexy
HEADACHE ATTRIBUTED TO NONVASCULAR INTRACRANIAL
DISORDER
Headache attributed to increased cerebrospinal fluid pressure
Headache attributed to idiopathic intracranial hypertension
Headache attributed to intracranial hypertension secondary to
metabolic, toxic, or hormonal causes
Headache attributed to intracranial hypertension secondary to
hydrocephalus
Headache attributed to low cerebrospinal fluid pressure
Post–dural puncture headache
Cerebrospinal fluid fistula headache
Headache attributed to spontaneous intracranial hypotension
Headache attributed to noninfectious inflammatory disease
Headache attributed to neurosarcoidosis
Headache attributed to aseptic (noninfectious) meningitis
Headache attributed to other noninfectious inflammatory disease
Headache attributed to lymphocytic hypophysitis
Syndrome of transient headache and neurologic deficits with
cerebrospinal fluid lymphocytosis (HaNDL)
Headache attributed to intracranial neoplasm
Headache attributed to colloid cyst of the third ventricle
Headache attributed to carcinomatous meningitis
Headache attributed to hypothalamic or pituitary hypersecretion or
hyposecretion
Headache attributed to intrathecal injection
Headache attributed to epileptic seizure
Hemicrania epileptica
Postictal headache
Headache attributed to Chiari malformation type I
Headache attributed to other nonvascular intracranial disorder

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 635 u Headaches

3641

Table 635.1  Classification of Headaches (ICHD-­3 Code Diagnosis)—cont’d
HEADACHE ATTRIBUTED TO A SUBSTANCE OR ITS
WITHDRAWAL
Headache attributed to use of or exposure to a substance
Nitric oxide donor–induced headache
Phosphodiesterase inhibitor–induced headache
Carbon monoxide–induced headache
Alcohol-­induced headache
Monosodium glutamate–induced headache
Cocaine-­induced headache
Histamine-­induced headache
Calcitonin gene-­related peptide–induced headache
Headache attributed to exogenous acute pressor agent
Headache attributed to occasional or long-­term use of non–headache
medication
Headache attributed to exogenous hormone
Medication-­Overuse Headache (MOH)
Ergotamine-­overuse headache
Triptan-­overuse headache
Simple analgesic–overuse headache
Paracetamol (acetaminophen)-­overuse headache
Acetylsalicylic acid–overuse headache
Other nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug–overuse headache
Opioid-­overuse headache
Combination analgesic–overuse headache
Headache Attributed to Substance Withdrawal
Caffeine-­withdrawal headache
Opioid-­withdrawal headache
Estrogen-­withdrawal headache
HEADACHE ATTRIBUTED TO INFECTION
Acute or chronic headache attributed to bacterial meningitis or
meningoencephalitis
Persistent headache attributed to past bacterial meningitis or
meningoencephalitis
Acute or chronic headache attributed to intracranial fungal or other
parasitic infection
Headache attributed to brain abscess
Headache attributed to subdural empyema
Headache attributed to systemic infection (acute or chronic)
HEADACHE ATTRIBUTED TO DISORDER OF HOMEOSTASIS
Headache attributed to hypoxia and/or hypercapnia
High-­altitude headache
Headache attributed to airplane travel
Diving headache
Sleep apnea headache
Dialysis headache
Headache attributed to arterial hypertension
Headache attributed to pheochromocytoma
Headache attributed to hypertensive crisis with or without
hypertensive encephalopathy
Headache attributed to preeclampsia or eclampsia
Headache attributed to autonomic dysreflexia
Headache attributed to hypothyroidism
Headache attributed to fasting
Cardiac cephalalgia
Headache attributed to other disorder of homoeostasis

HEADACHE OR FACIAL PAIN ATTRIBUTED TO DISORDER OF
THE CRANIUM, NECK, EYES, EARS, NOSE, SINUSES, TEETH,
MOUTH, OR OTHER FACIAL OR CERVICAL STRUCTURE
Headache attributed to disorder of cranial bone
Headache attributed to retropharyngeal tendonitis
Headache attributed to craniocervical dystonia
Headache attributed to acute glaucoma
Headache attributed to refractive error
Headache attributed to heterophoria or heterotropia (latent or
persistent squint)
Headache attributed to ocular inflammatory disorder
Headache attributed to tracheitis
Headache attributed to disorder of the ears
Headache attributed to acute or chronic or recurring
rhinosinusitis
Headache attributed to temporomandibular disorder
Head or facial pain attributed to inflammation of the stylohyoid
ligament
Headache or facial pain attributed to other disorder of the cranium,
neck, eyes, ears, nose, sinuses, teeth, mouth, or other facial or
cervical structure
HEADACHE ATTRIBUTED TO PSYCHIATRIC DISORDER
Headache attributed to somatization disorder
Headache attributed to psychotic disorder
PAINFUL CRANIAL NEUROPATHIES AND OTHER FACIAL PAINS
Classical trigeminal neuralgia
Classical trigeminal neuralgia, purely paroxysmal or with concomitant
persistent facial pain
Painful trigeminal neuropathy
Painful trigeminal neuropathy attributed to acute herpes zoster
Postherpetic trigeminal neuropathy
Painful posttraumatic trigeminal neuropathy
Painful trigeminal neuropathy attributed to multiple sclerosis (MS)
plaque
Painful trigeminal neuropathy attributed to space-­occupying
lesion
Painful trigeminal neuropathy attributed to other disorder
Glossopharyngeal neuralgia
Classical nervus intermedius (facial nerve) neuralgia
Nervus intermedius neuropathy attributed to herpes zoster
Occipital neuralgia
Optic neuritis
Headache attributed to ischemic ocular motor nerve palsy
Tolosa-­Hunt syndrome
Paratrigeminal oculosympathetic (Raeder) syndrome
Recurrent painful ophthalmoplegic neuropathy
Burning mouth syndrome (BMS)
Persistent idiopathic facial pain (PIFP)
Central neuropathic pain
Central neuropathic pain attributed to multiple sclerosis
Central post-­stroke pain (CPSP)

From Headache Classification Committee of the International Headache Society (IHS). The International Classification of Headache Disorders, 3rd ed. Cephalalgia. 2018;38(1):1–211.

Of particular concern is the exclusively occipital headache because
although these can be migraines, they are more frequently secondary to
another more proximate etiology such as posterior fossa abnormalities.
The headaches of migraine, when allowed to fully develop, often
worsen with activity. Worsening of the pain occurs classically in
adults when going up or down stairs. This history is often not elicited in children. A change in the child’s activity pattern can be easily
observed as a reduction in play or physical activity. Older children
may limit or restrict their sports activity or exercise during a headache attack.
The attacks may have a variety of associated symptoms. In younger
children, nausea and vomiting may be the most obvious symptoms and

often outweigh the headache itself. This often leads to the overlap with
several of the gastrointestinal periodic diseases, including recurrent
abdominal pain, recurrent vomiting, cyclic vomiting, and abdominal
migraine. The common feature among all of these related conditions is
an increased propensity among children with them for the later development of a typical description of a headache caused by migraine. Early
childhood recurrent vomiting may in fact be migraine, but the child is
not asked about or is unable to describe headache pain. This may occur
as early as infancy because babies with colic have a higher incidence of
migraine once they are able to express their symptoms. Once a clear
head pain becomes evident, the earlier diagnosis of a gastrointestinal
disorder is no longer appropriate.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3642 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 635.2  Genetics in Migraine

Table 635.5  Migraine with Brainstem Aura

KEY FACTS
• Based on studies with twins, the heritability of migraine has been
estimated as 42%
• A genome-­wide association meta-­analysis identified 38 genomic
loci that affect migraine risk
• The relative risk of migraine without aura is 1.9 in first-­degree
relatives of probands with migraine without aura
• The relative risk of migraine with aura is 3.8 in first-­degree
relatives of probands with migraine with aura

A.	At least two attacks fulfilling criteria for migraine with aura and
criterion B
B.	Aura with both of the following
1.	At least two of the following brainstem symptoms:
a.	Dysarthria
b.	Vertigo
c.	Tinnitus
d.	Hyperacusis
e.	Diplopia
f.	Ataxia
g.	Decreased level of consciousness
2.	No motor or retinal symptoms

GENETIC BIOMARKERS FOR MONOGENIC SUBTYPES OF
MIGRAINE OR MIGRAINE-­RELATED SYNDROMES
• Familial hemiplegic migraine
• Type 1 (CACNA1A gene)
• Type 2 (ATP1A2 gene)
• Type 3 (SCN1A gene)
• Possible association with PRRT2 gene
• Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical
infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (NOTCH3 gene)
• Retinal vasculopathy with cerebral leukoencephalopathy and
systemic manifestations (TREX1 gene)
• Familial advanced sleep phase syndrome (CSNK1D gene)
Modified from Ashina M, Terwindt GM, Al-­Mahdi Al-­Karagholi M, et al. Migraine:
disease characterization, biomarkers, and precision medicine. Lancet. 2021;397:1496–
1504, Panel 2, p. 1498.

Table 635.3  Migraine Without Aura
A.	At least five attacks fulfilling criteria B-­D
B.	Headache attacks lasting 4-­72 hr (untreated or unsuccessfully
treated)
C.	Headache has at least two of the following four characteristics:
1.	Unilateral location
2.	Pulsating quality
3.	Moderate or severe pain intensity
4.	Aggravation by or causing avoidance of routine physical
activity (e.g., walking or climbing stairs)
D.	During headache at least one of the following:
1.	Nausea and/or vomiting
2.	Photophobia and phonophobia
E.	Not better accounted for by another ICHD-­3 diagnosis
From Headache Classification Committee of the International Headache Society
(IHS). The International Classification of Headache Disorders, 3rd ed. Cephalalgia.
2018;38(1):1–211, Table 4.

Table 635.4  Migraine with Typical Aura
A.	At least two attacks fulfilling criteria B and C
B.	One or more of the following fully reversible aura symptoms:
1.	Visual
2.	Sensory
3.	Speech/language symptoms
4.	Motor
5.	Brainstem
6.	Retinal
C.	At least three of the following six characteristics:
1.	At least one aura symptom spreads gradually over 5 or more
minutes
2.	Two or more symptoms occur in succession
3.	Each individual aura symptom lasts 5-­60 min
4.	At least one aura symptom is unilateral
5.	At least one aura symptom is positive
6.	The aura is accompanied, or followed within 60 minutes, by
headache
D.	Not better accounted for by another ICHD-­3 diagnosis, and
transient ischemic attack has been excluded
From Headache Classification Committee of the International Headache Society
(IHS). The International Classification of Headache Disorders, 3rd ed. Cephalalgia.
2018;38(1):1–211, Table 6.

From Headache Classification Committee of the International Headache Society
(IHS). The International Classification of Headache Disorders, 3rd ed. Cephalalgia.
2018;38(1):1–211, Table 7.

Table 635.6  Vestibular Migraine with Vertigo
A.	At least five episodes fulfilling criteria C and D
B.	A current or past history of migraine without aura or migraine with
aura
C.	Vestibular symptoms of moderate or severe intensity, lasting
between 5 min and 72 hr
D.	At least 50% of episodes are associated with at least one of the
following three migrainous features:
1.	Headache with at least two of the following four
characteristics:
a.	Unilateral location
b.	Pulsating quality
c.	Moderate or severe intensity
d.	Aggravation by routine physical activity
2.	Photophobia and phonophobia
3.	Visual aura
E.	Not better accounted for by another ICHD-­3 diagnosis or by
another vestibular disorder
From Headache Classification Committee of the International Headache Society
(HIS). The International Classification of Headache Disorders, 3rd ed. Cephalalgia.
2018;38(1):1–211, Table 8.

Table 635.7  Chronic Migraine
A.	Headache (tension-­type–like and/or migraine-­like) on 15 or more
days/mo for more than 3 mo and fulfilling criteria B and C
B.	Occurring in a patient who has had at least five attacks fulfilling
criteria B-­D for migraine without aura and/or criteria B and C for
migraine with aura
C.	On 8 or more days/mo for more than 3 mo, fulfilling any of the
following:
1.	Criteria C and D for migraine without aura
2.	Criteria B and C for migraine with aura
3.	Believed by the patient to be migraine at onset and relieved
by a triptan or ergot derivative
D.	Not better accounted for by another ICHD-­3 diagnosis
From Headache Classification Committee of the International Headache Society
(IHS). The International Classification of Headache Disorders, 3rd ed. Cephalalgia.
2018;38(1):1–211, Table 9.

When headache is present, vomiting raises the concern of a secondary headache, particularly related to increased intracranial pressure.
One of the red flags for this is the daily or near-­daily early morning vomiting or headaches waking the child up from sleep or with the Valsalva
maneuver. When the headaches associated with vomiting episodes
are sporadic and not worsening, it is more likely that the diagnosis
is migraine. Vomiting and headache caused by increased intracranial
pressure are frequently present on first awakening and remit with
maintenance of upright posture. In contrast, if a migraine is present on

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 635 u Headaches
first awakening (a relatively infrequent occurrence in children), getting
up and going about normal, upright activities usually makes the headache and vomiting worse.
When the child matures, light and sound sensitivity (photophobia
and phonophobia) may become more apparent. This is either by direct
report of the patient or the interpretation by the parents of the child’s
activity because the parent may become aware of this symptom before
the child. These symptoms are likely a component of the hypersensitivity
that develops during an acute migraine attack and may also include smell
sensitivity (osmophobia) and touch sensitivity (cutaneous allodynia).
Although only the photophobia and phonophobia are components
of the ICHD-­3 criteria, these other symptoms are helpful in confirming the diagnosis and may be helpful in understanding the underlying
pathophysiology and determining the response to treatment. The final
ICHD-­3 requirement is the exclusion of causes of secondary headaches,
and this should be an integral component of the headache history.
Migraine typically runs in families, with reports of up to 90% of children having a first-­or second-­degree relative with recurrent headaches.
Given the underdiagnoses and misdiagnosis in adults, this is often not
recognized by the family, and a headache family history is required.
When a family history is not identified, this may be the result of either
a lack of awareness of migraine within the family or an underlying secondary headache in the child. Any child whose family, upon close and
both direct and indirect questioning, does not include individuals with
migraine or related syndromes (e.g., motion sickness, cyclic vomiting,
menstrual headache) should have an imaging procedure performed to
look for anatomic etiologies for headache.
In addition to the classifying features, there may be additional markers of a migraine disorder. These include such things as triggers (skipping meals, inadequate or irregular sleep, dehydration, and weather
changes are the most common), pattern recognition (associated with
menstrual periods in adolescents or Monday-­
morning headaches
resulting from changes in sleep patterns over the weekend and nonphysiologic early waking on Monday mornings for school), and prodromal symptoms (a feeling of irritability, tiredness, and food cravings
before the start of the headache) (Fig. 635.1). Although these additional
features may not be consistent, they do raise the index of suspicion for
migraine and provide a potential mechanism of intervention. In the
past, food triggers were considered widely common, but the majority
have either been discredited with scientific study or represent such a
small number of patients that they only need to be addressed when
consistently triggering the headache.

Migraine with Aura

The aura associated with migraine is a neurologic warning that a
migraine is going to occur. In the common forms, this can be the start
of a typical headache without migraine, or it may even occur in isolation. For a typical aura, the aura needs to be visual, sensory, or dysphasic, lasting longer than 5 minutes and less than 60 minutes, with the
headache starting within 60 minutes (see Table 635.4). The importance
of the aura lasting longer than 5 minutes is to differentiate the migraine
aura from a seizure with a postictal headache, whereas the 60-­minute
maximal duration is to separate migraine aura from the possibility of
a more prolonged neurologic event such as a transient ischemic attack.
The ICHD-­3 criteria have also added the requirements that for a diagnosis of aura, there needs to be a positive symptom and not just a loss
of function (i.e., flashing lights, tingling, not just blurring of vision).
The most common type of visual aura in children and adolescents
is photopsia (flashes of light or light bulbs going off everywhere).
These photopsias are often multicolored, and when gone, the child may
report not being able to see where the flash occurred. Less likely in
children are the typical adult auras, including fortification spectra (brilliant white zigzag lines resembling a starred pattern castle) or shimmering scotoma (sometimes described as a shining spot that grows or
a sequined curtain closing). In adults, the auras typically involve only
half the visual field, whereas in children they may be randomly dispersed. Blurred vision is often confused as an aura but is difficult to
separate from photophobia or difficulty concentrating during the pain
of the headache.

3643

Abdominal Discomfort
Polyuria
Visual Blurring
Vertigo
Anorexia
Nausea
Feeling Hot
Light Headedness
Sleep Disturbance
Memory Complaints
Neck Stiffness
Hypersalivation
Cravings
Concentration Difficulty
Mood Change
Irritable
Thirst
Falling Asleep
Crying
Fatigue
Pallor
Yawning
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

Fig. 635.1 Frequency of different premonitory symptoms reported.
(From Karsan N, Prabhakar P, Goadsby PJ. Characterizing the premonitory stage of migraine in children: a clinic-­based study of 100 patients in
a specialist headache service. J Head Pain. 2016;17:94, Fig. 1.)

Sensory auras are less common. They typically occur unilaterally.
Many children describe this sensation as insects or worms crawling
from their hand, up their arm, to their face with a numbness following
this sensation. Once the numbness occurs, the child may have difficulty
using the arm because they have lost sensory input, and a misdiagnosis
of hemiplegic migraine may be made.
Dysphasic auras are the least common type of typical aura and have
been described as an inability or difficulty to respond verbally. The
patient afterward will describe an ability to understand what is being
asked but cannot answer back. This may be the basis of what in the
past has been referred to as confusional migraine, and special attention
needs to be paid to asking the child about this possibility and their
degree of understanding during the initial phases of the attack. Most of
the time, these episodes are described as a motor aphasia, and they are
often associated with sensory or motor symptoms.
Much less commonly, rarer forms of aura can occur, including hemiplegia (true weakness, not numbness, and may be familial), vertigo or
lower cranial nerve symptoms–brainstem aura (formerly called basilar-­
type and once thought to be caused by basilar artery dysfunction, now
thought to be a more brainstem-­based migraine with brainstem aura)
(see Table 635.4), and distortion (Alice in Wonderland syndrome).
Whenever these rarer forms of aura are present, further investigation is warranted. Not all motor auras can be classified as hemiplegic
migraine spectrum, and they should be differentiated from those specific migrainous events, because the diagnosis of hemiplegic migraine
has genetic, pathophysiologic, and therapeutic implications.
Hemiplegic migraine is one of the better-­known forms of rare
auras. This transient unilateral weakness usually lasts only a few
hours but may persist for days. Both familial and sporadic forms have
been described. The familial hemiplegic migraine is an autosomal
dominant disorder with pathogenic variants in three separate genes:
CACNA1A, ATP1A2, and SCN1A (see Table 635.2). Some patients
with familial hemiplegic migraine have other yet-­to-­be-­identified
genetic variants. Multiple polymorphisms have been described for
these genes. Hemiplegic migraines may be triggered by minor head

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3644 Part XXV u The Nervous System
trauma, exertion, or emotional stress. The motor weakness is usually
associated with another aura symptom and may progress slowly over
20-­30 minutes, first with a visual aura and then, in sequence, with
sensory, motor, aphasic, and basilar auras. Headache is present in
more than 95% of patients and usually begins during the aura; headache may be unilateral or bilateral and may have no relationship to
the motor weakness. Some patients may develop attacks of coma with
encephalopathy, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pleocytosis, and cerebral
edema. Long-­term complications may include seizures, repetitive
daily episodes of blindness, cerebellar signs with the development of
cerebellar atrophy, and mental disabilities.
Migraine with brainstem aura (basilar-­type migraine) was formerly considered a disease of the basilar artery because many of the
unique symptoms were attributed to dysfunction in this area of the
brainstem. Some of the symptoms described include vertigo, tinnitus,
diplopia, blurred vision, scotoma, ataxia, and an occipital headache.
The pupils may be dilated, and ptosis may be evident.
Syndrome of transient headache and neurologic deficits with CSF
lymphocytosis (HaNDL) describes transient migraine-­like headaches
associated with neurologic deficits (motor, sensory, language impairments) and CSF showing pleocytosis. It is considered a self-­limited
migraine-­like syndrome of unknown etiology and is rarely reported in
the pediatric population.
Childhood periodic syndromes are a group of potentially related
symptoms that occur with increased frequency in children with
migraine. The hallmark of these symptoms is the recurrent episodic
nature of the events. Some of these have included gastrointestinal-­
related symptoms (colic, motion sickness, recurrent abdominal
pain, recurrent vomiting including cyclic vomiting, and abdominal
migraine), sleep disorders (sleepwalking, sleep talking, and night terrors), unexplained recurrent fevers, and even seizures.
The gastrointestinal symptoms span the spectrum from the relatively mild (motion sickness on occasional long car rides) to severe episodes of uncontrollable vomiting that may lead to dehydration and the
need for hospital admission to receive fluids. These latter episodes may
occur on a predictable time schedule and are called cyclic vomiting.
During these attacks, the child may appear pale and frightened but does
not lose consciousness. After a period of deep sleep, the child awakens
and resumes normal play and eating habits as if the vomiting had not
occurred. Many children with cyclic vomiting have a positive family
history of migraine and as they grow older have a higher-­than-­average
likelihood of developing migraine. Cyclic vomiting may be responsive
to migraine-­specific therapies; careful attention is needed for fluid
replacement if the vomiting is excessive. Cyclic vomiting of migraine
must be differentiated from gastrointestinal disorders, including intestinal obstruction (malrotation, intermittent volvulus, duodenal web,
duplication cysts, superior mesenteric artery compression, and internal hernias), peptic ulcer, gastritis, giardiasis, chronic pancreatitis, and
Crohn disease. Abnormal gastrointestinal motility and pelviureteric
junction obstruction can also cause cyclic vomiting. Metabolic causes
include disorders of amino acid metabolism (heterozygote ornithine
transcarbamylase deficiency), organic acidurias (propionic acidemia,
methylmalonic acidemia), fatty acid oxidation defects (medium-­chain
acyl-­coenzyme A dehydrogenase deficiency), disorders of carbohydrate metabolism (hereditary fructose intolerance), acute intermittent
porphyria, and structural central nervous system lesions (posterior
fossa brain tumors, subdural hematomas, or effusions). The diagnosis
is a diagnosis of exclusion, and children will need a full workup to be
labeled as having cyclic vomiting syndrome. Cyclic vomiting syndrome
is more frequent in younger children and will gradually transform into
a typical migraine attack by puberty (see Chapter 390).
The diagnosis of abdominal migraine can be confusing but can be
thought of as a migraine without the headache. Like a migraine, it is
an episodic disorder characterized by midabdominal pain with pain-­
free periods between attacks. At times this pain is associated with nausea and vomiting (thus crossing into the recurrent abdominal pain or
cyclic vomiting spectrum). The pain is usually described as dull and
may be moderate to severe. The pain may persist from 1 to 72 hours,
and although it is usually in the midline, it may be periumbilical or

poorly localized by the child. To meet the criteria of abdominal
migraine, the child must complain at the time of the abdominal pain
of at least two of the following: anorexia, nausea, vomiting, or pallor.
Similar to cyclic vomiting, a thorough history and physical examination with appropriate laboratory studies must be completed to rule out
an underlying gastrointestinal disorder as a cause of the abdominal
pain. Careful questioning about the presence of headache or head pain
needs to be addressed directly to the child because many times, this is
truly a migraine but in the child’s mind (and the parents’ observation),
the abdominal symptoms are paramount.

DIAGNOSIS AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

A thorough history and physical examination, including a neurologic
examination with special focus on headache, has been shown to be the
most sensitive indicator of an underlying etiology. The history needs to
include a thorough evaluation of the prodromal symptoms, any potential
triggering events or timing of the headaches, associated neurologic symptoms, and a detailed characterization of the headache attacks, including
frequency, severity, duration, associated symptoms, use of medication,
and disability. The disability assessment should include the impact on
school, home, and social activities and can easily be assessed with tools
such as PedMIDAS. A family history of headaches and any other neurologic, psychiatric, and general health conditions is also important both
for identification of migraine within the family and the identification
of possible secondary headache disorders. The familial penetrance of
migraine is so robust that the absence of a family history of migraine
or its equivalent phenomena should raise the concern that the diagnosis
may not be migraine and warrants further history taking, referral to a
headache specialist, or investigation. The lack of a family history may be
the result of a lack of awareness of the family of the migraine (“doesn’t
everybody get headaches?”). When headaches are refractory, a history of
potential comorbid conditions, which includes mood disorders and illicit
substance use, especially in teenagers, that may influence adherence
and acceptability of the treatment plan, may also need to be addressed.
Patients with difficult-­to-­treat chronic migraines may have raised intracranial pressure; a lumbar puncture with lowering of the pressure may
resolve the migraine. These patients may not have papilledema. In addition, disorders such as cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with
subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL), Moyamoya
disease, reversible cerebral vasoconstriction syndrome, and strokelike
migraine attacks after radiation therapy (SMART) may initially present
with migraines (Table 635.8).
Neuroimaging is warranted when the neurologic examination is
abnormal or unusual neurologic features occur during the migraine;
when the child has headaches that awaken the child from sleep or that
are present on first awakening and remit with upright posture; when
the child has brief headaches that only occur with cough or bending
over; when the headache is mostly in the occipital area; and when the
child has migrainous headache with an absolutely negative family history of migraine or its equivalent (e.g., motion sickness, cyclic vomiting; Table 635.9). In this case, an MRI is the imaging method of choice
because it provides the highest sensitivity for detecting posterior fossa
lesions and does not expose the child to radiation.
In the child with a headache that is instantaneously at its worst at
onset, a CT scan looking for blood is the best initial test; if it is negative, a lumbar puncture should be done looking especially for xanthochromia of the CSF. There is no evidence that laboratory studies or an
electroencephalogram is beneficial in a typical migraine without aura
or migraine with aura.

TREATMENT

Table 635.10 outlines the drugs used to manage migraine headaches
in children. The American Academy of Neurology established useful
practice guidelines for the management of migraine as follows:
• Reduction of headache frequency, severity, duration, and disability
• Reduction of reliance on poorly tolerated, ineffective, or unwanted
acute pharmacotherapies
• Improvement in quality of life
• Avoidance of acute headache medication escalation

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 635 u Headaches
Table 635.8  Migraine Mimics and Secondary Migraine
Trigeminal autonomic cephalgias (TACs)
Cluster headache
Hemicrania continua
Short-­lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache attacks with or
without conjunctival tearing (injection) (SUNCT/SUNA)
Ophthalmoplegic (CN III, IV, VI) migraine
Arterial dissection
Vasculitis/vasculopathies
Giant cell arteritis
Moyamoya
Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts
and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL) (NOTCH 3)
Cerebral autosomal recessive arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts
and leukoencephalopathy (CARASIL) (HTRA1)
SLE
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis
Primary CNS vasculitis
Reversible cerebral vasoconstriction syndrome (RCVS)
Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome
MELAS
Idiopathic intracranial hypertension (pseudotumor cerebri)
Occipital epilepsy
Sudden vision loss
Transient ischemic attack
Acute glaucoma
Sinusitis with intracranial extension
Epilepsy with aura
Transient headache and neurologic deficits with CSF lymphocytosis
(HaNDL)
Alternating hemiplegia of childhood (ATP1A3)
Fabry disease
SMART syndrome
CN, Cranial nerve; CNS, central nervous system; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; MELAS,
mitochondrial encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, and strokelike episodes; SMART,
strokelike migraine attack after radiation therapy.
Modified from Lauck SM, Gage S. Headaches. In: Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ,
et al., eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based Diagnosis, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2023: Table 34.17, p. 560.

Table 635.9  Indications for Neuroimaging in a Child with
Headaches
Abnormal neurologic examination
Abnormal or focal neurologic signs or symptoms
• Focal neurologic symptoms or signs developing during a
headache (i.e., complicated migraine)
• Focal neurologic symptoms or signs (except classic visual
symptoms of migraine) develop during the aura, with fixed
laterality; focal signs of the aura persisting or recurring in the
headache phase
Seizures or very brief auras (<5 min)
Unusual headaches in children
• Atypical auras, including basilar-­type, hemiplegic
• Trigeminal autonomic cephalalgia, including cluster headaches
in child or adolescent
• An acute secondary headache (i.e., headache with known
underlying illness or insult)
Headache in children younger than 6 yr old or any child who cannot
adequately describe his or her headache
Brief cough headache in a child or adolescent
Headache worst on first awakening or that awakens the child from
sleep
Migrainous headache in the child with no family history of migraine
or its equivalent

• Education and enabling of patients to manage their disease to enhance personal control of their migraine
• Reduction of headache-­related distress and psychologic symptoms

3645

To accomplish these goals, three components need to be incorporated into the treatment plan: (1) an acute treatment strategy should
be developed for stopping a headache attack on a consistent basis with
return to function as soon as possible, with the goal being 2 hours
maximum; (2) a preventive treatment strategy should be considered
when the headaches are frequent (one or more per week) and disabling;
and (3) biobehavioral therapy should be started, including a discussion
of adherence, elimination of barriers to treatment, and healthy habit
management.

Acute Treatment

Management of an acute attack is designed to provide headache
freedom as quickly as possible with return to normal function. This
mainly includes two groups of medicines: nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and triptans. Small-­
molecule calcitonin
gene–related peptide modulator (CGRP receptor antagonists) therapies are approved for patients 18 and older for acute headache treatment, but they are still under investigation for efficacy and tolerability
in children and adolescents. Most headaches caused by migraine in
children will respond to appropriate doses of NSAIDs when they are
administered at the onset of the headache attack. Ibuprofen has been
well documented to be effective at a dose of 7.5-­10.0 mg/kg and is
often preferred; however, acetaminophen (15 mg/kg) can be effective
in those with a contraindication to NSAIDs. Special concern for the
use of ibuprofen or other NSAIDs includes ensuring that the children can recognize and respond to onset of the headache. This means
discussing with the child the importance of telling the teacher when
the headache starts at school and ensuring that proper dosing guidelines and permission have been provided to the school. In addition,
medication overuse needs to be avoided, limiting NSAIDs and other
pain medications for headache (or any combination of nonprescription analgesics) to not more than 2-­3 times per week. The limitation
of any analgesic to not more than three headaches per week is necessary to prevent the transformation of the migraines into medication-­
overuse headaches (MOHs). If a patient has maximized the weekly
allowance of analgesics, the patient’s next step is to only use hydrating
fluids for the rest of the week as an abortive approach. If ibuprofen
is not effective, naproxen sodium also may be tried in similar doses.
Aspirin is also a reasonable option but is usually reserved for older
children (>16 years). Use of other NSAIDs has yet to be studied in
pediatric migraine. The goal of the acute medication should be relief
of headache and associated symptoms within 1 hour, with return to
function in 10 of 10 headaches.
When an attack of migraine is especially severe, NSAIDs alone may
not be sufficient. In this case, a triptan may be considered. Multiple
studies have demonstrated their effectiveness and tolerability. There
are currently three triptans that are approved by the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of episodic migraine
in the pediatric population. Almotriptan is approved for the treatment of acute migraine in adolescents (ages 12-­17 years). Rizatriptan
is approved for the treatment of migraine in children as young as age
6 years. The intranasal formulation of zolmitriptan is also approved
by the FDA in the United States for use in children ages 12 and over.
Several studies have shown it to provide rapid and effective relief, and
it has been demonstrated to be well tolerated for treatment of acute
migraine in patients 12 years and older. Zolmitriptan nasal spray may
be of particular benefit to those with nausea and in patients who have
difficulty swallowing tablets.
The combination of naproxen sodium and sumatriptan has been
studied and may be effective in children. Controlled clinical trials demonstrate that intranasal sumatriptan is safe and effective in children
older than age 8 years with moderate to severe migraine. At present,
pediatric studies showing the effectiveness of oral sumatriptan are lacking, and there is insufficient evidence to support the use of subcutaneous sumatriptan in children. For most adolescents, dosing is the same
as for adults; a reduction in dose is made for children weighing less
than 40 kg. The triptans vary by rapidity of onset and biologic half-­life.
This is related to both their variable lipophilicity and dose. Clinically,
60–70% of patients respond to the first triptan tried, with 60–70% of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3646 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 635.10  Drugs Used in the Management of Migraine Headaches in Children
DRUG

DOSE

MECHANISM

SIDE EFFECTS

COMMENTS

ACUTE MIGRAINE
Analgesics
Acetaminophen

15 mg/kg/dose

Analgesic effects

Overdose, fatal hepatic necrosis

Effectiveness limited in migraine

Ibuprofen

7.5-­10 mg/kg/dose

Antiinflammatory
and analgesic

GI bleeding, stomach upset,
kidney injury

Avoid overuse (2-­3 times per wk)

Triptans
Almotriptan* (ages
12-­17 yr)

12.5 mg

5-­HT1b/1d agonist

Vascular constriction, serotonin
symptoms such as flushing,
paresthesias, somnolence, GI
discomfort

Avoid overuse (>4-­6 times per mo)

Eletriptan

40 mg

Same

Same

Avoid overuse (>4-­6 times per mo)

Frovatriptan

2.5 mg

Same

Same

May be effective for menstrual migraine
prevention
Avoid overuse (>4-­6 times per mo)

Naratriptan

2.5 mg

Same

Same

May be effective for menstrual migraine
prevention
Avoid overuse (>4-­6 times per mo)

Rizatriptan* (ages
6-­17 yr)

5 mg for child
weighing <40 kg,
10 mg

Same

Same

Available in tablets and melts
Avoid overuse (>4-­6 times per mo)

Sumatriptan

Oral: 25, 50, 100 mg
Nasal: 10 mg
SC: 6 mg

Same

Same

Avoid overuse (>4-­6 times per mo)

Zolmitriptan (NS
ages 12+)

Oral: 2.5, 5 mg
Nasal: 5 mg*

Same

Same

Available in tablets and melts
Avoid overuse (>4-­6 times per mo)

Headache, lethargy, dizziness

May ↑ to 10 mg hs

PROPHYLAXIS (NONE APPROVED BY FDA FOR CHILDREN)
Calcium Channel Blockers
Flunarizine†
5 mg hs
Calcium channel
blocking agent
Anticonvulsants
Valproic acid

20 mg/kg/24 hr
(begin 5 mg/
kg/24 hr)

↑ Brain GABA

Nausea, pancreatitis, fatal
hepatotoxicity

↑ 5 mg/kg every 2 wk

Topiramate* (12-­17 yr)

100-­200 mg divided
bid

↑ Activity of GABA

Fatigue, nervousness

Increase slowly over 12-­16 wk

Levetiracetam

20-­60 mg/kg divided
bid

Unknown

Irritability, fatigue

Increase every 2 wk starting at 20 mg/kg
divided bid

Gabapentin

900-­1800 mg divided Unknown
bid

Somnolence, fatigue,
aggression, weight gain

Begin 300 mg, ↑ 300 mg/wk

Antidepressants
Amitriptyline

1 mg/kg/day

↑ CNS
serotonin and
norepinephrine

Cardiac conduction,
abnormalities and dry mouth,
constipation, drowsiness,
confusion

Increase by 0.25 mg/kg every 2 wk
Morning sleepiness reduced by
administration at dinnertime

0.2-­0.4 mg/kg
divided bid; max:
0.5 mg/kg/24 hr

H1-­receptor and
serotonin agonist

Drowsiness, thick bronchial
secretions

Preferred in children who cannot swallow
pills; not well tolerated in adolescents

Antihypertensive
Propranolol

10-­20 mg tid

Nonselective
β-­adrenergic
blocking agent

Dizziness, lethargy

Begin 10 mg/24 hr ↑ 10 mg/wk
(contraindicated in asthma and
depression)

Others
Coenzyme Q10

1-­3 mg/kg/day

Increases fatty
acid oxidation in
mitochondria

No adverse effects reported

Fat soluble; ensure brand contains small
amount of vitamin E to help absorption

Riboflavin

50-­400 mg daily

Cofactor in energy
metabolism

Bright yellow urine, polyuria and
diarrhea

Antihistamines
Cyproheptadine

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 635 u Headaches

3647

Table 635.10  Drugs Used in the Management of Migraine Headaches in Children—cont’d
DRUG

DOSE

MECHANISM

SIDE EFFECTS

Magnesium

9 mg/kg divided tid

Cofactor in energy
metabolism

Diarrhea or soft stool

Butterbur

50-­150 mg daily

May act similar to a
calcium channel
blocker

Burping

OnabotulinumtoxinA

100 units (age 11-­
17 yr)

Inhibits
acetylcholine
release from
nerve endings

Ptosis, blurred vision, hematoma
at injection site

Used off-­label in children

Dopamine
antagonist

Agitation, drowsiness, muscle
stiffness, akinesia and akathisia

May have increased effectiveness when
combined with ketorolac and fluid
hydration
Caution in asthma patients

SEVERE INTRACTABLE
Prochlorperazine
0.15 mg/kg/IV; max
dose 10 mg

COMMENTS

Metoclopramide

0.2 mg/kg IV; 10 mg
max dose

Dopamine
antagonist

Drowsiness, urticaria, agitation,
akinesia and akathisia

Ketorolac

0.5 mg/kg IV; 15 mg
max dose

Antiinflammatory
and analgesic

GI upset, bleeding

Valproate sodium
injection

15 mg/kg IV:
1,000 mg max
dose

↑ Brain GABA

Nausea, vomiting, somnolence,
thrombocytopenia

Would avoid in hepatic disease

Dihydroergotamine
IV

0.5 mg/dose every
8 hr (<40 kg)
1.0 mg/dose every 8
hr (>40 kg)

Nausea, vomiting, vascular
constriction, phlebitis

Dose may need to be adjusted for
side effects (decrease) or limited
effectiveness (increase)

Nasal spray

0.5-­1.0 mg/dose
0.5 mg/spray

*FDA approved in the pediatric population.
†Available in Europe.

↑, Increase; CNS, central nervous system; GABA, γ-­aminobutyric acid; GI, gastrointestinal; hs, at night; SC, subcutaneous.

the patients who did not respond to the first triptan responding to the
next triptan. Therefore in the patient who does not respond to the first
triptan in the desired way (rapid reproducible response without relapse
or side effects), it is worthwhile to try a different triptan. The most
common side effects of the triptans are caused by their mechanism of
action—tightness in the jaw, chest, and fingers as a result of vascular
constriction and a subsequent feeling of grogginess and fatigue from
the central serotonin effect. The vascular constriction symptoms can be
alleviated through adequate fluid hydration during an attack.
The most effective way to administer acute treatment is with the
recognition that NSAIDs and triptans have different mechanisms of
action. NSAIDs are used for all headaches, mild to severe, with their
use being restricted to fewer than two to three attacks per week; the
triptans are added for moderate to severe headaches, with their use
being restricted to not more than six to eight attacks per month. For an
acute attack, the NSAIDs can be repeated once in 3-­4 hours, if needed
for that specific attack, and the triptans can be repeated once in 2 hours
if needed. It is important to consider the various formulations available, and these options should be discussed with pediatric patients and
their parents, especially if a child is unable to swallow pills or take an
oral dose because of nausea and/or vomiting.
Because vascular dilation is a common feature of migraine that may
be responsible for some of the facial flushing, followed by paleness
and the lightheaded feeling accompanying the attacks, fluid hydration
should be integrated into the acute treatment plan. For oral hydration,
this can include the sports drinks that combine electrolytes and sugar
to provide the intravascular rehydration.
Antiemetics are used for acute treatment of the nausea and vomiting. Further study has identified that their unique mechanism of
effectiveness in headache treatment is related to their antagonism of
dopaminergic neurotransmission. Therefore the antiemetics with
the most robust dopamine antagonism (i.e., prochlorperazine and

metoclopramide) have the best efficacy. These can be very effective for
status migrainosus or a migraine that is unresponsive to NSAIDs and
triptans. They require intravenous administration because other forms
of administration of these drugs are less effective than the NSAIDs or
triptans. When combined with ketorolac and intravenous fluids in the
emergency department or an acute infusion center, intravenous antiemetics can be highly effective. When they are not effective, further
inpatient treatment may be required using dihydroergotamine (DHE),
which will mean an admission to an inpatient unit for more aggressive
therapy of an intractable attack.
There are also a growing number of devices that appear to be effective for the acute treatment of headache attacks caused by migraine.
Currently both a remote electrical neuromodulation (REN) device and
a vagal nerve stimulator are approved for the acute treatment of attacks
down to age 12. These devices have the benefit of improving the adolescent’s locus of control, as they can modulate the degree and duration
of treatment, without the need to swallow a pill.

Emergency Department Treatments for Intractable
Headaches

When an acute migraine attack does not respond to the recommended
outpatient regimen and the headache is disabling, more aggressive
therapeutic approaches are available and may be necessary to prevent
further increase in the duration and frequency of headaches. These
migraines fall into the classification of status migrainosus (migraine
attack lasting more than 72 hours), and patients may need to be referred
to an infusion center, the emergency room, or an inpatient unit.
Available specific treatments for migraine headache in an emergency room setting include the following: antidopaminergic medications such as prochlorperazine and metoclopramide, NSAIDs such as
ketorolac, vasoconstrictor medications such as DHE, and antiepileptic
drugs such as sodium valproate.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3648 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Antidopaminergic Drugs: Prochlorperazine and
Metoclopramide

The use of antidopaminergic medications is not limited to controlling
the nausea and vomiting often present during a migraine headache.
Their potential pharmacologic effect may be a result of their antidopamine property and the underlying pathologic process involving
the dopaminergic system during a migraine attack. Prochlorperazine
is highly effective in aborting an attack in the emergency room when
given intravenously with a bolus of intravenous fluid. Results show
a 75% improvement with 50% headache freedom at 1 hour and 95%
improvement with 60% headache freedom at 3 hours. Prochlorperazine may be more effective than metoclopramide. The average dose of
metoclopramide is 0.13-­0.15 mg/kg, with a maximum dose of 10 mg
given intravenously over 15 minutes. The average dose of prochlorperazine is 0.15 mg/kg, with a maximum dose of 10 mg. These medications are usually well-­tolerated, but extrapyramidal reactions are more
frequent in children than in older persons. An acute extrapyramidal
reaction can be controlled in the emergency room with 25-­50 mg of
diphenhydramine given intravenously. There is no need for premedication with diphenhydramine to prevent side effects. Diphenhydramine
should only be used if needed when side effects are present.

Nonsteroidal Antiinflammatory Drugs: Ketorolac

It is known that an aseptic inflammation occurs in the central nervous
system as a result of the effect of multiple reactive peptides in patients
with migraines, including the CGRP molecules. Ketorolac is often used
in the emergency department as monotherapy for a migraine attack
or in combination with other drugs. In monotherapy, the response to
ketorolac is 55.2% improvement. When ketorolac is combined with
prochlorperazine, the response rate jumps to 93%.

Antiepileptic Drugs: Sodium Valproate

Antiepileptic drugs have been used as prophylactic treatment for
migraine headache for years with adequate double-­blinded, controlled
studies on their efficacy in adults. The mechanism by which sodium valproate acutely aborts migraine headaches is not well understood. Sodium
valproate is given as a bolus of 15-­20 mg/kg push (over 10 minutes). This
intravenous load is followed by an oral dose (15-­20 mg/day) in the 4
hours after the injection. Patients may benefit from a short-­term preventive treatment with an extended-­release form after discharge from the
emergency room for 2 weeks to keep the level in the therapeutic range.
Sodium valproate is usually well tolerated. Patients should receive a fluid
load during the procedure to prevent a possible hypotensive episode.

Triptans

Subcutaneous sumatriptan (0.06 mg/kg) has an overall efficacy of 72%
at 30 minutes and 78% at 2 hours, with a recurrence rate of 6%. Because
children tend to have a shorter duration of headache, a recurrence rate of
6% would seem appropriate for this population. DHE, if recommended
for the recurrences, should not be given in the 8 hours after triptan
use. Triptans are contraindicated in patients treated with ergotamine
within 24 hours and within 2 weeks of treatment with monoamine oxidase inhibitors. Triptans may rarely produce serotonin syndrome in
patients taking a serotonin receptor reuptake inhibitor. Both triptans
and ergotamine are contraindicated in hemiplegic migraines.

Dihydroergotamine

DHE is a medication used as a vasoconstrictor to abort the vascular
phase of migraine headache. The effectiveness is discussed in detail in
the section “Inpatient Management of Intractable Migraine and Status Migrainosus,” next. One dose of DHE can be effective for abortive
treatment in the emergency department. Emergency room treatment
of migraine shows a recurrence rate of 29% at 48-­72 hours, with 6%
of patients needing even more aggressive therapy in an inpatient unit.

Inpatient Management of Intractable Migraine and
Status Migrainosus

About 6–7% of patients fail acute treatment in the emergency department. These patients are usually admitted for 3-­5 days to an inpatient

unit and receive extensive parenteral treatment. Admission is reserved
for patients who are disabled by their acute migraine attack and those
who did not experience relief from all other abortive approaches as
discussed earlier: (1) for acute status migrainosus, (2) for exacerbation
of an underlying chronic migraine when the episode fits the criteria
for a status migrainosus occurring on top of their continuous baseline
headache, and (3) for severe analgesic overuse headache that did not
respond to any other recommended abortive therapy. The goal of inpatient treatment is to control a headache that has been unresponsive to
other outpatient abortive therapies and is disabling to the child. Treatment protocols include the use of DHE, antiemetics, sodium valproate,
and other drugs.

Dihydroergotamine

Ergots are one of the oldest treatments for migraine headache. DHE is
a parenteral form used for acute exacerbations. Its effect stems from the
5HT1A-­1B-­1D-­1F receptor agonist affinity and central vasoconstriction.
DHE has greater α-­adrenergic antagonist activity and is less vasoconstrictive peripherally. Before initiation of an intravenous ergot protocol, a full history should be obtained and a neurologic examination
performed to rule out any possibility of secondary headache before the
initiation of the treatment, keeping in mind that patients with migraine
can still develop a secondary headache. Females of childbearing age
should be evaluated for pregnancy before ergots are administered.
The DHE protocol consists of the following: Patients are premedicated with 0.13-­0.15 mg/kg of prochlorperazine 30 minutes before
the DHE dose (maximum of three prochlorperazine doses to prevent
extrapyramidal syndrome; after three doses of prochlorperazine, a
non–dopamine antagonist antiemetic should be used, such as ondansetron). A dose of 0.5-­1.0 mg of DHE is used (depending on age and tolerability) every 8 hours until headache freedom is achieved or headache
returns back to baseline for those with a continuous headache. The first
dose should be divided into two half-­doses separated by 30 minutes if
the patient is naïve to treatment with DHE. When the headache ceases,
an extra dose of DHE is given in an attempt to prevent recurrence after
discharge. The response to this protocol is a 97% improvement and
77% headache freedom. The response is noticeable by the fifth dose;
the drug can reach its maximum effects after the tenth dose. Common
side effects of DHE include nausea, vomiting, abdominal discomfort,
a flushed face, muscle cramping, and increased blood pressure. The
maximum dose used in this protocol is 15 mg total of DHE.

Sodium Valproate

Sodium valproate is used when DHE is contraindicated or has been ineffective. One adult study recommends the use of valproate sodium as follows: bolus with 15 mg/kg (maximum of 1,000 mg), followed by 5 mg/kg
every 8 hours until headache freedom or up to a maximum of 10 doses.
An extra dose is recommended after the headache ceases to prevent
recurrence. This protocol was studied in adults with chronic daily headaches and showed an 80% improvement. It is well tolerated and is useful
in children when DHE is ineffective, contraindicated, or not tolerated.

Other Inpatient Therapies

During an inpatient admission for status migrainosus, other services
such as behavioral medicine and holistic medicine should be involved
if they are available. The behavioral medicine staff can play a major role
in talking to patients about their specific triggers and can also evaluate school, as well as home and social stressors. The staff would also
initiate some coping skills training during the admission and evaluate
the necessity for further outpatient follow-­up for cognitive-­behavioral
therapy, biofeedback, or treatment for other comorbidities. The holistic
medicine staff, when consulted, can offer holistic approaches to pain
control, including relaxation techniques, medical massage, and craniosacral therapy.

Preventive Therapy

When the headaches are frequent (more than one headache per
week) or disabling (causing the patient to miss school, home, or social
activities or with a PedMIDAS score >20), preventive or prophylactic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 635 u Headaches
therapy may be warranted. The goal of this therapy should be to reduce
the frequency to one headache or fewer per week and level of disability
(PedMIDAS score <10). Prophylactic agents should be given for at least
4-­6 months at an adequate dose and then weaned over several weeks.
Evidence in adult studies has begun to demonstrate that persistent
frequent headaches foreshadow an increased risk of progression with
decreased responsiveness and increased risk of refractoriness in the
future. It is unclear whether this also occurs in children and/or adolescents and whether early treatment of headache in childhood prevents
development of refractory headache in adulthood.
Multiple preventive medications have been used for migraine prophylaxis in children. When analyzed as part of a practice parameter,
one medication, flunarizine (a calcium channel blocking agent), demonstrated a level of effectiveness viewed as substantial; it is not available
in the United States. Flunarizine is typically given at 5 mg orally daily
and increased after 1 month to 10 mg orally daily, with a month off the
drug every 4-­6 months.
A commonly used preventive therapy for headache and migraine
is amitriptyline. Typically, a dose of 1 mg/kg daily at dinner or in the
evening is effective. However, this dose needs to be reached slowly (i.e.,
over weeks, with an increase every 2 weeks until the goal is reached)
to minimize side effects and improve tolerability. Side effects include
sleepiness and those related to amitriptyline’s anticholinergic activity. Weight gain has been observed in adults using amitriptyline but
is a less frequent occurrence in children. Amitriptyline does have
the potential to exacerbate prolonged QT syndrome, so it should be
avoided in patients with this diagnosis and looked for in patients taking
the drug who complain of a rapid or irregular heart rate.
Antiepileptic medications are also used for migraine prophylaxis,
with topiramate, valproic acid, and levetiracetam having been demonstrated to be effective in adults. There are limited studies in children for
migraine prevention, but all of these medications have been assessed
for safety and tolerability in children with epilepsy.
Topiramate has become widely used for migraine prophylaxis in
adults. Topiramate was also demonstrated to be effective in an adolescent study. This study demonstrated that a 25-­mg dose twice a day
was equivalent to placebo, whereas a 50-­mg dose twice a day was superior. Thus it appears that the adult dosing schedule is also effective in
adolescents with an effective dosage range of 50 mg twice a day to 100
mg twice a day. This dose needs to be reached slowly to minimize the
cognitive slowing associated with topiramate use. Side effects include
weight loss, paresthesias, kidney stones, lowered bicarbonate levels,
decreased sweating, and rarely glaucoma and changes in serum transaminases. In addition, in adolescent females taking birth control pills,
the lowering of the effectiveness of the birth control by topiramate
needs to be discussed.
A comparative effectiveness study in children (8-­17 years) of the two
most common treatments (amitriptyline and topiramate) compared
with placebo (the CHAMP study) demonstrated that all three treatments were effective, but there was not statistical superiority for amitriptyline or topiramate over placebo.
Valproic acid has long been used for epilepsy in children and has
been demonstrated to be effective in migraine prophylaxis in adults.
The effective dose in children appears to be 10 mg/kg orally twice a
day. Side effects of weight gain, ovarian cysts, and changes in serum
transaminases and platelet counts need to be monitored. Other antiepileptics, including lamotrigine, levetiracetam, zonisamide, gabapentin,
and pregabalin, are also used for migraine prevention.
β Blockers have long been used for migraine prevention. The studies on β blockers have a mixed response pattern with variability both
between β blockers and between patients with a given β blocker. Propranolol is the best studied for pediatric migraine prevention with
unequivocally positive results. The contraindication for the use of
propranolol in children with asthma or allergic disorders or diabetes
and the increased incidence of depression in adolescents using propranolol limit its use somewhat. It may be effective for a mixed subtype
of migraine (basilar-­type migraine with postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome). This syndrome has been reported to be responsive
to propranolol. α-­Blockers and calcium channel blockers, aside from

3649

flunarizine, also have been used in pediatric migraine; their effectiveness, however, remains unclear.
In very young children, cyproheptadine may be effective in the prevention of migraine or the periodic syndromes of childhood. Young
children tend to tolerate the increased appetite induced by the cyproheptadine and tend not to be subject to the lethargy seen in older children and adults; the weight gain is limiting once children start to enter
puberty. Typical dosing is 0.1-­0.2 mg/kg orally twice a day.
Nutraceuticals are popular choices, especially among families who
prefer a more natural approach to headache treatment. Despite studies
showing success of these therapies in adults, few studies have shown
effectiveness in pediatric headaches. Riboflavin (vitamin B2), at doses
ranging from 25 to 400 mg, is the most widely studied with good results.
Side effects are minimal and include bright yellow urine, diarrhea, and
polyuria. Coenzyme Q10 supplementation may be effective in reducing migraine frequency at doses of 1-­2 mg/kg/day. Butterbur is also
effective in reducing headaches, with minimal side effects, including
burping. Use in children has been limited to avoid the potential toxicity of butterbur-­containing pyrrolizidine alkaloids, which are naturally
contained and are a known carcinogen and toxic to the liver.
OnabotulinumtoxinA is the first medication FDA-­
approved for
chronic migraine in adults. There are studies in children indicating its
effectiveness; use in children is considered off-­label. The limited available studies revealed the following: The average dose used was 188.5
units ± 32 units with a minimum dose of 75 units and maximum of
200 units. The average age of patients receiving the treatment was
16.8 ± 2.0 years (minimum 11 years; maximum 21 years). OnabotulinumtoxinA injections improved disability scores (PedMIDAS) and
headache frequency in pediatric chronic daily headache patients and
chronic migraine in this age-­group. OnabotulinumtoxinA not only had
a positive effect on the disability scoring for these young patients with
headache but was also able to transform the headaches from chronic
daily to intermittent headaches in more than 50% of the patients.
Eptinezumab, erenumab, galcanezumab, and fremanezumab—humanized monoclonal antibodies against the CGRP or its receptor—have demonstrated safety and efficacy in adult patients with migraine. The FDA has
approved these agents for use in adults with migraine, including chronic
migraine. There are no completed studies in children and adolescents.

Biobehavioral Therapy

Biobehavioral evaluation and therapy are essential for effective
migraine management. This includes identification of behavioral barriers to treatment, such as a child’s shyness or limitation in notifying a
teacher of the start of a migraine or a teacher’s unwillingness to accept
the need for treatment. Additional barriers include a lack of recognition of the significance of the headache problem and reverting to bad
habits once the headaches have responded to treatment. Adherence is
equally important for acute and preventive treatment. The need to have
a sustained response long enough to prevent relapse (to stay on preventive medication) is often difficult when the child starts to feel better.
Establishing a defined treatment goal (one or two or fewer headaches
per month for 4-­6 months) helps with acceptance.
Because many of the potential triggers for attacks of migraine (skipping meals, dehydration, decreased or altered sleep) are related to a
child’s daily routine, a discussion of healthy habits is a component of
biobehavioral therapy. This should include adequate fluid intake without caffeine, regular exercise, not skipping meals and making healthy
food choices, and adequate (8-­9 hours) sleep on a regular basis. Sleep
is often difficult in adolescents because middle and high schools often
have very early start times, and the adolescent’s sleep architecture features a shift to later sleep onset and waking. This has been one of the
explanations for worsening headaches during the school year in general and at the beginning of the school year and week.
Biofeedback-­assisted relaxation and cognitive-­behavioral therapy
(usually in combination with amitriptyline) are effective for both acute
and preventive therapy and may be incorporated into this multiple
treatment strategy. This provides the child with a degree of self-­control
over the headaches and may further help the child cope with frequent
headaches.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3650 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Young Adults and the Transition of Headache Care
from a Pediatric to an Adult Provider

Migraine is a chronic condition that may first present in childhood.
Males are diagnosed at a younger age than females; however, during
development, the prevalence becomes highest among women, starting
at puberty. Some adolescents and women report migraine associated
with menses; the pain symptoms are described as lasting longer and
having a higher intensity. The role of oral contraceptive pills (OCPs)
is often a topic of discussion among female adolescents and young
women. Studies have shown improvement of menstrual migraine in
adult patients taking oral estrogens and progesterone; similar studies
have not been done in adolescents. OCPs are not approved by the FDA
for treatment of menstrual migraine; they have been associated with an
increased risk of stroke among women with migraine aura. Therefore
their use in adolescents as a prophylactic agent is not advised.
Comorbid conditions such as anxiety and depression are seen with a
high prevalence among adults with migraine; however, the prevalence
among adolescent patients remains unclear. Diagnostic tools capable
of differentiating mood disorders from pain symptoms in the pediatric
population are limited, which makes identifying those at risk challenging. However, it is important to keep in mind the potential of mood
disorders, especially in young adults.
Remission of migraine is seen in up to 34% of adolescents, and
almost 50% continue to have migraine persisting into adulthood. Successful transition of care from a pediatric to an adult provider has been
shown to improve outcomes in patients with chronic disease.
Early diagnosis and treatment of migraine can help minimize the
progression of the disease in adults. This, together with careful screening for comorbid conditions, may help identify those at risk for refractory migraine, minimize disability, and improve overall headache
outcomes.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

635.2 Secondary Headaches
Andrew D. Hershey, Marielle Kabbouche, and
Joanne Kacperski
Headaches can be a common symptom of other underlying illnesses.
In recognition of this, the ICHD-­3 has classified potential secondary
headaches (see Table 635.1). The key to the diagnosis of a secondary
headache is to recognize the underlying cause and demonstrate a direct
cause and effect. Until this has been done, the diagnosis is speculative.
This is especially true when the suspected etiology is common.
Headache is a common occurrence after concussion or mild traumatic brain injury (mTBI), reported in as many as 86% of high school
and college athletes who have suffered from head trauma (see Chapter
729). Although there are no strict criteria for determining who will
develop persistent headache after concussion, it is important to gather
information to rule out other secondary headaches and significant primary headache disorders and to identify those who may be at risk for
persistent headache after concussion.
Chronic or persistent headaches are headaches that last for more
than 3 months after head trauma. This definition is consistent with the
classification of persistent posttraumatic headaches in the ICHD-­3.
Although concussion and posttraumatic headache are rapidly evolving areas of study, there is an unfortunate lack of definitive scientific
evidence at this time on these topics in pediatrics. The ICHD-­3 classifies posttraumatic headaches as acute if they last less than 3 months
and persistent if they last more than 3 months after injury. This period
is consistent with ICHD-­II diagnostic criteria, although the term persistent has been adopted in place of chronic. Although the ICHD-­3
criteria state that posttraumatic headaches begin within 7 days after
injury to the head or after regaining consciousness, this 7-­day cutoff is
arbitrary, and some experts believe that headaches may develop after a
longer interval. Some studies have shown that ∼50% of children with

posttraumatic headache 3 months after concussion had a history of
preexisting headaches, and 31% had a history of migraine or probable
migraine before the injury. Furthermore, 56% of patients with headaches at 3 months after injury had a family history of migraine. Based
on clinical experiences of patients with prolonged postconcussion
symptoms, those with prior concussion and persistent posttraumatic
headaches, preexisting anxiety and/or depression, and maladaptive
coping styles may also be at higher risk for persistent posttraumatic
headache.
Despite being classified as a secondary headache, a posttraumatic
headache generally presents with clinical features that are observed in
primary headache disorders, including tension-­type, migraine, and
cervicogenic headaches. The few reports that have thus far assessed the
characteristics of posttraumatic headache in the pediatric population
have also reported various proportions of migraine or tension-­type
characteristics, with the reported prevalence of each varying among
individual studies.
Although headache is reported to be the most common symptom
after concussion, there is a paucity of studies regarding the safety and
efficacy of headache treatments for persistent posttraumatic headaches.
Posttraumatic headaches may be difficult to treat. There are currently
no established guidelines for their treatment, especially when persistent, and practices can vary widely. Most treatment algorithms proposed have been extrapolated from the primary headache literature
and small noncontrolled trials of posttraumatic headache regimens.
When posttraumatic headaches become problematic or persistent, a
multidimensional management approach, including pharmacologic
intervention, physical rehabilitation, and cognitive-­behavioral therapies, are often used. Management should therefore be relevant to the
type of headache and focused on the clinical needs of the child.
Like primary headache disorders, these headaches can have a substantial effect on the child’s life, leading to lost school days and withdrawal from social interactions. Referral for biobehavioral therapy and
coping strategies may be necessary. Adherence should be promoted
and can be optimized by educating both the patient and the family
about the proper use of acute and prophylactic medications, establishing realistic expectations (including expectations for recovery), and
emphasizing compliance at the initiation of treatment.
Children with persistent posttraumatic headaches may require frequent analgesics. Rebound headaches are common and can complicate
treatment. The excessive use of symptomatic headache medicines, most
commonly simple analgesics, can cause MOHs in susceptible patients
and has been well-­described in patients with primary headache disorders. Medication overuse can be a contributing factor in headache
chronicity in 20–30% of children and adolescents, with chronic daily
headache unrelated to concussion. Because analgesics are commonly
recommended for the treatment of acute headaches after concussion,
some susceptible patients with concussion are at risk for developing a
medication-­overuse pattern that causes a chronic headache syndrome.
There is no clear evidence to help guide the clinician on the timing of
initiation of preventive therapy in children to decrease the likelihood of
developing persistent posttraumatic headaches. Although many medications are being used to manage persistent posttraumatic headaches,
most have supporting data for the management of migraine or chronic
migraine, and few have been studied for the treatment of persistent
posttraumatic headaches in a systematic manner.
Sinus headache is the most overdiagnosed form of recurrent headache. Although no studies have evaluated the frequency of misdiagnosis of an underlying migraine as a sinus headache in children, in
adults, it has been found that up to 90% of adults diagnosed as having
a sinus headache either by themselves or their physician appear to have
migraine. When headaches are recurrent and respond within hours
to analgesics, migraine should be considered first. In the absence of
purulent nasal discharge, fever, or chronic cough, the diagnosis of sinus
headache should not be made.
MOHs frequently complicate primary and secondary headaches.
An MOH is defined as a headache present for more than 15 days/
month for longer than 3 months and intake of a simple analgesic on

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 635 u Headaches
Table 635.11  History-­Related Red Flags for Secondary
Headache

Table 635.12  Physical Examination Red Flags for
Secondary Headaches

QUALITY
“Thunderclap” rapid-­onset headache or the “worst headache of my
life”
Recent worsening in severity or frequency
Change in quality
New-­onset symptoms consistent with cluster headache

ABNORMAL VITAL SIGNS
Hypertension
Growth failure
Increased head circumference or bulging fontanel
Fever
Meningeal signs with or without fever
Evidence of cranial trauma
Cranial bruit
Frontal bony tenderness
Macrocephaly

LOCATION
Unilateral without alteration of sides
Chronic or recurrent occipital headache
TIMING
Awakens from sleep
Occurs in morning or causes morning vomiting
Acute or chronic progressive pattern
POSITIONAL OR ACTIVITY-­RELATED VARIATIONS
Worsened in the recumbent position or when bending over
Headache experienced or worsened with cough or the Valsalva
maneuver
ASSOCIATED NEUROLOGIC HISTORY
Neurologic dysfunction other than typical aura
Altered sensorium during headache
Sensory deficits or changes in vision, gait, or coordination
Other focal neurologic deficits
Seizures or syncope
Decreased visual acuity
Mental status changes (e.g., confusion or disorientation)
Regression in fine or gross motor developmental skills
Decline in cognition or school performance
Change in mood, behavior, or personality
ASSOCIATED GENERAL HISTORY
Vomiting without nausea and morning/fasting nausea or vomiting
Polyuria or polydipsia
Preschool or younger age
History of head trauma
Neck pain
Medical comorbidities
History of ventriculoperitoneal shunt
Certain medications
Signs of systemic or localized head/neck infection
Negative family history of primary headache disorders
From Lauck SM, Gage S. Headaches. In: Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, et al., eds.
Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based Diagnosis, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023: Table
34.5, p. 553.

more than 15 days/month and/or prescription medications, including
triptans or combination medications, on more than 10 days/month.
Some of the signs that should raise suspicion of medication overuse
are the increasing use of analgesics (nonprescription or prescription)
with either decreased effectiveness or frequent wearing off (i.e., analgesic rebound). An MOH can be worsened by ineffective medications
or misdiagnosis of the headache. Patients should be cautioned against
the frequent use of antimigraine medications, including combination
analgesics or triptans.
Serious causes of secondary headaches are likely to be related to
increased intracranial pressure. This can be caused by a mass (tumor,
vascular malformation, cystic structure) or an intrinsic increase in
pressure (idiopathic intracranial hypertension, also known as pseudotumor cerebri). In the former case, the headache is caused by the mass
effect and local pressure on the dura; in the latter case, the headache is
caused by diffuse pressure on the dura. The etiology of idiopathic intracranial hypertension may be the intake of excessive amounts of fat-­
soluble compounds (e.g., vitamin A, retinoic acid, and minocycline),
hormonal changes (increased incidence in females), or blockage of

3651

ABNORMAL OPHTHALMOLOGIC FINDINGS
Papilledema
Abnormal ocular movements
Squinting
Pathologic pupillary response
Visual field defects
ABNORMAL NEUROLOGIC FINDINGS
Impaired mental status
Cranial nerve palsy
Ataxia
Abnormal gait
Abnormal coordination
Abnormal reflexes
Asymmetric motor or sensory examination
Hemiparesis
Developmental regression
Precocious, delayed, or arrested puberty
SKIN FINDINGS
Café-­au-­lait or ash leaf macules
Petechiae or purpura
Facial hemangioma
Malar rash
From Lauck SM, Gage S. Headaches. In: Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, et al., eds.
Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based Diagnosis, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023: Table
34.6, p. 553.

venous drainage (as with inflammation of the transverse venous sinus
from mastoiditis). When increased pressure is suspected, either by historical suspicion or the presence of papilledema, an MRI with magnetic
resonance angiography and magnetic resonance venography should
be performed, followed by a lumbar puncture if no mass or vascular
anomaly is noted. The lumbar puncture can be diagnostic and therapeutic of idiopathic intracranial hypertension but must be performed
with the patient in a relaxed recumbent position with legs extended,
because abdominal pressure can artificially raise intracranial pressure.
If headache persists or there are visual field changes, pharmaceutical
treatment with a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor, optic nerve fenestration, or a shunt needs to be considered.
Additional causes of secondary headaches in children that may not
be associated with increased intracranial pressure include arteriovenous malformations, berry aneurysm, collagen vascular diseases
affecting the central nervous system, hypertensive encephalopathy,
infectious or autoimmune etiologies, acute subarachnoid hemorrhage,
and stroke. The management of secondary headache depends on the
cause. Helpful laboratory tests and neuroradiologic procedures depend
on the clues provided by the history (Table 635.11) and physical (Table
635.12) examination. By definition, a secondary headache has a specific cause and should resolve once this cause is treated. If the headache
persists, the diagnosis and treatment should be questioned because
either the diagnosis, which may include a primary headache, or the
treatment, or both, may be incorrect.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3652 Part XXV u The Nervous System

635.3 Tension-­Type Headaches
Andrew D. Hershey, Marielle Kabbouche, and
Joanne Kacperski
Tension-­type headaches (TTHs) may be common in children and adolescents, with a prevalence in some studies as high as 48%, with those
having a combination of migraine and TTH around 20%. Because of
their mild to moderate nature, relative lack of associated symptoms,
and lower degree of associated disability, they are often ignored or have
minimal impact. The ICHD-­3 subclassifies TTHs as infrequent (<12
headaches/year) (Table 635.13), frequent (1-­15 headaches/month), and
chronic (>15 headaches/month). They can further be separated into
headaches with or without pericranial muscle tenderness. The classification of TTH can be likened to the opposite of migraine. Whereas
migraines are typically moderate to severe, are focal in location, are
worsened by physical activity or limit physical activity, and have a
throbbing quality, TTHs are mild to moderate in severity, are diffuse
in location, are not affected by activity (although the patient may not
feel like being active), and are nonthrobbing (often described as a constant pressure). TTH is much less frequently associated with nausea,
photophobia, or phonophobia and is never associated with more than
one of these at a time or with vomiting. TTH must be recurrent, but at
least 10 headaches are required, and the duration can be 30 minutes to
7 days. Secondary headaches with other underlying etiologies must be
ruled out.
Evaluation of patients with suspected TTHs requires a detailed
headache history and complete general and neurologic examination.
This is to establish the diagnosis and ensure exclusion of secondary
etiologies. When secondary headaches are suspected, further directed
evaluation is indicated.
Treatment of TTHs can require acute therapy to stop attacks, preventive therapy when frequent or chronic, and behavioral therapy. It
is often suspected that there may be underlying psychologic stressors
(hence, the misnomer as a stress headache), but this is often difficult to
identify in children, and although it may be suspected by the parents,
it cannot be confirmed in the child. Studies of and conclusive evidence
to guide the treatment of TTH in children are lacking, but the same
general principles and medications used in migraine can be applied to
children with TTHs (see Chapter 635.1). Oftentimes, simple analgesics (ibuprofen or acetaminophen) can be effective for acute treatment.
Flupirtine is a nonopioid analgesic that has been approved in Europe
for the treatment of TTH in children as young as age 6 years but is
not available in the United States. Amitriptyline has the most evidence
of effective prevention of TTH; biobehavioral intervention, including
biofeedback-­assisted relaxation training and coping skills, can be useful as well.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Table 635.13  Infrequent Episodic Tension-­Type
Headache
A.	At least 10 episodes of headache occurring on <1 day/mo on
average (<12 days/yr) and fulfilling criteria B-­D
B.	Lasting from 30 min to 7 days
C.	At least two of the following four characteristics:
1.	Bilateral location
2.	Pressing or tightening (nonpulsating) quality
3.	Mild or moderate intensity
4.	Not aggravated by routine physical activity, such as walking or
climbing stairs
D.	Both of the following:
1.	No nausea or vomiting
2.	No more than one of photophobia or phonophobia
E.	Not better accounted for by another ICHD-­3 diagnosis
From Headache Classification Committee of the International Headache Society
(HIS). The International Classification of Headache Disorders, 3rd ed. Cephalalgia.
2018;38(1):1–211, Table 10.

Chapter 636

Neurocutaneous
Syndromes
Mustafa Sahin, Nicole Ullrich,
Siddharth Srivastava, and Anna L. Pinto
The neurocutaneous syndromes include a heterogeneous group of disorders characterized by abnormalities of both the integument and central nervous system (CNS) of variable severity (Table 636.1). Many of
the disorders are hereditary and believed to arise from a defect in differentiation of the primitive ectoderm (nervous system, eyeball, retina,
and skin). Disorders classified as neurocutaneous syndromes include
neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1), neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2),
tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC), Sturge-­Weber syndrome (SWS),
von Hippel-­Lindau disease (VHL), PHACE (posterior fossa malformations, hemangiomas, arterial anomalies, coarctation of the aorta,
cardiac defects, eye abnormalities) syndrome, ataxia-­
telangiectasia
(AT), linear nevus syndrome, hypomelanosis of Ito, and incontinentia
pigmenti.

636.1 Neurofibromatosis
Nicole Ullrich
NF refers to a group of autosomal dominant genetic conditions that
cause tumors to grown on nerves throughout the body. The types of
NF include neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) and all types of schwannomatosis (SWN), including NF2-related schwannomatosis (NF2-SWN,
formerly called neurofibromatosis type 2, or NF2).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND DIAGNOSIS

NF1 has an incidence of 1 in 2,500 live births and is caused by autosomal dominant loss-­of-­function pathogenic variants in the NF1 gene.
Approximately 50% are inherited from an affected parent, and the
other 50% result from a sporadic gene variant. The diagnostic criteria
for NF1 were updated in 2021 by an international expert panel. The
disease is clinically diagnosed when any two of the following manifestations are present: (1) Six or more café-­au-­lait macules (CALMs)
>5 mm in greatest diameter in prepubertal individuals and >15 mm
in greatest diameter in postpubertal individuals (Fig. 636.1). CALMs
are the hallmark of neurofibromatosis and are present in almost 100%
of patients. They are present at birth but increase in size, number, and
pigmentation, especially during the first few years of life. The CALMs
are scattered over the body surface, with predilection for the trunk and
extremities. CALMs are not specific for NF1 and may be observed in
other disorders (Table 636.2). (2) Axillary or inguinal freckling consisting of multiple hyperpigmented areas 2-­3 mm in diameter; at least
one of the two pigmentary findings (café-au-lait macules or freckling) must be bilateral (Fig. 636.2). Skinfold freckling usually appears
between 3 and 5 years of age. The frequency of axillary and inguinal
freckling is reported to be >80% by 6 years of age. (3) Two or more
iris Lisch nodules, which are hamartomas located within the iris and
are best identified by a slit-­lamp examination, or two or more choroidal abnormalities (Fig. 636.3). They are present in more than 74% of
patients with NF1. The prevalence of Lisch nodules increases with age,
from only 5% of children younger than 3 years of age, to 42% among
children 3-­4 years of age, and virtually 100% of adults older than 21
years of age. (4) Two or more neurofibromas or one plexiform neurofibroma. Neurofibromas are most visible on the skin, but they may occur
on any peripheral nerve in the body, including along peripheral nerves
and blood vessels and within viscera, including the gastrointestinal

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 636 u Neurocutaneous Syndromes

3653

Table 636.1  Genetic and Clinical Features Associated with Neurocutaneous Syndromes
SYNDROME

GENE(S)

INHERITANCE

CLINICAL FEATURES

Tuberous sclerosis
complex

TSC1 (tuberous sclerosis
1; hamartin)
TSC2 (tuberous sclerosis
2; tuberin)

Autosomal dominant

Angiofibromas, hypomelanotic macules, shagreen patches,
ungual fibromas, cortical dysplasias, subependymal giant
cell astrocytomas, subependymal nodules, intellectual
disability, epilepsy including infantile spasms, autism spectrum
disorder, retinal hamartomas, cardiac rhabdomyomas,
lymphangioleiomyomatosis, renal angiomyolipomas

Neurofibromatosis
type 1

NF1 (neurofibromin)

Autosomal dominant

Schwannomatosis
NF2-­related
schwannomatosis

Autosomal
dominant
NF2

Vestibular schwannoma, meningioma, ependymoma, schwannoma,
juvenile subcapsular or cortical cataract, retinal hamartoma,
epiretinal membrane, affected parent, NF2 pathogenic variant in
at least two distinct tumors
(formerly called NF2)

Non-­NF2-­related
schwannomatosis

Two or more schwannomas or hybrid nerve sheath tumors AND
pathogenic variant identified; no vestibular schwannomas identified

SMARCB1-­related
schwannomatosis

SMARCB1

LZTR1-­related
schwannomatosis

LZTR1

22q-­related
schwannomatosis

LOH of chromosome 22

Schwannomatosis
NOS (not otherwise
specified):
For those who have not
had genetic testing
Schwannomatosis
NEC (not elsewhere
classified):
For those in whom
genetic testing of
blood/saliva and
tumors failed to detect
a pathogenic variant
Von Hippel-­Lindau

VHL (von Hippel-­Lindau
tumor suppressor)

Autosomal dominant

Cerebellar hemangioblastomas, retinal angiomas, endolymphatic
sac tumors, pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors, renal cysts, renal
cell carcinomas, pheochromocytomas

Linear nevus
sebaceous

HRAS (HRas proto-­
oncogene, GTPase)
KRAS (KRAS proto-­
oncogene, GTPase)
NRAS (neuroblastoma
RAS viral oncogene
homolog)

Somatic mosaicism

Linear sebaceous nevus, hemimegalencephaly, ventriculomegaly,
intellectual disability, epilepsy, ocular defects (e.g., strabismus),
cardiac defects (e.g., coarctation of the aorta), urogenital defects
(e.g., horseshoe kidney), skeletal defects (e.g., fibrous dysplasia)

PHACE

Unknown

Incontinentia
pigmenti

IKBKG (inhibitor of
kappa B kinase
gamma)

Posterior fossa malformations, hemangiomas, arterial lesions (e.g.,
dysplasia of cerebral arteries), cardiac defects (e.g., coarctation of
the aorta), ocular defects (e.g., microphthalmia), ventral defects
(e.g., sternal clefting)
X-­linked dominant

tract. These lesions appear characteristically during adolescence or
pregnancy, suggesting a hormonal influence. They are usually small,
rubbery lesions with a slight purplish discoloration of the overlying
skin. Plexiform neurofibromas are typically congenital and result from
diffuse thickening of nerve trunks and surrounding soft tissues. The
skin overlying a plexiform neurofibroma may be coarse and associated

Distinctive skin lesion appearing in four stages (bullous, verrucous,
pigmentary, atretic), alopecia, dental anomalies (e.g., hypodontia),
intellectual disability, epilepsy, ocular defects (e.g., retinal
neovascularization), nail defects (e.g., dystrophic nails)

with hyperpigmentation. Plexiform neurofibromas may produce overgrowth of an extremity and a deformity of the corresponding bone.
(5) A distinctive osseous lesion such as sphenoid dysplasia (which may
cause pulsating exophthalmos), anterolateral bowing of tibia (tibial
dysplasia), or pseudarthrosis of a long bone. (6) Optic pathway gliomas are present in approximately 15–20% of individuals with NF1;

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3654 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 636.2  Diseases Associated with Multiple
Café-­Au-­Lait Macules

Fig. 636.1 Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1). The presence of six or

more café-­au-­lait (CAL) spots larger than 0.5 cm in diameter in children
and 1.5 cm in adolescents suggests the possibility of NF1, although
having CAL spots alone does not allow for definitive diagnosis. (From
Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 5th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016, Fig. 11-­44.)

however, only ∼30% of these are clinically symptomatic and require
tumor-­directed therapy. They are the most frequently observed CNS
tumor in NF1. Because of visual acuity compromise, it is recommended that all children with NF1 undergo at least annual ophthalmologic examinations, or more frequent ones if there is a concern. The
most common time to develop symptoms is between the ages of 2 and
6 years; they manifest as a change in visual acuity, a change in the visual
fields, or pallor of the optic nerve. Extension into the hypothalamus
can lead to precocious puberty. The brain MRI findings of an optic
glioma include diffuse thickening, localized enlargement, or a distinct
focal mass originating from the optic nerve or chiasm (Fig. 636.4). (7)
A parent with NF1 whose diagnosis was based on the aforementioned
criteria. (8) A pathogenic NF1 gene variant. It is important to note that
genetic testing is not required to make a diagnosis of NF1, but it may
allow for an earlier diagnosis. In addition, presence of a genetic variant alone is not sufficient to diagnose NF1; a second diagnostic feature
is required.
Children with NF1 are susceptible to neurologic complications.
MRI studies of selected children have shown abnormal hyperintense
T2-­weighted signals in the optic tracts, brainstem, globus pallidus,
thalamus, internal capsule, and cerebellum (Fig. 636.5). These signals,
unidentified bright objects or focal areas of signal abnormality (FASI),
tend to disappear with age; most have disappeared by 30 years of age. It
is unclear what the unidentified bright objects represent pathologically,
and there is disagreement as to the relationship between the presence
and number of unidentified bright objects and the occurrence of learning disabilities, attention-­deficit disorders, behavioral and psychosocial
problems, and abnormalities of speech among affected children. Therefore imaging studies such as brain MRIs should be reserved for patients
with clinical symptoms only.
One of the most common complications is a learning disability affecting more than half of individuals with NF1. Seizures are
observed in approximately 8% of NF1 patients. The cerebral vessels may develop aneurysms or stenosis consistent with moyamoya
syndrome (see Chapter 641). Neurologic sequelae of these vascular
abnormalities include transient cerebrovascular ischemic attacks,
hemiparesis, and cognitive defects. Precocious puberty may become
evident in the presence or absence of lesions of the optic pathway
tumors. Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors are in the family
of aggressive sarcomas and occur either de novo or as the result of
malignant degeneration of an existing plexiform neurofibroma. The
lifetime risk is 8–13%. Additionally, the incidence of pheochromocytoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, leukemia, and Wilms tumor is higher
than in the general population. Scoliosis is a common complication
found in approximately 10% of the patients. Patients with NF1 are
at risk for hypertension, which may be present in isolation or result
from renal vascular stenosis or a pheochromocytoma.

DISEASE

MAJOR FEATURES

Ataxia telangiectasia

Progressive ataxia, lymphoreticular
malignancy

Bannayan-­Riley-­Ruvalcaba
syndrome

Macrosomia, megalencephaly,
lipomas, intestinal polyps

Basal cell nevus syndrome

Multiple basal cell epitheliomas, jaw
cysts, skeletal anomalies

Bloom syndrome

Short stature, photosensitivity,
chromosome breaks, malignancy

Fanconi anemia

Limb anomalies, renal anomalies,
pancytopenia

Gaucher disease

Jewish predilection, ataxia, mental
retardation

Hunter syndrome

Thickened skin, coarse facies, skin
papules, joint contractures

Jaffe-­Campanacci
syndrome

Fibromas of long bones,
hypogonadism, mental retardation,
ocular/cardiac anomalies

Legius syndrome

Axillary freckling, macrocephaly, a
Noonan-­like facial dysmorphism,
lipomas

Maffucci syndrome

Venous malformations, enchondromas

McCune-­Albright syndrome

Polyostotic fibrous dysplasia,
precocious puberty

Multiple lentigines
syndrome

Multiple lentigines, hypertelorism,
pulmonic stenosis

Multiple mucosal neuroma
syndrome

Mucosal neuromas, thyroid carcinoma,
pheochromocytoma, parathyroid
adenoma, dysautonomia

Neurofibromatosis type 1

Neurofibromas, optic pathway
glioma, central nervous system
tumors, iris hamartomas, axillary
freckles, skeletal anomalies, learning
disabilities

Neurofibromatosis
type 2-related
schwannomatosis

Vestibular schwannoma, meningioma,
subcapsular cataracts, skin plexiform
schwannomas, ependymoma

Schwannomatosis

Multiple schwannomas or hybrid
nerve sheath tumors; subtypes
distinguished by the molecular
phenotype of the tumor. No
vestibular schwannomas present.

Russell-­Silver syndrome

Short stature, asymmetry, limb
anomalies

Tuberous sclerosis

White macules, multiple hamartomas,
central nervous system anomalies

Watson syndrome

Pulmonic stenosis, axillary freckles,
low intelligence

From Marcoux DA, Duran-­McKinster C, Baselga E, et al. Pigmentary abnormalities. In:
Schachner LA, Hansen RC, eds. Pediatric Dermatology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby;
2011: Table 10-­2.

Mosaic NF1 (also called segmental NF1) results from a pathogenic
variant that occurs after conception, leading to a mixture of cells with
and without the gene variant. The manifestations are therefore limited
to one or more body segments secondary to somatic (or gonadal) variants expressed in those locations. Lesions may be unilateral or bilateral,
asymmetric or symmetric, and confined to a narrow band or a single
quadrant. Neurologic manifestations are rare but have been reported.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 636 u Neurocutaneous Syndromes

3655

Fig. 636.2 Neurofibromatosis. Axillary freckling (Crowe’s sign) is a
pathognomonic sign. (From Habif TP, ed. Clinical Dermatology, 4th ed.
Philadelphia: Mosby; 2004: Fig. 26-­11.)

Fig. 636.5 T2-­weighted MRI scan of a patient with NF1. Note the
high-­signal areas (unidentified bright objects or focal areas of signal
abnormality [FASI]) in the basal ganglia (arrows).

MANAGEMENT

Fig. 636.3 Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1). Pigmented hamartomas

of the iris (Lisch nodules). (From Zitelli BJ, McIntire S, Nowalk AJ, eds.
Zitelli and Davis’ Atlas of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2012: Fig. 15-­9.)

Because of the diverse and unpredictable complications associated
with NF1, close multidisciplinary follow-­up is necessary. Patients with
NF1 should have regular clinical assessments at least yearly, focusing
the history and examination on the potential problems for which they
are at increased risk. These assessments include yearly ophthalmologic
examination, neurologic assessment, blood pressure monitoring, and
scoliosis evaluation. Neuropsychologic and educational testing should
be considered as needed. The National Institutes of Health (NIH) Consensus Development Conference has advised against routine imaging
studies of the brain and optic tracts because treatment in these asymptomatic NF1 children is rarely required. However, all symptomatic
cases (i.e., those with changes in visual acuity, optic pallor, proptosis,
precocious puberty) should undergo MR imaging. Selumetinib, an oral
inhibitor of mitogen-­activated protein kinase kinase (MEK) 1 and 2,
has been demonstrated in children (≥2 years of age) with NF1-­related
inoperable plexiform neurofibromas to be effective in inducing partial
responses and reducing tumor progression.

GENETIC COUNSELING

Fig. 636.4 Optic glioma. Sagittal T1-­weighted MRI scan of a patient
with NF1 shows thickening of the optic nerve (arrow).

Although NF1 is an autosomal dominant disorder, more than half
the cases are sporadic, representing de novo pathogenic variants.
The NF1 gene on chromosome region 17q11.2 encodes for a protein
also known as neurofibromin. Neurofibromin acts as an inhibitor
of the oncogene Ras (Fig. 636.6). The diagnosis of NF1 is based on
the clinical features; molecular testing for the NF1 gene variants is
available and now is included as one of the diagnostic criteria. Some
scenarios in which genetic testing is particularly helpful include
patients who meet only one of the criteria for clinical diagnosis,
those with unusually severe disease, and those seeking prenatal/
preimplantation diagnosis.
An international consensus group of NF experts updated the diagnostic criteria for neurofibromatosis type 2 and schwannomatosis (SWN).
SWN is the umbrella term used to describe the group of overlapping
conditions in which a patient has multiple schwannomas. The criteria
also address the discovery of the genes involved, assists in distinguishing
the types of neurofibromatosis and SWN using classification according to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3656 Part XXV u The Nervous System
IL1R

TNFR

TLR

ETR
GNAQ*/11

RTK

Neurofibromatosis
NF1*

IKKα
IKKβ

IKBKG*

GFRs

Sturge-Weber
syndrome

RAS*

Incontinentia Pigmenti

PI3K

Linear nevus
sebaceous syndrome

AKT

BRAF

MEK1/2

Canonical NF-KB signaling

Tuberous sclerosis
complex

TSC2*

TBC1D7

TSC1*

ERK1/2

RHEB

mTOR
Von Hippel-Lindau
Syndrome
HIF1α

VHL*

Proliferation
Survival

Angiogenesis

S6K

4E-BP1

Cell growth
Cell growth
Protein synthesis Protein synthesis

Fig. 636.6 Schematic representation of the cellular pathways affected by pathogenic variants in the genes associated with neurocutaneous disorders, such as NF1, TSC, and SWS. The asterisks denote genes with associated syndromes discussed in the chapter.

the pathogenic variant identified, and minimizes the misdiagnosis with
NF1. Genetic testing for the variants involved in all subtypes of SWN is
available and should be completed whenever possible for a patient suspected of having this diagnosis. This can be performed on a blood or saliva
sample, but often requires tumor tissue. There are several key updates to
the former NF2 diagnostic criteria: NF2 pathologic variant added; clarification of first-­degree relative with “other than sibling”; cataract clarified
as juvenile cataract; retinal hamartoma added as a criterion; glioma and
neurofibroma removed; and ependymoma added (Table 636.3).
Genetic testing identifies pathogenic variants in the NF2 gene in
66-­
90% of individuals with NF2-­schwannomatosis (NF2-­SWN),
which has an incidence of 1:25,000 worldwide. The NF2 gene (which
codes for a protein known as merlin or schwannomin) is located on
chromosome 22q1.11. Table 636.4 notes the frequency of lesions in
NF2. Testing is not required for the diagnosis and it remains possible to diagnose NF2-­SWN based on clinical criteria. Genetic testing
is required for the diagnosis of a specific type of schwannomatosis
(except NF2-­related or NOS). Excluding NF2-­SWN, the other types
of SWN affect 1:70,000 individuals. Genetic testing alone is not sufficient to make a diagnosis and there must also be a clinical feature.
In most cases, tissue from schwannoma or hybrid nerve sheath tumor
is required to diagnose the type of SWN and to distinguish between
LZTR1-­related SWN, SMARCB1-­related SWN, 22q-­related SWN and
SWN NOS/NEC.
Individuals with NF2-­SWN may present with tinnitus, hearing loss,
facial weakness, headache, and gait instability. Although this may present in childhood, VS are more likely to appear in the second and third
decades of life. In the pediatric age group, café au lait macules and cutaneous plexiform schwannomas are the most common presentation and
can be confused with the skin findings in NF1.
Workup should include ophthalmologic evaluation (assessing
for subcapsular or cortical cataracts), MRI of the brain and spine,
and audiology evaluation. These are all important components of
ongoing surveillance and management of individuals with suspected or confirmed NF2-­related SWN. The goal is to preserve
hearing related to VS. Other forms of SWN should be suspected
when an individual has two or more schwannomas in the absence

Table 636.3  Diagnostic Criteria for NF2-­Related
Schwannomatosis (Formerly Called
Neurofibromatosis Type 2 [NF2])
A diagnosis of NF2-­related schwannomatosis can be made when a
patient has one of the following:
• Bilateral vestibular schwannomas (VS)
• An identical NF2 pathogenic variant in at least two anatomically
distinct NF2-­related tumors (schwannoma, meningioma, and/or
ependymoma)
Either two major OR one major and two minor criteria are present
as follows:
MAJOR CRITERIA
• Unilateral vestibular schwannoma
• First-­degree relative other than a sibling with NF2-­related
schwannomatosis
• Two or more meningiomas
• N
 F2 pathogenic variant in an unaffected tissue, such as blood
MINOR CRITERIA
Can count more than one of a type (e.g. two schwannomas = two
minor criteria)
• Ependymoma
• Schwannoma (note that if the major criterion is a unilateral VS, at
least one schwannoma must be dermal in location)
Can count only once
• Juvenile subcapsular or cortical cataract
• Retinal hamartoma
• Epiretinal membrane in a person aged less than 40 years
• Single meningioma (meningioma cannot be used as both a major
and a minor criteria)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 636 u Neurocutaneous Syndromes
Table 636.4  Frequency of Lesions Associated with
Neurofibromatosis Type 2-Related
Schwannomatosis*
FREQUENCY OF ASSOCIATION
WITH NF2-RELATED
SCHWANNOMATOSIS
NEUROLOGIC LESIONS
Bilateral vestibular schwannomas

90–95%

Other cranial nerve
schwannomas

24–51%

Meningioma

45–58%

Spinal schwannomas

63–90%

Spinal ependymoma

20%

Peripheral neuropathy

Up to 66%

OPHTHALMOLOGIC LESIONS
Juvenile subcapsular or cortical
cataract

60–81%

Epiretinal membranes (age less
than 40 years)

12–40%

Retinal hamartomas

6–22%

CUTANEOUS LESIONS
Cutaneous schwannomas

59–68%

Subcutaneous tumors

43–48%

Intradermal tumors

Rare

*Formerly known as NF2.
Modified from Asthagiri AR, Parry DM, Butman JA, et al. Neurofibromatosis type 2.
Lancet. 2009;373:1974–1984, Table 1.

of bilateral vestibular schwannomas. Evaluation also includes
imaging of the brain and spine to exclude VS and to distinguish
from NF2-­related SWN.
Legius syndrome (caused by SPRED1 pathogenic variants) is an
autosomal dominant disorder with skin findings that resemble and
may be hard to distinguish from NF1 in younger individuals. Persons
with Legius syndrome present with multiple CALMs and macrocephaly, with and without skinfold freckling. However, other typical
features of NF1, such as Lisch nodules, neurofibromas, optic nerve
gliomas, long bone dysplasia, plexiform neurofibromas, and malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors, are not seen in individuals with
SPRED1 variants.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

636.2 Tuberous Sclerosis
Siddharth Srivastava and Mustafa Sahin
Tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) is a multisystem disease characterized by an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance, variable expressivity, and a prevalence of 1 in 6,000-­10,000 newborns. Spontaneous
pathogenic variants occur in 65% of the cases. Molecular genetic studies have identified two foci for TSC: the TSC1 gene (located on chromosome 9q34) and the TSC2 gene (located on chromosome 16p13).
The TSC1 gene encodes a protein called hamartin, and the TSC2 gene
encodes a protein called tuberin. Within a cell, these two molecules
form a complex along with a third protein, TBC1D7 (Tre2-­Bub2-­
Cdc16 1 domain family, member 7). Consequently, a pathogenic variant in either the TSC1 gene or the TSC2 gene results in a similar disease
in patients, though individuals with TSC2 variants tend to be more
severely affected.
Tuberin and hamartin are involved in a key pathway in the cell that
regulates protein synthesis and cell size (see Fig. 636.6). One of the ways

3657

cells regulate their growth is by controlling the rate of protein synthesis. A protein called mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) is one of
the master regulators of cell growth (mTOR has additional roles in the
CNS, where it helps regulate neuronal development and synaptic plasticity). mTOR, in turn, is controlled by Ras homolog enriched in brain
(RHEB), a small cytoplasmic guanosine triphosphatase. When RHEB
is activated, the protein synthesis machinery is turned on, most likely
via mTOR signaling, and the cell grows. Under normal conditions, the
tuberin/hamartin complex keeps RHEB in an inactive state. However,
in TSC, there is disinhibition of RHEB and subsequent overactivation
of the mTOR pathway. Accordingly, the TSC1 and TSC2 genes can
be considered tumor-­suppressor genes. The loss of either tuberin or
hamartin protein results in the formation of numerous benign tumors
(hamartomas).
TSC is an extremely heterogeneous disease with a wide clinical
spectrum varying from severe intellectual disability and intractable
epilepsy to normal intelligence and a lack of seizures. This variation
is often seen within the same family, that is, with individuals within a
family carrying the same variant. The disease affects many organ systems other than the skin and brain, including the heart, kidney, eyes,
lungs, and bone (Fig. 636.7).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND DIAGNOSIS

Definite TSC is diagnosed when at least two major or one major
plus two minor features are present (Tables 636.5 and 636.6 list the
major and minor features). In addition, carrying a pathogenic variant in TSC1 or TSC2 is sufficient for the diagnosis of TSC.
The hallmark of TSC is the involvement of the CNS. The characteristic brain lesion is a cortical tuber (Fig. 636.8). Brain MRI is the
best way of identifying cortical tubers, which can form before birth.
Subependymal nodules are lesions found along the wall of the lateral
ventricles, where they undergo calcification and project into the ventricular cavity, producing a candle-­dripping appearance. These lesions
do not cause any problems; however, in 5–10% of cases, these benign
lesions can grow into subependymal giant cell astrocytomas (SEGAs).
These tumors can grow and block the circulation of cerebrospinal fluid
around the brain and cause hydrocephalus, which requires immediate
neurosurgical intervention. Thus it is recommended that all asymptomatic TSC patients undergo brain MRI every 1-­3 years to monitor for new
occurrences of SEGA. Patients with large or growing SEGAs, or with
SEGAs causing ventricular enlargement without other manifestations,
should undergo MRI scans more frequently, and the patients and their
families should be educated regarding the potential of new symptoms
caused by increased intracranial pressure. Surgical resection should be
performed for acutely symptomatic SEGA. For growing but otherwise
asymptomatic SEGAs, either surgical resection or medical treatment
with an mTOR inhibitor (sirolimus, everolimus) may be used. Treatment with everolimus can be effective in slowing the growth or even
reducing the size of SEGAs. Everolimus is also effective in treating renal
angiomyolipomas. Sirolimus is also effective in treating lymphangioleiomyomatosis, renal angiomyolipomas, and cardiac rhabdomyomas.
The most common neurologic manifestations of TSC are epilepsy,
intellectual disability, and autism spectrum disorder. TSC may present during infancy with infantile spasms and a hypsarrhythmic electroencephalogram pattern. However, it is important to remember
that TSC patients can have infantile spasms without hypsarrhythmia. The seizures may be difficult to control, and at a later age, they
may develop into other seizure types such as focal-­onset seizures or
generalized myoclonic seizures (see Chapter 633). Vigabatrin is the
first-­line therapy for infantile spasms. Adrenocorticotropic hormone
(ACTH) or prednisolone can be used if treatment with vigabatrin
fails. Anticonvulsant therapy for other seizure types in TSC should
generally follow that of other epilepsies, and epilepsy surgery can be
considered for medically refractory TSC patients. Everolimus (adjunctive) has received U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval
for treatment-­refractory focal seizures in TSC. Studies on prevention
of epilepsy with preemptive treatment with vigabatrin have yielded
mixed results so far. However, it is recommended that infants with TSC
should undergo baseline EEG to enable early detection and treatment

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3658 Part XXV u The Nervous System

A

B

C

RVOT
Tumour
TV
RA

PV
AOV

PA

LA

F

E

D

Fig. 636.7 Dermatologic, cardiac, and pulmonary manifestations of tuberous sclerosis. A, Hypomelanotic macules. B, Facial angiofibromas. C,
Shagreen patch. D, Hyperechoic rhabdomyoma detected by echocardiography. E, Retinal hamartoma. F, Lymphangioleiomyomatosis. (From Curatolo P, Bombardieri R, Jozwiak S. Tuberous sclerosis. Lancet. 2008;372:657–668, Fig. 7.)

Table 636.5  Major Features of Tuberous Sclerosis
Complex
Cortical dysplasias (including tubers and cerebral white matter
migration lines)
Subependymal nodules
Subependymal giant cell astrocytoma
Facial angiofibromas (≥3) or forehead plaque
Ungual fibromas (≥2)
Hypomelanotic macules (≥3, ≥5 mm in diameter)
Shagreen patch
Multiple retinal nodular hamartomas
Cardiac rhabdomyoma
Renal angiomyolipoma
Pulmonary lymphangioleiomyomatosis

A
Table 636.6  Minor Features of Tuberous Sclerosis
Complex
Dental enamel pits (>3)
Intraoral fibromas (≥2)
Retinal achromic patch
Confetti skin lesions
Nonrenal hamartomas
Multiple renal cysts

of seizures, and this should be repeated every 6 weeks until 12 months
of age. In addition to epilepsy, about 90% of individuals with TSC have
a spectrum of cognitive, behavioral, psychiatric, and academic impairments termed tuberous sclerosis–associated neuropsychiatric disorders
(TANDs), which include intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorder, attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder, anxiety, and depression.
About 45% of individuals with TSC have intellectual disability, and up
to 25-50% have autism spectrum disorder.

Skin Lesions

More than 90% of patients show the typical hypomelanotic macules
that have been likened to an ash leaf on the trunk and extremities.

B

Fig. 636.8 Tuberous sclerosis. A, CT scan with subependymal calci-

fications characteristic of tuberous sclerosis. B, The MRI demonstrates
multiple subependymal nodules in the same patient (arrow). Parenchymal tubers are also visible on both the CT and the MRI scan as low-­
density areas in the brain parenchyma.

Visualization of the hypomelanotic macule is enhanced by using a Wood
ultraviolet lamp (see Chapter 694). To count as a major feature, at least
three hypomelanotic macules must be present (see Fig. 636.7). Facial
angiofibromas develop between 4 and 6 years of age; they appear as tiny
red nodules over the nose and cheeks and are sometimes confused with
acne (see Fig. 636.7). Later, they enlarge, coalesce, and assume a fleshy
appearance. Topical rapamycin is approved for treatment of facial angiofibromas. A shagreen patch is also characteristic of TSC and consists
of a roughened, raised lesion with an orange-­peel consistency located
primarily in the lumbosacral region (see Fig. 636.7). Forehead fibrous
plaques usually occur on one side of the forehead. They are characteristically raised, yellow-­brown or flesh-­colored, and soft to hard in
consistency. Forehead plaques are histologically similar to facial angiofibromas, though the former can appear at any point. During adolescence
or later, small fibromas or nodules of skin may form around fingernails
or toenails (ungual fibromas) in 15–20% of TSC patients (Fig. 636.9).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 636 u Neurocutaneous Syndromes

3659

Diagnosis of TSC relies on a high index of suspicion, especially
when assessing a child with infantile spasms. A careful evaluation for
the typical skin and retinal lesions should be completed in all patients
with a seizure disorder or autism spectrum disorder. Brain MRI can
confirm the clinical diagnosis in many cases. Genetic testing for pathogenic TSC1 and TSC2 variants is available and should be considered
when the individual patient does not meet all the clinical criteria, or in
order to provide molecular confirmation of a clinical diagnosis. Prenatal testing may be offered when a known pathogenic TSC1/TSC2 variant exists in that family.

MANAGEMENT

Fig. 636.9 Periungual fibroma in a patient with tuberous sclerosis
complex (TSC).

The following are recommended for routine follow-­up of individuals
with TSC in addition to physical examination: brain MRI every 1-­3
years, abdominal MRI to evaluate the kidneys every 1-­3 years; echocardiogram every 1-­3 years in patients with cardiac rhabdomyomas until
there is regression of the rhabdomyomas; electrocardiogram every 3-­5
years; high-­resolution chest CT every 5-­10 years in females older than
18 years; dental examination twice a year; skin examinations once a year;
detailed ophthalmic examination once a year in patients with vision concerns or retinal lesions (sooner if they are receiving treatment with vigabatrin); neurodevelopmental testing at the beginning of first grade or
sooner based on concerns; and screening for TAND at each clinic visit.
Based on the complications of the disease, additional follow-­up testing
may be required for each individual. Symptoms and signs of increased
intracranial pressure suggest obstruction of the foramen of Monro by a
SEGA and warrant immediate investigation and surgical intervention.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

636.3 Sturge-­Weber Syndrome
Anna L. Pinto
Fig. 636.10 A mulberry lesion involving the superior part of the optic

nerve in a patient with tuberous sclerosis. (From Yanoff M, Sassani JW.
Ocular Pathology, 7th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2015: Fig. 2-­7.)

Other Organ Involvement

Retinal lesions consist of two types: hamartomas (elevated mulberry
lesions or plaquelike lesions (Fig. 636.10) and white depigmented
patches (similar to the hypopigmented skin lesions). Approximately
50% of children with TSC have cardiac rhabdomyomas, which may be
detected in the fetus by an echocardiogram, usually by 20-­30 weeks of
gestation. The rhabdomyomas may be numerous and located throughout the ventricular myocardium, and although they can cause congestive heart failure and arrhythmias in a minority of patients, they tend to
slowly resolve spontaneously. In 75–80% of patients older than 10 years
of age, the kidneys display angiomyolipomas that are usually benign
tumors. Angiomyolipomas begin in childhood in many individuals
with TSC, but they may not be problematic until young adulthood. By
the third decade of life, they may cause lumbar pain and hematuria
from slow bleeding, and rarely they may result in sudden retroperitoneal bleeding. Embolization followed by corticosteroids to alleviate
postembolization syndrome is first-­line therapy for angiomyolipoma
presenting with acute hemorrhage. Nephrectomy should be avoided as
a way of maintaining renal function, because lesions can be numerous
and bilateral. For asymptomatic, growing angiomyolipomas measuring larger than 3 cm in diameter, an mTOR inhibitor, everolimus, is
approved for treatment by the FDA. Selective embolization or kidney-­
sparing resection is an alternative therapy for asymptomatic angiomyolipoma. Single or multiple renal cysts are also commonly present
in TSC; renal cell carcinoma, on the other hand, is rare. Lymphangioleiomyomatosis is the classic pulmonary lesion in TSC and only
affects women, beginning in late adolescence (≥15 years). Sirolimus is
approved by the FDA for lymphangioleiomyomatosis. Topical rapamycin should be considered for treatment of facial angiofibromas.

Sturge-­Weber syndrome (SWS) is a segmental vascular neurocutaneous disorder with a constellation of symptoms and signs characterized
by capillary malformation in the face (port-­wine birthmark [PWB])
and brain (leptomeninges), as well as abnormal blood vessels of the eye
leading to glaucoma. Low flow of the leptomeningeal capillary malformation appears to result in a chronic hypoxic state leading to cortical
atrophy and calcifications. Patients present with seizures, hemiparesis,
strokelike episodes, headaches, and developmental delay. Approximately 1 in 20,000-­50,000 live births are affected with SWS.

ETIOLOGY

The nonsyndromic PWBs and SWS are caused by a pathologic somatic
single-­nucleotide variant (c.548G→A, p.Arg183Gln) in the GNAQ gene
(see Fig. 636.6). Brain tissue from SWS patients also demonstrates the
same change in the GNAQ gene. These results strongly suggest that
SWS occurs as a result of a mosaic pathologic genetic variant in GNAQ.
The GNAQ p.R183Q variant is enriched in endothelial cells in SWS
brain lesions, thereby revealing endothelial cells as a source of aberrant Gαq signaling. The timing of the somatic variant in GNAQ during
development likely affects the clinical phenotype. Mosaic-­activating
GNA11 and GNB2 gene variants have been described in atypical SWS
cases. The aberrant G-­protein signaling provides a molecular basis to
explain SWS lesions.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Facial PWBs are present at birth, but not all are associated with SWS
(Table 636.7). In fact, the overall incidence of SWS has been reported
to be 20–40% in those with a PWB involving the forehead and upper
eyelid. High-­risk PWB for SWS includes hemifacial, median, and forehead phenotypes (Fig. 636.11), along with large segmental PWB. The
PWB tends to be unilateral and ipsilateral to the brain involvement
(Fig. 636.12). The capillary malformation may also be evident over
the lower face and trunk and in the mucosa of the mouth and pharynx. Buphthalmos and glaucoma of the ipsilateral eye are common

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3660 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 636.7  Port-Wine Birthmark–Associated Syndromes
Sturge-­Weber syndrome
Klippel-­Trénaunay syndrome
Parkes Weber syndrome
Phakomatosis pigmentovascularis
Proteus syndrome
CLOVES syndrome
Macrocephaly–capillary malformation (M-­CM) syndrome
Capillary malformation–arteriovenous malformation (CM-­AVM)
syndrome
Cobb syndrome
Bannayan-­Riley-­Ruvalcaba syndrome
Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome
Von Hippel-­Lindau disease
Rubinstein-­Taybi syndrome
Wyburn-­Mason syndrome
Roberts syndrome
Coat disease
Nonsyndromic, idiopathic, neurologically asymptomatic

Fig. 636.12 Port-­wine birthmark involving both the V1 and V2 dermatomes. (Courtesy Dr. Anne W. Lucky, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital.)

CLOVES, Congenital lipomatous overgrowth, vascular malformations, epidermal nevi,
and scoliosis/skeletal and spinal anomalies.
From Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 5th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Box 12-­2.

Fig. 636.13 Gadolinium-­enhanced axial T1 fluid-­attenuated inversion
Forehead PWS phenotype
Median PWS phenotype
Hemifacial PWS phenotype

Fig. 636.11 Port-­wine stain (birthmark) phenotypes associated with

highest risk of Sturge-­Weber syndrome. (From Zallmann M, Mackay MT,
Leventer RJ, et al. Retrospective review of screening for Sturge-­Weber
syndrome with brain magnetic resonance imaging and electroencephalography in infants with high-­risk port-­wine stains. Pediatr Dermatol.
2018;35:575–581, Fig.1, p. 576.)

complications. Seizures occur in 75–80% of all SWS patients and in
over 90% of those with bilateral brain involvement. Early onset of
seizures will likely occur during the first year of life but rarely during
the first month of life, and they are typically focal clonic and contralateral to the side of the facial PWB. They may become refractory to
anticonvulsants, and status epilepticus is often associated. One third
of children with intractable epilepsy associated with SWS experience
episodes of prolonged postictal deficits, which would last from 1 day
to a few years, until recovering back to baseline. Some patients also
develop slowly progressive hemiparesis. Transient strokelike episodes or visual field defects persisting for several days and unrelated
to seizure activity are common and probably result from thrombosis
of cortical veins in the affected region. Although neurodevelopment
appears to be normal in the first year of life, intellectual disability

recovery (FLAIR) images of a 15-­mo-­old with Sturge-­Weber syndrome
show leptomeningeal enhancement in the left hemisphere.

or severe learning disabilities are present in at least 50% of patients
in later childhood, probably the result of intractable epilepsy and
increasing cerebral atrophy. The degree of visual field defect, hemiparesis, seizure frequency, and cognitive function (based on age-­group:
infant/preschooler, child, and adult) can be rated using a validated
SWS neurologic rating system.

DIAGNOSIS

Brain MRI with contrast is the imaging modality of choice for demonstrating the extension of pial capillary malformation in SWS (Fig.
636.13). White matter abnormalities are common and are thought to
be a result of chronic hypoxia. Often, atrophy is noted ipsilateral to
the leptomeningeal capillary malformation. Calcifications can be seen
best with a head CT (Fig. 636.14). The choroid plexus is frequently
enlarged, and the degree of plexal enlargement shows a positive correlation with the extent of the leptomeningeal capillary malformation.
Positron emission tomography using 18 F-­deoxyglucose has been used
to study cerebral metabolism in patients with SWS, and it has been
useful for the surgical planning and prognosis. Ophthalmologic evaluation examining for glaucoma is also necessary and is a lifelong concern because ocular complications can occur at any moment during a
lifetime. Based on the involvement of the brain and the face, there are
three types of SWS in the Roach Scale:

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 636 u Neurocutaneous Syndromes

Fig. 636.14 CT scan of a patient with Sturge-­Weber syndrome showing
unilateral calcification and underlying atrophy of a cerebral hemisphere.

Type I: Classic facial and leptomeningeal capillary malformation
present; often with glaucoma.
Type II: Facial capillary malformation alone (no CNS involvement);
may have glaucoma.
Type III: Isolated leptomeningeal capillary malformation; usually no
glaucoma.
In addition, there is an overlap syndrome between SWS and Klippel-­
Trénaunay syndrome (mixed capillary, venous, or lymphatic malformations involving bone and muscle in one limb).

MANAGEMENT

The management of SWS is primarily symptomatic and multidisciplinary
but not well studied by prospective studies. Treatment is aimed at seizure
control, relief of headaches, and prevention of strokelike episodes, as well
as monitoring of glaucoma and laser therapy for the cutaneous capillary
malformations. Most infants with SWS brain involvement have seizure
onset by 2 years of age. Presymptomatic treatment in high-risk babies
may prevent or delay seizure onset. For patients with well-­controlled seizures and normal or near-­normal development, management consists of
anticonvulsants and surveillance for complications, including glaucoma
and behavioral abnormalities. If the seizures are refractory to anticonvulsant therapy, especially in infancy and the first 1-­2 years and arise from
primarily one hemisphere, most medical centers advise a hemispherectomy or, if well indicated, focal disconnections. The use of low-­dose aspirin is controversial. The medication is not used routinely, but patients
with strokelike events and frequent refractory seizures may benefit from
this form of treatment. Because of the risk of glaucoma, regular measurement of intraocular pressure is indicated. The facial PWB is often a target of ridicule by classmates, leading to psychologic trauma. Pulsed-­dye
laser therapy often provides excellent clearing of the PWB, particularly if
it is located on the forehead.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

636.4 Von Hippel-­Lindau Disease
Siddharth Srivastava and Mustafa Sahin
von Hippel-­Lindau disease affects many organs, including the cerebellum, spinal cord, retina, endolymphatic sac of the inner ear, kidney, pancreas, adrenal glands, epididymis, and broad ligament of the

3661

uterus. Its incidence is around 1 in 36,000 newborns. It results from
an autosomal dominant pathogenic variant affecting a tumor suppressor gene, VHL. Approximately 80% of affected individuals have
an inherited variant, and approximately 20% have a de novo variant.
Molecular testing is available and detects pathogenic variants in most
probands.
The major neurologic feature of the condition is CNS hemangioblastomas, including brain hemangioblastomas and spinal hemangioblastomas. In affected individuals, brain hemangioblastomas commonly
affect the cerebellum. Patients with cerebellar hemangioblastoma
can present in early adult life with symptoms and signs of increased
intracranial pressure. A brain CT or MRI scan typically shows a cystic
cerebellar lesion with a vascular mural nodule. A smaller number of
patients have hemangioblastoma of the spinal cord, producing pain as
well as sensory and motor changes. Syringomyelia often accompanies
symptomatic spinal hemangioblastomas in von Hippel-­Lindau disease.
Surgical intervention for symptomatic CNS hemangioblastomas and
syringomyelia is often warranted.
Approximately 70% of individuals with von Hippel-­Lindau disease
have retinal angiomas (also known as retinal hemangioblastomas),
which have identical histology as CNS hemangioblastomas. Retinal
angiomas, which can present in childhood, are characterized by small
masses of thin-­walled capillaries that are fed by large and tortuous arterioles and venules. They are usually located in the peripheral retina so
that vision is unaffected. Exudation in the region of the angiomas may
lead to retinal detachment and visual loss. Retinal angiomas are treated
with photocoagulation and cryocoagulation, though outcomes can
vary depending on the characteristics of the lesions, and complications
such as retinal edema can occur.
Cysts (affecting the kidneys, pancreas, and liver), as well as tumors/
malignancies (including endolymphatic sac tumors, pheochromocytoma, paragangliomas, neuroendocrine tumors of the pancreas,
renal cell carcinomas, epididymis cystadenomas, and broad ligament
cystadenomas) are associated with von Hippel-­Lindau disease. Renal
carcinoma and CNS hemangioblastomas can be causes of death in
affected individuals. Regular follow-­up and appropriate imaging studies are necessary to identify lesions that may be treated at an early stage.
In affected individuals ≥1 year, there should be yearly ophthalmology
evaluation for retinal angiomas. Beginning in the first decade of life,
there should be yearly clinical assessment for neurological concerns,
vision concerns, and hearing concerns, as well as measurement of
blood pressure. At age 5 years, laboratory screening for pheochromocytoma should begin. Beginning at age 11 years, there should be brain
and complete spine MRI every 2 years to evaluate for CNS lesions, with
particular focus on the inner/petrous temporal bone and posterior
fossa. Beginning at age 11 years, there should also be formal audiology
assessment every 2-3 years to screen for endolymphatic sac tumors.
Formal audiological assessment should occur sooner and more frequently if symptoms such as hearing loss, tinnitus, and vertigo are
present. Beginning at age 15 years, there should be MRI of the abdomen (including kidney, pancreas, and adrenal glands) every 2 years to
evaluate for visceral lesions. At age 15-20 years in asymptomatic individuals, there should be an MRI of internal auditory canals to screen
for endolymphatic sac tumor.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

636.5 Linear Nevus Sebaceous Syndrome
Siddharth Srivastava and Mustafa Sahin
This sporadic condition is characterized by a large facial nevus, neurodevelopmental abnormalities, and systemic defects. The nevus is usually located on the forehead and nose and tends to be midline in its
distribution, although it may affect other locations, such as the scalp
and neck. It may be quite faint during infancy but later becomes hyperkeratotic, with a yellow-­brown appearance.
The most common associated CNS finding is unilateral hemimegalencephaly (enlargement of one cerebral hemisphere), which affects

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3662 Part XXV u The Nervous System
about half of patients. Other structural brain abnormalities include
enlargement of the lateral ventricles, white matter hyperintensity on
T2-­weighted imaging, cortical dysplasia, pachygyria, agyria, agenesis
of the corpus callosum, and Dandy-­Walker malformation. The incidence of epilepsy and intellectual disability is as high as 75% and 60%,
respectively. Focal neurologic signs, including hemiparesis and homonymous hemianopia, may occur.
Other organ systems may be involved, including the eyes (strabismus, retinal abnormalities, coloboma, cataracts, corneal revascularization, ocular hemangiomas, and lipodermoid scleral tumors); heart
(aortic coarctation, ventricular septal defect); kidneys (horseshoe kidney); and skeleton (fibrous dysplasia, skeletal hypoplasia, scoliosis/
kyphoscoliosis, and vitamin D-­resistant hypophosphatemic rickets).
The syndrome is associated with somatic variants in members of
the Ras family of oncogenes, including HRAS (HRas proto-­oncogene,
GTPase), KRAS (KRAS proto-­oncogene, GTPase), and NRAS (neuroblastoma RAS viral oncogene homolog) (see Fig. 636.6).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

636.6 PHACE Syndrome
Siddharth Srivastava and Mustafa Sahin
See also Chapter 691.
The syndrome denotes posterior fossa malformations, hemangiomas, arterial anomalies, coarctation of the aorta and other cardiac
defects, and eye abnormalities (see Chapter 691). It is also referred to
as PHACES syndrome when ventral developmental defects, including sternal clefting and/or a supraumbilical raphe, are present. The
hallmark of the disorder is infantile hemangiomas affecting the face,
neck, and/or scalp. The underlying pathogenesis of PHACE syndrome
remains unknown, though evidence that infantile hemangiomas may
result from abnormal growth and differentiation of hemogenic endothelium highlights some avenues for further investigation. Overall,
there is a female predominance, but the reasons for this association
are unclear.
Other organ systems besides the skin are commonly affected in
PHACE syndrome. Posterior fossa anomalies affect up to 80% of
patients and encompass Dandy-­Walker malformation and cerebellar hypoplasia/dysplasia. Less common structural brain anomalies
include neuronal migration defects (polymicrogyria, heterotopia,
cortical dysplasia), dysgenesis of the corpus callosum or septum pellucidum, and pituitary defects. Congenital heart disease affects up to two
thirds of patients, and common defects are aortic anomalies (coarctation of aorta, dysplasia of aortic arch) and aberrant left subclavian
artery. The facial hemangioma is typically ipsilateral to the aortic arch
anomalies. Arterial anomalies include hypoplasia/dysplasia/altered
anatomic course of cervical, cerebral, and brachiocephalic arteries.
Cerebrovascular anomalies can result in progressive arterial stenosis
and acute ischemic stroke. Ophthalmologic findings include persistent
fetal vasculature (also known as persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous), retinal vascular anomalies, morning glory disc anomaly, optic
nerve hypoplasia, peripapillary staphyloma, coloboma, cataracts, and
microphthalmia. Endocrinopathies (such as hypopituitarism, hypogonadism, hypothyroidism, ectopic thyroid gland, growth hormone deficiency, and diabetes insipidus) can occur. Midline defects of the chest
and abdomen encompass sternal defect, sternal pit, sternal cleft, and
supraumbilical raphe. Dental abnormalities, specifically enamel hypoplasia, can be associated with PHACE syndrome.
There can be an assortment of neurologic symptoms, the most common of which is headaches, specifically migraines. Other reported neurologic symptoms are seizures, cyclical vomiting, developmental delay
(language, gross motor, fine motor), hypotonia, tremor, dysphagia,
opisthotonus, hearing loss (conductive, sensorineural, or mixed), and
cranial nerve deficits. New onset of headaches in an individual with
PHACE syndrome should prompt further evaluation for vessel disease
and cerebral ischemia. Development can be affected: according to a

case series of 29 children with PHACE syndrome, 69% had abnormal
neurodevelopment, including 44% with language delay, 36% with gross
motor delay, and 8% with fine motor delay. Certain medical comorbidities like posterior fossa malformations and oropharyngeal hemangiomas increase the risk for dysphagia. Sensorineural hearing loss may be
caused by involvement of the cranial nerve VIII that is on the same side
as the infantile hemangioma; similarly, conductive hearing loss may be
caused by compression of the eustachian tube that is on the same side
as the infantile hemangioma.
There are clinical diagnostic criteria for PHACE syndrome that
delineate definite PHACE syndrome and possible PHACE syndrome.
Definite PHACE syndrome is defined by either of the following: (1)
infantile hemangioma (>5 cm in diameter) affecting the head/scalp in
combination with one major or two minor criteria or (2) segmental
infantile hemangioma of the neck, upper trunk, or trunk/proximal arm
in combination with two major criteria. Possible PHACE syndrome is
defined by one of the following: (1) infantile hemangioma (>5 cm in
diameter) affecting the head/scalp in combination with one minor criteria; (2) segmental infantile hemangioma of the neck, upper trunk,
or trunk/proximal arm in combination with one major or two minor
criteria; and (3) absence of hemangioma but presence of two major
criteria. Major and minor criteria pertain to arterial, structural brain,
cardiovascular, ocular, and ventral/midline features of the syndrome.
Children newly diagnosed with PHACE syndrome should undergo
a complete physical examination, screening echocardiogram, ophthalmologic examination, hearing screening, and MRI with and
without gadolinium of the brain/neck as well as MRA of the brain/
neck/aortic arch. Results of these baseline evaluations steer further
management. The presence of a severe midline defect would prompt
evaluation with pediatric surgery. Abnormalities on echocardiogram
would require expertise from pediatric cardiology. Anomalies on
ophthalmologic exam would likely require ongoing care. Hearing loss
can be a risk factor for language delay, so affected children should
have hearing screening if not already performed. If there are structural brain abnormalities identified on MRI, evaluation by pediatric
neurology and neurosurgery (in the case of Dandy-­Walker malformation or hydrocephalus) would be necessary. Pituitary defects would
require endocrinologic evaluation. Results from MRA of cervical and
cerebral arteries would classify patients into one of three risk tiers for
cerebrovascular changes and stroke (low risk, intermediate risk, high
risk), each with varying levels of need for follow-­up neuroimaging and
ongoing neurologic care.
Treatments in PHACE syndrome are symptom targeted. The β
blocker propranolol can be used for infantile hemangiomas associated with PHACE syndrome, though there must be careful consideration in the presence of cerebrovascular abnormalities predisposing to
stroke. Treatment of headaches is per standard clinical care, but certain
vasoconstrictive medications, like triptans and ergotamine derivatives,
should be avoided if there are arterial abnormalities. Dysphagia would
require referral for feeding evaluation. Developmental delays should
prompt neurodevelopmental assessment and developmental therapies
such as physical therapy and speech-­language therapy.
LUMBAR syndrome (lower-­segment hemangioma, urogenital
defects, myelopathy of spinal cord, bony deformities, arterial and
anorectal defects, renal anomalies), also called SACRAL syndrome
(spinal dysraphism, anogenital anomalies, cutaneous anomalies, renal-­
urologic anomalies, angioma of lumbosacral localization), is a possible
variant of PHACES syndrome in the lumbosacral region.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

636.7 Incontinentia Pigmenti
Siddharth Srivastava and Mustafa Sahin
Incontinentia pigmenti (IP) is a rare, heritable, multisystem ectodermal disorder that features dermatologic, dental, ocular, and CNS
abnormalities. The phenotype is produced by defects in the X-­linked

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 636 u Neurocutaneous Syndromes
dominant gene IKBKG (previously NEMO), which plays a role in activating the antiapoptotic signaling molecule NF-­kappaB (NF-­κB). In
the majority of males, IP causes embryonic lethality, so affected males
who survive have somatic mosaicism for a pathogenic IKBKG variant or
a 47,XXY karyotype. With respect to a male with IP, some of his daughters may inherit a pathogenic IKBKG variant and hence be affected, but
all of his sons would be unaffected. Among affected females, an abnormal gene product causes apoptosis in cells; therefore highly skewed
X-­inactivation can be a result. With respect to a female with IP, one
third of her offspring are expected to be unaffected females, one third
are expected to be affected females, and one third are expected to be
unaffected males; this ratio accounts for the high rate of miscarriages
in pregnancies with a male conceptus carrying a pathogenic variant in
IKBKG.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND DIAGNOSIS

This disease has four stages, not all of which may occur in a given
patient. The first (bullous) stage is evident at birth or in the first few
weeks of life and consists of erythematous linear streaks and plaques
of vesicles (Fig. 636.15) that are most pronounced on the limbs and
circumferentially on the trunk. The lesions may be confused with
those of herpes simplex, bullous impetigo, or mastocytosis, but the
linear configuration is unique. Histopathologically, epidermal edema
and eosinophil-­filled intraepidermal vesicles are present. Eosinophils
also infiltrate the adjacent epidermis and dermis. Blood eosinophilia
as high as 65% of the white blood cell count is common. The first stage
generally resolves by 4 months of age, but mild, short-­lived recurrences
of blisters may develop during febrile illnesses. In the second (verrucous) stage, as blisters on the distal limbs resolve, they become dry
and hyperkeratotic, forming verrucous plaques. The verrucous plaques
rarely affect the trunk or face and generally involute within 6 months.
Epidermal hyperplasia, hyperkeratosis, dyskeratosis, and papillomatosis are characteristic. The third (pigmentary) stage is the hallmark of
IP. It generally develops over weeks to months and may overlap the earlier phases or, more commonly, begin to appear in the first few months
of life. Hyperpigmentation is more often apparent on the trunk than the
limbs and is distributed in macular whorls, reticulated patches, flecks,
and linear streaks that follow Blaschko lines. The axillae and groin are
characteristically affected. The sites of involvement are not necessarily those of the preceding vesicular and warty lesions. The pigmented
lesions, once present, persist throughout childhood. They generally
begin to fade by early adolescence and often disappear by age 16 years.
Occasionally, the pigmentation remains permanently, particularly in
the groin. Histopathologically, the lesion shows vacuolar degeneration
of the epidermal basal cells and melanin in melanophages of the upper
dermis as a result of incontinence of pigment. In the fourth (atretic)
stage, hairless, anhidrotic, hypopigmented patches or streaks occur as
a late manifestation of IP; they may develop, however, before the hyperpigmentation of stage 3 has resolved. The lesions develop mainly on the
flexor aspect of the lower legs and less often on the arms and trunk. On

Fig. 636.15 Whorled vesicular phase of incontinentia pigmenti.

3663

histology, there are decreased rete ridges (epidermal protrusions) and
sweat gland secretory coils during this stage.
A large percentage of affected children have other dermal/dental
defects. Alopecia, which may be scarring and patchy or diffuse, is most
common on the vertex and occurs in up to 40% of patients. Hair may
be coarse and wooly or sparse and brittle. Fingernails and toenails may
demonstrate pigmentary or dystrophic changes (ridging, pitting), as
well as painful subungual and periungual keratotic tumors. Dental
anomalies consist of late dentition, hypodontia, conical teeth, malocclusion, and impaction.
CNS manifestations are found in up to 30% of affected children and
include seizures, intellectual disability, learning disabilities, microcephaly, hemiplegia/hemiparesis (in the setting of stroke), spasticity, and cerebellar ataxia. Brain MRI in patients can be notable for periventricular
and subcortical white matter changes, ischemic/hemorrhagic infarcts,
hemorrhagic necrosis, dysgenesis of the corpus callosum, cerebral atrophy, cerebellar hypoplasia, cystic changes, and ventricular enlargement.
Ocular anomalies, such as retinal neovascularization, microphthalmos, strabismus, optic nerve atrophy, cataracts, and retrolenticular
masses, occur in up to 77% of affected individuals. Nonetheless, >90%
of patients have normal vision. Notably, retinal neovascularization
could herald abnormalities in the CNS vasculature that predispose the
patient to ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke.
Other medical issues have been reported in IP. Leukocytosis with
eosinophilia can occur. Primary pulmonary hypertension is seen in
some affected individuals.
Diagnosis of IP is made on clinical grounds, although major and
minor criteria have been established to aid in the diagnosis. Satisfaction of the sole major criteria (pertaining to the characteristic skin
lesions in the varying stages) is needed for a clinical diagnosis; lack
of fulfillment of any of the minor criteria may direct the clinician
toward the possibility of another diagnosis. Wood lamp examination
may be useful in older children and adolescents to highlight pigmentary abnormalities. Clinical molecular testing is available, and around
65% of affected females and 16% of affected males have a recurrent
pathogenic variant, an 11.7-­kb deletion of exons 4-­10 of IKBKG. Skin
biopsy may be helpful if the patient has unclear clinical findings and
negative genetic testing. For male patients with negative genetic testing
from blood, a variant may be detectable in skin cells from an affected
region, increasing the utility of a skin biopsy. The differential diagnosis
includes hypomelanosis of Ito, which presents with similar skin manifestations and is often associated with chromosomal mosaicism.

MANAGEMENT

The choice of investigative studies and the plan of management depend
on the occurrence of particular noncutaneous abnormalities. Medical
genetics and genetic counseling can help establish a molecular diagnosis in addition to providing family counseling. Dermatology may be
involved to characterize the nature of skin lesions and to manage skin
manifestations that are extensive. Dentistry can provide teeth implants
along with routine care. If dental issues affect speech or feeding, then
input from speech pathologists and nutritionists may be necessary.
Ophthalmology is important for delineating the presence and extent
of retinal neovascularization (which can be treated with cryotherapy
and laser photocoagulation) and other ocular abnormalities. Cardiology may be necessary if there is pulmonary hypertension. Neurology
can help evaluate and treat relevant concerns such as microcephaly, seizures, and motor abnormalities. A brain MRI is useful if there are focal
neurologic deficits or retinal neovascularization. Finally, developmental medicine can formulate recommendations regarding developmental
and behavioral concerns. Surveillance includes regular ophthalmologic
assessment (monthly until age 4 months, then every 3 months until age
1 year, then every 6 months until age 3 years, then annually thereafter).
Regular evaluation with dentistry and neurologic/neurodevelopmental
assessments are appropriate.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3664 Part XXV u The Nervous System

Chapter 637

Movement Disorders
Jonathan W. Mink
INTRODUCTION

Movement disorders are characterized by impaired voluntary movements or excessive involuntary movements that may result in
abnormalities in posture, tone, balance, or fine motor control. Most
movement disorders in children are characterized by involuntary
movements. These involuntary movements can represent the sole disease manifestation, or they may be one of many signs and symptoms.
Evaluation of movement disorders begins with a comprehensive
history and careful neurologic examination. It is often difficult for
children and caregivers to describe abnormal movements, which
makes observation of the movements by the clinician an essential
component of the evaluation. If the movements are not apparent at
the time of the examination, video examples from home or school can
be invaluable.
There is no specific diagnostic test to differentiate among movement
disorders. The category of movement assists in localizing the pathologic process, whereas the onset of the disorder, age of the patient, and
degree of abnormal motor activity and associated neurologic findings
help organize the investigation.
When considering the type of movement disorder, the following
questions concerning the history and examination of the movement
are helpful:
• What is the distribution of the movements across body parts?
• Are the movements symmetric?
• What is the speed of the involuntary movements? Are they rapid and
fast or slow and sustained?
• When do the movements occur? Are they present at rest? Are they
present with maintained posture or with voluntary actions?
• Are the movements seen in relation to certain postures or body positions?
• Do the abnormal movements occur only with specific tasks?
• Can the child voluntarily suppress the movements, even for a short
time?
• Are the movements stereotyped?
• Are the movements rhythmic?
• What is the temporal pattern of the movements? Are they continuous or intermittent? Do they occur in discrete episodes?
• Are the involuntary movements preceded by an urge to make the
movement?
• Do the movements persist during sleep?
• Are the movements associated with impairment of motor function?
• What factors aggravate or alleviate the movements?
The first decision to be made is whether the movement disorder is
hyperkinetic (characterized by excessive and involuntary movements)
or hypokinetic (characterized by slow voluntary movements and a
general paucity of movement). Hyperkinetic movement disorders are
much more common than hypokinetic disorders in children. Once the
category of movement disorder is recognized, the etiology can be considered. The clinical history, including the birth history, medication/
toxin exposure, trauma, infections, family history, progression of the
involuntary movements, developmental progress, and behavior, should
be explored as the underlying cause is established. Table 637.1 lists the
types and clinical characteristics of selected hyperkinetic movement
disorders. A diagnostic approach to paroxysmal movement disorders is
noted in Figure 637.1; age-­related presentations of paroxysmal movement disorders are noted in Figure 637.2.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

637.1 Ataxias
Peter E. Morrison and Jonathan W. Mink
Ataxia is the inability to make smooth, accurate, and coordinated
movements. It occurs because of a dysfunction of the cerebellum, its
inputs or outputs, its sensory pathways in the posterior columns of
the spinal cord, or a combination of these. Ataxias may be generalized but can also primarily affect the gait, the hands and arms, or the
trunk; they may be acute or chronic, or acquired or genetic (Tables
637.2-­637.8).
Signs and symptoms of ataxia include clumsiness, difficulty walking or sitting, falling to one side, slurred speech, low muscle tone,
intention tremor, dizziness, delayed motor development, or a combination of these. Genetic or chronic causes of cerebellar ataxia
are often characterized by a long duration of symptoms, a positive
family history, muscle weakness and abnormal gait, abnormal tone
and strength, abnormal deep tendon reflexes, pes cavus, and sensory defects. Distinguishing ataxia from vestibular dysfunction may
be difficult; however, labyrinth disorders are often characterized by
severe vertigo, nausea and vomiting, position-­induced vertigo, and a
severe sense of unsteadiness.
Congenital anomalies of the posterior fossa, including Dandy-­
Walker malformation, Chiari malformation, and encephalocele, are
prominently associated with ataxia because of their destruction or
abnormal development of the cerebellum (see Chapter 631.8). MRI

Table 637.1  Selected Types of Involuntary Movement in
Childhood
TYPE

CHARACTERISTICS

Stereotypies (see Chapter 37)

Involuntary, patterned,
coordinated, repetitive, rhythmic
movements that occur in the
same fashion with each repetition

Tics (see Chapter 37)

Involuntary, sudden, rapid, abrupt,
repetitive, nonrhythmic, simple
or complex motor movements
or vocalizations (phonic
productions). Tics are usually
preceded by an urge that is
relieved by carrying out the
movement.

Tremor (see Chapter 637.2)

Oscillating, rhythmic movements
about a fixed point, axis, or plane

Dystonia (see Chapter 637.4)

Intermittent and sustained
involuntary muscle contractions
that produce abnormal postures
and movements of different parts
of the body, often with a twisting
quality

Chorea (see Chapter 637.2)

Involuntary, continual, irregular
movements or movement
fragments with variable rate and
direction that occur unpredictably
and randomly

Ballism

Involuntary, high-­amplitude,
flinging movements typically
occurring proximally. Ballism is
essentially a large-­amplitude
chorea

Athetosis (see Chapter 637.2)

Slow, writhing, continuous,
involuntary movements

Myoclonus (see Chapter 637.3)

Sudden, quick, involuntary muscle
jerks

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 637 u Movement Disorders

3665

Paroxysmal movement disorders

Medical history + physical examination (interictal and ictal, if possible) + videotape (if possible)

Step 1

Confirmed PMDs

Suspected seizures

Step 2
Not
confirmed

Diagnostic algorithm for
epilepsy (vEEG/LTM)
DPMDs

Primary PMDs

PxDx

Start adequate
treatment and
follow-up

Diagnostic algorithm
for FMDs

Brain MRI

Confirmed

Step 3

Suspected FMDs

Specific
diagnostic
algorithm

Secondary or
metabolic
PMDs

Not
confirmed

Confirmed

EAs

Start adequate
treatment and
follow-up

Start adequate
treatment and
follow-up

Specific
diagnostic
algorithm

Step 4

Gene panel for movement disorders / clinical exome sequencing

Step 5

WES / WGS / consider other genetic tests

Fig. 637.1 Operative algorithm for pediatric-­onset PMDs. DPMDs, developmental PMDs; EAs, episodic ataxias; FMDs, functional movement disorders; LTM, long-­term EEG monitoring; PxDx, paroxysmal dyskinesias; vEEG, video electroencephalogram; WES, whole exome sequencing; WGS,
whole genome sequencing. (Modified from Garone G, Capuano A, Travaglini L, et al. Clinical and genetic overview of paroxysmal moment disorders
and episodic ataxias. Inter J Mol Sci. 2020;21:3603, Fig. 5.)

Acquired PMD
Episodic ataxia
PED
PNKD
PKD
Hemiplegic attacks
BMEI spectrum
TDI
BPTI
Paroxysmal tonic upgaze
Oculogyric crisis
Other PEM
Exaggerated startle
BNSM
Neonatal
age

Infancy

Childhood

Adolescence

Adulthood

Fig. 637.2 Onset of different paroxysmal movement disorders (PMDs) according to age. BNSM, benign neonatal sleep myoclonus; BMEI, benign

myoclonus of early infancy; BPTI, benign paroxysmal torticollis of infancy; PEM, paroxysmal eye movements; PED, paroxysmal exercise-­induced
dyskinesia; PKD, paroxysmal kinesigenic dyskinesia; PNKD, paroxysmal nonkinesigenic dyskinesia. (From Garone G, Capuano A, Travaglini L, et al.
Clinical and genetic overview of paroxysmal moment disorders and episodic ataxias. Inter J Mol Sci. 2020;21:3603, Fig. 1.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3666 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 637.2  Selected Causes of Ataxia in Childhood
CONGENITAL CAUSES
Agenesis of vermis of the cerebellum
Aplasia or dysplasia of the cerebellum
Basilar impression
Cerebellar dysplasia with microgyria, macrogyria, or agyria
Cervical spinal bifida with herniation of the cerebellum (Chiari
malformation type 3)
Chiari malformation
Dandy-­Walker syndrome
Encephalocele
Hydrocephalus (progressive)
Hypoplasia of the cerebellum
DEGENERATIVE AND/OR GENETIC CAUSES
Acute intermittent cerebellar ataxia
Ataxia, retinitis pigmentosa, deafness, vestibular abnormality, and
intellectual deterioration
Ataxia-­telangiectasia
Biemond posterior column ataxia
Cerebellar ataxia with deafness, anosmia, absent caloric responses,
nonreactive pupils, and hyporeflexia
Cockayne syndrome
Dentate cerebellar ataxia (dyssynergia cerebellaris progressiva)
Familial ataxia with macular degeneration
Friedreich ataxia
Hereditary cerebellar ataxia, intellectual retardation, choreoathetosis,
and eunuchoidism
Hereditary cerebellar ataxia with myotonia and cataracts
Hypertrophic interstitial neuritis
Marie ataxia
Marinesco-­Sjögren syndrome
Multiple system atrophy
Pelizaeus-­Merzbacher disease
Periodic attacks of vertigo, diplopia, and ataxia: autosomal dominant
inheritance
Posterior and lateral column difficulties, nystagmus, and muscle
atrophy
Progressive cerebellar ataxia and epilepsy
Ramsay Hunt syndrome (myoclonic seizures and ataxia)
Roussy-­Lévy disease
Spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA); olivopontocerebellar ataxias
Vanishing white matter syndrome
ENDOCRINOLOGIC CAUSES
Hypothyroidism (acquired or congenital)
INFECTIOUS, POSTINFECTIOUS, AND IMMUNE INFLAMMATORY
CAUSES
Acute cerebellar ataxia
Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis
Autoimmune (anti–glutamic acid decarboxylase, anti–γ-­aminobutyric
acid-­B receptor antibodies, idiopathic, gluten ataxia, Miller-­Fisher
syndrome, Hashimoto encephalopathy, lupus)
Cerebellar abscess
Cerebellitis
Coxsackievirus
Diphtheria
Echovirus
Fisher syndrome
Infectious mononucleosis (Epstein-­Barr virus infection)
Infectious polyneuropathy
Japanese B encephalitis
Multiple sclerosis
Mumps encephalitis
Mycoplasma pneumonia
Paraneoplastic (opsoclonus-­myoclonus-­ataxia syndrome)
Pertussis
Polio
Postbacterial meningitis
Rubeola
Tuberculosis
Typhoid
Varicella

METABOLIC CAUSES
Abetalipoproteinemia
Argininosuccinic aciduria
Ataxia with vitamin E deficiency (AVED)
Congenital disorders of glycosylation
GM2 gangliosidosis (late)
Hartnup disease
Hyperalaninemia
Hyperammonemia I and II (urea cycle defects)
Hypoglycemia
Kearns-­Sayre syndrome
Leigh disease
Maple syrup urine disease (intermittent)
Myoclonic epilepsy with ragged red fibers (MERRF)
Metachromatic leukodystrophy
Mitochondrial complex defects (I, III, IV)
Multiple carboxylase deficiency (biotinidase deficiency)
Neuronal ceroid-­lipofuscinosis
Neuropathy, ataxia, retinitis pigmentosa (NARP)
Niemann-­Pick disease (late infantile)
5-­Oxoprolinuria
Pyruvate decarboxylase deficiency
Refsum disease
Sialidosis
Triose-­phosphate isomerase deficiency
Tryptophanuria
Wernicke encephalopathy
NEOPLASTIC CAUSES
Frontal lobe tumors
Hemispheric cerebellar tumors
Midline cerebellar tumors
Neuroblastoma
Pontine tumors (primarily gliomas)
Spinal cord tumors
PRIMARY PSYCHOGENIC CAUSES
Functional disorder
TOXIC CAUSES
Alcohol
Benzodiazepines
Carbamazepine
Clonazepam
Dextromethorphan
Lead encephalopathy
Neuroblastoma
Phenobarbital
Phenytoin
Primidone
Tic paralysis poisoning
TRAUMATIC CAUSES
Acute cerebellar edema
Acute frontal lobe edema
VASCULAR CAUSES
Angioblastoma of the cerebellum
Basilar migraine
Cerebellar embolism
Cerebellar hemorrhage
Cerebellar thrombosis
Posterior cerebellar artery disease
Vasculitis
von Hippel-­Lindau disease

Modified from Jafar-­Nejad P, Maricich SM, Zoghbi HY. The cerebellum and the hereditary ataxias. In: Swaiman KF, Ashwal S, Ferriero DM, et al., eds. Swaiman’s Pediatric Neurology,
5th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2012: Box 67-­1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 637 u Movement Disorders

3667

Table 637.3  Treatable Causes of Inherited Ataxia
DISORDER

METABOLIC ABNORMALITY

DISTINGUISHING CLINICAL FEATURES

TREATMENT

Acute disseminated
encephalomyelitis

Demyelination

Positive MRI findings

Steroids, IVIG, rituximab

Ataxia with vitamin E
deficiency

Pathogenic variants in α-­tocopherol
transfer protein

Ataxia, areflexia, retinopathy

Vitamin E

Bassen-­Kornzweig
syndrome

Abetalipoproteinemia

Acanthocytosis, retinitis pigmentosa, fat
malabsorption

Vitamin E

Hartnup disease

Tryptophan malabsorption

Pellagra rash, intermittent ataxia

Niacin

Familial episodic ataxia
type 1 and type 2

Pathogenic variants in potassium
channel (KCNA1) and α1A
voltage-­gated calcium channel,
respectively

Episodic attacks, worse with pregnancy or
birth control pills

Acetazolamide

Multiple carboxylase
deficiency

Biotinidase deficiency

Alopecia, recurrent infections, variable
organic aciduria

Biotin

Mitochondrial complex
defects

Complexes I, III, IV

Encephalomyelopathy

Possibly riboflavin, CoQ10,
dichloroacetate

Opsoclonus-­myoclonus-­
ataxia syndrome

Paraneoplastic or spontaneous
autoimmune

Underlying neuroblastoma or
autoantibodies

Steroids, IVIG, rituximab

Primary CoQ10 deficiency
(multiple types)

Mitochondrial dysfunction

Seizures, sensorineural hearing loss, lactic
acidosis, cardiomyopathies

Possibly CoQ10

Pyruvate dehydrogenase
deficiency

Block in E-­M and Krebs cycle interface

Lactic acidosis, ataxia

Ketogenic diet, possibly
dichloroacetate

Refsum disease

Phytanic acid, α-­hydroxylase

Retinitis pigmentosa, cardiomyopathy,
hypertrophic neuropathy, ichthyosis

Dietary restriction of
phytanic acid

Urea cycle defects

Urea cycle enzymes

Hyperammonemia

Protein restriction, arginine,
benzoate, α-­ketoacids

CoQ10, Coenzyme Q10; E-­M, mitochondrial electron transport; IVIG, intravenous immunoglobulin.
Modified from Stumpf DA. The inherited ataxias. Pediatr Neurol. 1985;1:129–133, Table 1; and from Jafar-­Nejad P, Maricich SM, Zoghbi HY. The cerebellum and the hereditary ataxias.
In: Swaiman KF, Ashwal S, Ferriero DM, et al., eds. Swaiman’s Pediatric Neurology, 5th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2012: Table 67-­1.

Table 637.4  Hereditary Ataxias Caused by Nucleotide Repeat Expansions: Clinical Findings
GENE*

DISORDER

MOI

MOST COMMONLY INVOLVED GENES
ATN1
DRPLA
AD

DISTINGUISHING NONATAXIC CLINICAL FEATURES

COMMENT

Chorea, dementia, myoclonus, seizures; mimics
Huntington disease

• Anticipation is prominent
• More common in Japan

ATXN1

SCA1

AD

Peripheral neuropathy, pyramidal signs; early bulbar
features; occasional cognitive decline

• Anticipation is more likely with
paternal transmission.

ATXN2

SCA2

AD

↓ DTRs, dementia, peripheral neuropathy, slow saccadic
eye movements

• Anticipation is more likely with
paternal transmission
• Large Cuban founder
population

ATXN3

SCA3

AD

Amyotrophy, fasciculations, sensory loss; lid retraction,
nystagmus, and ↓ saccade velocity; pyramidal and
extrapyramidal signs; shortened life span

• Anticipation may be
more likely with paternal
transmission
• Large Portuguese founder
population
• Also known as Machado-­
Joseph disease

ATXN7

SCA7

AD

Visual loss with retinopathy; often rapidly progressive;
shortened life span

Anticipation is prominent with
more marked repeat expansions
with paternal transmission

ATXN8

SCA8

AD

Slowly progressive, sometimes brisk DTRs, ↓ vibration sense;
rarely, cognitive impairment in persons with earlier onset

Anticipation is more likely with
maternal transmission

ATXN8OS

Continued
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3668 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 637.4  Hereditary Ataxias Caused by Nucleotide Repeat Expansions: Clinical Findings—cont’d
GENE*

DISORDER

MOI

DISTINGUISHING NONATAXIC CLINICAL FEATURES

COMMENT

ATXN10

SCA10

AD

Seizures in certain families

• Anticipation can occur with
paternal transmission
• Large Mexican founder
population

CACNA1A

SCA6

AD

May begin with episodic ataxia, very slow progression;
onset often after age 50 yr; normal life span

• Anticipation is not seen
• See Table 637.6 for ataxia
caused by missense variants

FXN

Friedreich ataxia

AR

Generally childhood onset with slowly progressive ataxia,
absent tendon reflexes, Babinski responses, posterior
column sensory loss, cardiomyopathy, scoliosis, pes
cavus, and diabetes; in some: onset ≥25 yr, slower
progression, and retained reflexes

Anticipation is not seen

RFC1

RFC1 CANVAS/
spectrum
disorder

AR

Spectrum ranges from typical cerebellar ataxia,
neuropathy, and vestibular areflexia syndrome (CANVAS),
to cerebellar, sensory, and vestibular impairment, to
more limited phenotypes involving predominantly or
exclusively one of the systems involved in balance control

Anticipation is not seen

TBP

SCA17

AD

Mental deterioration; occasional chorea, dystonia,
myoclonus, epilepsy

Anticipation is infrequently
observed

Normal sensation

Common in Japan

LESS COMMONLY INVOLVED GENES
BEAN1
SCA31
AD
(OMIM 117210)
FMR1

Fragile
X-­associated
tremor/ataxia
syndrome
(FXTAS)

XL

• Anticipation occurs almost
exclusively with maternal
transmission
• Most common X-­linked ataxia;
occurs in male and female
premutation carriers

NOP56

SCA36

AD

Hyperreflexia, muscle fasciculations, tongue atrophy

Insufficient evidence for
anticipation

PPP2R2B

SCA12
(OMIM 604326)

AD

Action tremor in the fourth decade, cognitive/psychiatric
disorders, including dementia, hyperreflexia, slowly
progressive ataxia, subtle parkinsonism possible

Insufficient evidence for
anticipation

*Genes are listed in alphabetic order within prevalence categories.
DRPLA, Dentatorubral-­pallidoluysian atrophy; DTR, deep tendon reflex; SCA, spinocerebellar ataxia.
From Perlman S. Hereditary ataxia overview. 1998 Oct 28 [Updated 2022 Jun 16]. In: Adam MP, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, et al., eds. GeneReviews® [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of
Washington, Seattle; 1993-­2023, Table 1.

Table 637.5  Hereditary Ataxias Caused by Nucleotide Repeat Expansions: Molecular Genetics

GENE1

PATHOGENIC
VARIANTS (%)

NUCLEOTIDE
REPEAT (AMINO
ACID)

REPEAT
LOCATION

NORMAL
REPEAT
NUMBER

FULL-­PENETRANCE
PATHOGENIC
REPEAT NUMBER

ATN1

100

CAG (Gln)

Exon 5

6-­35

≥48

ATXN1

100

CAG (Gln)

Exon 8

6-­35

≥39

ATXN2

100

CAG (Gln)

Exon 1

≤31

≥33

ATXN3

100

CAG (Gln)

Exon 8

12-­44

60-­87

ATXN7

100

CAG (Gln)

Exon 1

4-­19

≥36

ATXN8

100

CAG (Gln)

Exon 1

∼80

Unknown

ATXN8OS

100

CTG

3′ UTR

15-­50 CTA/CTG

≥71-­1300 CTA/CTG2

Penetrance is
<100%2

ATXN10

100

ATTCT

Intron 9

10-­32

≥800

Repeat
interruptions
are associated
with presence of
seizures

COMMENT

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 637 u Movement Disorders

3669

Table 637.5  Hereditary Ataxias Caused by Nucleotide Repeat Expansions: Molecular Genetics—cont’d

GENE1

PATHOGENIC
VARIANTS (%)

NUCLEOTIDE
REPEAT (AMINO
ACID)

REPEAT
LOCATION

NORMAL
REPEAT
NUMBER

FULL-­PENETRANCE
PATHOGENIC
REPEAT NUMBER

BEAN1

100

TGGAA

Intron 6

0

2.5-­to 3.8-­kb insertion

CACNA1A3

>99

CAG (Gln)

Exon 7

≤18

20-­33

See Table 637.6 for
phenotype
associated with
variants that are
not nucleotide
repeat disorders

FMR1

>99

CGG

5′ UTR

5-­44

≥200

Premutation
alleles: 55-­200
CGG repeats

FXN

∼98

GAA

Intron 1

5-­33

≥66

In about 5% of
affected persons
one FXN allele
is an expanded
GAA repeat
and one is a
pathogenic
missense variant

NOP56

100

GGCCTG

Intron 1

3-­14

≥650

PPP2R2B

100

CAG

Promoter

7-­31

51-­78

RFC1

100

AAGGG4

Intron 2

Unknown

∼400 to ∼2000

TBP

100

CAG or CAA (Gln)

Exon 3

25-­40

≥49

COMMENT

ACAGG repeat
expansion has
been reported
in three persons
from Asian and
Asian Pacific
populations4

Based on Resources for Genetics Professionals — Genetic Disorders Caused by Nucleotide Repeat Expansions and Contractions
1Genes are listed in alphabetic order.
2Although penetrance less than 100% has been reported at all repeat sizes, higher penetrance is reported for CTA/CTG repeat sizes of 80-­250.
3The majority of CACNA1A pathogenic variants are CAG repeat expansions associated with spinocerebellar ataxia type 6. Heterozygous CACNA1A missense, nonsense, splice site,
frameshift, and exon/multiexon deletions have been reported in individuals with episodic ataxia type 2 and progressive cerebellar ataxia.
4RFC1 intron 2 contains a microsatellite region with variable benign AAAAG repeats (range: 11-­200 repeats) and/or benign AAAGG repeats (range: 40-­1000 repeats). Interruption of
the benign AAAAG/AAAGG repeated units with biallelic pathogenic AAGGG expansions has been identified in individuals with RFC1 CANVAS/spectrum disorder.
From Perlman S. Hereditary Ataxia overview. 1998 Oct 28 [Updated 2022 Jun 16]. In: Adam MP, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, et al., eds. GeneReviews® [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of
Washington, Seattle; 1993-­2023, Table 2.

Table 637.6  Most Common Hereditary Ataxias (Excluding Nucleotide Repeat Disorders)
PHENOTYPE
GENE1

MOI

ATAXIA

SPASTICITY

AFG3L2

AD

+

+

AR
+

OTHER PHENOTYPIC
FEATURES/COMMENTS

DESIGNATION/GENEREVIEW/OMIM

Ophthalmoparesis, slow
saccades, ptosis3

SCA28 (OMIM 610246)

Downbeat nystagmus,
fasciculations

SCAR10 (OMIM 613728)

SCAR5 (OMIM 614487)

ANO10

AR

+

APTX

AR

+

Early-­onset ataxia, oculomotor
apraxia, extrapyramidal
features, sensorimotor
neuropathy, hypoalbuminemia;
secondary coenzyme
Q10 deficiency (see primary
coenzyme Q10 deficiency)

Ataxia with oculomotor apraxia type 1

ATM

AR

+

Early-­onset ataxia, oculomotor
apraxia, extrapyramidal
features, immunodeficiency,
cancer risk, ↑ alpha-­fetoprotein

Ataxia-­telangiectasia

CACNA1A2

AD

+

Episodic ataxia type 2 (OMIM 108500)
Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3670 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 637.6  Most Common Hereditary Ataxias (Excluding Nucleotide Repeat Disorders)—cont’d
PHENOTYPE

OTHER PHENOTYPIC
FEATURES/COMMENTS

DESIGNATION/GENEREVIEW/OMIM

+

Adult onset, slowly progressive

SCA15/16 (OMIM 606658)

+

Congenital, nonprogressive

SCA29 (OMIM 117360)

+

Adult onset, slowly progressive

SCA13

GENE1

MOI

ATAXIA

ITPR1

AD
AD3
AD3

KCNC3

SPASTICITY

Congenital, nonprogressive
KCND34

AD

+

SCA19/22 (OMIM 605411)

PRKCG

AD

+

SCA14

SACS

AR

+

+

Early-­onset ataxia with spastic
paraparesis and axonal-­
demyelinating sensorimotor
neuropathy; hypointense
pontine stripes on T2-­
weighted MRI5

ARSACS (SPAX6)

SETX6

AR

+

+

Early-­onset ataxia, oculomotor
apraxia with ↑ alpha-­
fetoprotein5

Ataxia with oculomotor apraxia type
2 (SCAR1)

SPG7

AR

+

+

Variable spasticity and cerebellar
ataxia5

Spastic paraplegia 7

SPTBN2

AD

+

SCA5 (OMIM 600224)

AR
SYNE17

SCAR14 (OMIM 615386)

AR

+

+

Cerebellar ataxia, variable
spasticity, and further
multisystemic neurologic
damage5

ARCA1 (SCAR8) (see SYNE1 deficiency)

Based on Synofzik & Schüle [2017] and Galatolo et al. [2018].
1Genes are listed in alphabetic order.
2Allelic disorders include familial hemiplegic migraine and spinocerebellar ataxia type 6.
3The disorder may occur as the result of a de novo pathogenic variant.
4Allelic disorder: Brugada syndrome.
5Synofzik and Schüle [2017].
6Allelic disorder: amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
7Allelic phenotype: arthrogryposis multiplex congenita (see SYNE1 deficiency).
AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; ARCA, autosomal recessive cerebellar ataxia; MOI, mode of inheritance; OMIM, Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man; SCA,
spinocerebellar ataxia; SCAR, spinocerebellar ataxia, autosomal recessive.
From Perlman S. Hereditary Ataxia overview. 1998 Oct 28 [Updated 2022 Jun 16]. In: Adam MP, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, et al., eds. GeneReviews [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of
Washington, Seattle; 1993-­2023, Table 3.

Table 637.7  The Hereditary Spastic Ataxias
SPASTIC ATAXIA (MIM#)

GENE

AGE OF ONSET (YR)

FEATURES

SPAX1 (108600)

VAMP1

MODE OF INHERITANCE

10-­20 yr

Progressive leg spasticity, dysarthria,
ocular movement abnormalities

SPAX2 (611302)

KIF1C

1-­16 yr

Frequent falls, ataxia, head tremor,
hyperreflexia, fasciculations

SPAX3/ARSAL (611390)

MARS2

AR

2-­59 yr; mean 15 yr

Ataxia and spasticity

SPAX4 (613672)

MTPAP

AR

Early childhood

Ataxia, spastic paraparesis, dysarthria,
optic atrophy, upper limb hypertonia

SPAX5 (614487)

AFG3L2

AR

Childhood

Spasticity, ataxia, oculomotor apraxia,
dystonia, myoclonic epilepsy

SPAX6/SACS/ARCSACS
(270660)

SACS

AR

Childhood

Spasticity and ataxia, very slow course,
stops progressing after age 20

SPAX7

Unknown

AD

Infancy to 20 yr

Symmetric ataxia, dysarthria, pyramidal
signs, optic atrophy

SPAR (607565)

Unknown

—

15-­35 yr

Later onset: spastic paraplegia
Early onset + ataxia, mental retardation

From Jafar-­Nejad P, Maricich SM, Zoghbi H. The cerebellum and the hereditary ataxias. In: Swaiman KF, Ashwal S, Ferriero DM, et al., eds. Swaiman’s Pediatric Neurology, 6th ed.
Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2018: Table 91-­5.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 637 u Movement Disorders

3671

Table 637.8  Genetic and Metabolic Disorders that Can Cause a Spastic-­Ataxic Syndrome

AGE AT ONSET

TREATMENT
AVAILABLE

Abetalipoproteinemia (MIM #200100)

C

Yes

Adrenomyeloneuropathy (MIM
#300100)

A

Ataxia with (primary) vitamin E
deficiency (MIM #277460)

DIAGNOSTIC TESTS,
IN ADDITION TO
METABOLIC TESTS

MODE OF
INHERITANCE

GENES

Blood lipid profile,
vitamin E

AR

MTP

Yes

MRI spinal cord, blood
VLCFA

X-­linked

ABCD1

C

Yes

Blood vitamin E

AR

TTPA

CAMOS (also SCAR5; MIM #606937)*

C

No

—

AR

ZNF592

CARASIL (MIM #600142)

A

No

MRI

AR

HTRA1

Cerebral amyloid angiopathy:
presenile dementia with spastic
ataxia (MIM #176500)*

A

No

MRI

AD

ITM2B

Cerebral folate deficiency (MIM
#613068)

C

Yes

CSF folates

AR

FOLR1

Childhood-­onset spastic ataxia
with optic atrophy and mental
retardation (MIM %270500)*

C

No

—

AR

Unknown

Coenzyme Q10 deficiency (MIM
#607426)

C

Yes

—

AR

>3 different
genes

Female carriers of EIEE1 (MIM
#308350)*

A

No

—

X-­linked

ARX

Gaucher disease type III (MIM
#231000)

C-­A

Yes

—

AR

GBA

Glutaric acidemia II (MIM #231680)

C

Yes

MRI

AR

ETFA, ETFB,
ETFDH

GM2 gangliosidosis (MIM #272800)

A

No

MRI

AR

HEXA, HEXB,
GM2A

Hereditary spastic ataxia with
congenital miosis (MIM%108650)
(SPAX7)*

C

No

—

AD

Unknown

Krabbe disease (MIM #245200)

C-­A

No

MRI

AR

GALC

LBSL (MIM #611105)*

C-­A

No

MRI

AR

DARS2

Megalencephalic
leukoencephalopathy with
subcortical cysts (MIM #604004)*

C

No

MRI

AR

MLC1

Metachromatic leukodystrophy (MIM
#250100)

C-­A

Yes

MRI

AR

ARSA

Nonketotic hyperglycinemia (MIM
#605899)

C-­A

Yes

CSF amino acids

AR

>3 different
genes

Optic atrophy ± deafness,
ophthalmoplegia, myopathy, ataxia,
neuropathy (MIM #605290)*

C

No

—

AD

OPA1

PHARC (MIM #612674)*

C

No

—

AR

ABHD12

Triple H syndrome (MIM #238970)*

C-­A

Yes

Blood ammonia, amino
acids

AR

SLC25A15

Type III 3-­methylglutaconic aciduria
(MIM #258501)*

C

No

Urine organic acids

AR

OPA3

Vanishing white matter
leukodystrophy (#603896)*

C

No

MRI

AR

>3 different
genes

*OMIM (Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man).
A, Adult onset; C, childhood onset; C-­A, all ages possible, predominantly onset in adolescence; CAMOS, cerebellar ataxia with mental retardation, optic atrophy, and skin
abnormalities; CARASIL, cerebral arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy; EIEE1, early infantile epileptic encephalopathy 1; LBSL, leukoencephalopathy
with brainstem and spinal cord involvement and lactate elevation; MIM%, phenotype description or locus, molecular basis unknown; MIM#, phenotype description, molecular basis
known; MRI, brain MRI unless otherwise stated; when MRI is indicated, a typical or pathognomonic pattern can be recognized; PHARC, polyneuropathy, hearing loss, ataxia, retinitis
pigmentosa, and cataract; triple H, hyperornithinemia-­hyperammonemia-­homocitrullinuria; VLCFA, very long-­chain fatty acids.
Modified from deBot ST, Willemsen MAAP, Vermeer S, et al. Reviewing the genetic causes of spastic-­ataxias. Neurology. 2012;79:1507–1514, Table 2.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3672 Part XXV u The Nervous System

A

B

Fig. 637.3 Molar tooth syndrome. A, Sagittal T1-­weighted MR image
shows hypoplasia of the superior cerebellar vermis with upward bowing
of the roof of the fourth ventricle. B, Axial T2-­weighted image shows
the molar tooth at the level of the midbrain, the hallmark of Joubert
syndrome and related disorders (JSRD). (From Rollins N. Congenital
brain malformations. In: Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic
Imaging, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019, Fig. 31.29AB, p. 286.)

is the method of choice for investigating congenital abnormalities of the
cerebellum, vermis, and related structures. Agenesis of the cerebellar
vermis presents in infancy with generalized hypotonia and decreased
deep tendon reflexes. Delayed motor milestones and truncal ataxia are
typical. Joubert syndrome and related disorders are autosomal recessive disorders marked by developmental delay, hypotonia, abnormal
eye movements, abnormal respirations, and a distinctive malformation
of the cerebellum and brainstem that manifests as the “molar tooth
sign” on axial MRI (Fig. 637.3). Pathogenic variants in more than 21
different genes are associated with Joubert syndrome, but only approximately 50% of patients have demonstrated a pathogenic variant.
The major infectious or postinfectious causes of ataxia include acute
cerebellar ataxia, infectious cerebellitis, immune-­mediated cerebellitis,
and acute labyrinthitis. Acute cerebellar ataxia occurs primarily in children 1-­3 years of age and is a diagnosis of exclusion. The condition often
follows a viral illness, such as varicella virus, coxsackievirus, or echovirus infection, by 2-­3 weeks. It is thought to represent an autoimmune
response to the viral agent affecting the cerebellum (see Chapter 643).
The onset is typically sudden, and the truncal ataxia can be so severe
that the child is unable to stand or sit. Vomiting may occur initially,
but fever and nuchal rigidity are absent because of the lack of meningeal involvement. Horizontal nystagmus is evident in ∼50% of cases; if
the child is able to speak, dysarthria may be impressive. Examination
of the cerebrospinal fluid is typically normal at the onset of ataxia, but a
mild lymphocytic pleocytosis (10-­30/mm3) is not unusual. Later in the
course, the cerebrospinal fluid protein undergoes a moderate elevation.
The ataxia begins to improve in a few weeks but may persist for as long
as 3 months, and rarely longer than that. The incidence of acute cerebellar ataxia appears to have declined with increased rates of vaccination
against varicella. The prognosis for complete recovery is excellent. A
small number of patients have long-­term sequelae, including behavioral
and speech disorders, as well as ataxia and incoordination. Acute cerebellitis, in contrast, is a more severe form of cerebellar ataxia characterized by abnormalities on MRI scans, more severe symptoms, and a
worse long-­term prognosis. Infectious agents include Epstein-­Barr virus,
mycoplasma, mumps, and influenza virus. An inflammatory process
such as hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis may involve the cerebellum. Cerebellar abscesses can also occur with bacterial infections. In
many, the etiology is unknown, but autoimmune cerebellitis may represent some of these unknown cases. Clinically, patients may present with
ataxia, increased intracranial pressure from obstructive hydrocephalus,
headache, and fever. Acute labyrinthitis may be difficult to differentiate
from acute cerebellar ataxia in a toddler. The condition is associated with
middle ear infections and presents with intense vertigo, vomiting, and
abnormalities in labyrinthine function.
Toxic causes of ataxia include alcohol, thallium (which is used
occasionally in homes as a pesticide), dextromethorphan, and

Fig. 637.4 Conjunctival telangiectasia in a patient with ataxia-­
telangiectasia. (From Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, et al., eds.
Bradley’s Neurology in Clinical Practice, 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2016, Fig. 97.6, p. 1468.)

anticonvulsants, particularly phenytoin and carbamazepine, when
serum levels exceed the usual therapeutic range.
Brain tumors (see Chapter 546), including tumors of the cerebellum and frontal lobe, may present with ataxia. Cerebellar tumors cause
ataxia because of direct disruption of cerebellar function or indirectly
because of increased intracranial pressure from compression of the
fourth ventricle. Frontal lobe tumors may cause ataxia as a consequence
of destruction or interruption of the associated fibers connecting the
frontal lobe with the cerebellum or because of increased intracranial
pressure. Neuroblastoma (see Chapter 547) may be associated with a
paraneoplastic encephalopathy characterized by progressive ataxia,
myoclonic jerks, and opsoclonus (nonrhythmic, conjugate horizontal
and vertical oscillations of the eyes).
Several metabolic disorders are characterized by ataxia, including
abetalipoproteinemia, arginosuccinic aciduria, and Hartnup disease
(see Table 637.2). Abetalipoproteinemia (Bassen-­Kornzweig disease)
is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by a pathogenic variant in the
microsomal triglyceride transfer protein (MTP). This disorder begins
in childhood with steatorrhea and failure to thrive. A blood smear
shows acanthocytosis, which consists of spiculated red blood cells.
Serum chemistries reveal decreased levels of cholesterol and triglycerides and absent serum β-­lipoproteins. Neurologic signs become evident
by late childhood and consist of ataxia, retinitis pigmentosa, peripheral
neuritis, abnormalities of position and vibration sense, muscle weakness, and intellectual disability. Vitamin E is undetectable in the serum
of patients with neurologic symptoms. In addition, ataxia may be one
manifestation of a mitochondrial disorder; these include myoclonic
epilepsy with ragged red fibers (MERFF), Kearns-­Sayre syndrome,
POLG1 pathogenic variants, and Charlevoix-­Saguenay syndrome.
Degenerative diseases of the central nervous system represent
an important group of ataxic disorders of childhood because of the
genetic consequences and poor prognosis. Ataxia-­telangiectasia, an
autosomal recessive condition, is the most common of the degenerative
ataxias and is heralded by ataxia beginning at approximately age 2 and
progressing to loss of ambulation by adolescence. Ataxia-­telangiectasia
is caused by pathogenic variants in ATM. ATM is a phosphatidylinositol-­3 kinase that phosphorylates proteins involved in DNA repair and
cell-­cycle control. Oculomotor apraxia of horizontal gaze, defined as
difficulty shifting the gaze from one object to another and overshooting the target with lateral movement of the head, followed by refixating the eyes, is a frequent finding. In addition, strabismus, hypometric
saccade pursuit abnormalities, and nystagmus are often seen. Ataxia-­
telangiectasia may also present with chorea (see Chapter 637.2) rather
than ataxia. The telangiectasia becomes evident by mid-­childhood
and is found on the bulbar conjunctiva, over the bridge of the nose,
and on the ears and exposed surfaces of the extremities (Fig. 637.4).
Examination of the skin shows a loss of elasticity. Abnormalities of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 637 u Movement Disorders
immunologic function that lead to frequent sinopulmonary infections
include decreased serum and secretory immunoglobulin (Ig) A, as well
as diminished IgG2, IgG4, and IgE levels in more than 50% of patients.
Children with ataxia-­telangiectasia have a 50-­to 100-­fold increased
risk of developing lymphoreticular tumors (lymphoma, leukemia, and
Hodgkin disease) and brain tumors. Additional laboratory abnormalities include an increased incidence of chromosome breaks, particularly
of chromosome 14, and elevated levels of α-­fetoprotein. Death typically
results from infection or tumor dissemination.
Friedreich ataxia is inherited as an autosomal recessive disorder involving the spinocerebellar tracts, dorsal columns in the spinal
cord, pyramidal tracts, and cerebellum and medulla. Most patients are
homozygous for a GAA trinucleotide repeat expansion in the noncoding region of the gene coding for the mitochondrial protein frataxin.
Pathogenic variants cause oxidative injury associated with excessive
iron deposits in mitochondria. The onset of ataxia is somewhat later
than in ataxia-­telangiectasia but usually occurs before the age of 10.
The ataxia is slowly progressive and involves the lower extremities to
a greater degree than the upper extremities. Examination will demonstrate a positive Romberg test and absent deep tendon reflexes
(particularly at the ankle); the plantar response is typically extensor
(Babinski sign). Patients develop a characteristic explosive, dysarthric
speech; nystagmus is present in most children. Although patients may
appear apathetic, their intelligence is preserved. They may have significant weakness of the distal musculature of the hands and feet. Marked
loss of vibration and joint position sense is common and is caused by
degeneration of the posterior columns. Friedreich ataxia is also characterized by skeletal abnormalities, including high-­arched feet (pes
cavus) and hammer toes, as well as progressive kyphoscoliosis. Results
of electrophysiologic studies, including visual, auditory brainstem, and
somatosensory-­evoked potentials, are often abnormal. Hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy with progression to intractable congestive heart failure is the cause of death for most patients.
In addition to ataxia-­telangiectasia and Friedreich ataxia, there are
more than 40 other known inherited causes of either autosomal dominant or recessive forms of ataxia (Fig. 637.5; see Tables 637.4-­637.8).
More specifically, there are more than 20 dominantly inherited spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs), some of which are also repeat expansion
PURE FORMS
PYRAMIDAL
SCA12

SCA35

SCA6

NYSTAGMUS

VISUAL
IMPAIRMENT

SCA31

SCA10

SCA7
SCA1

SCA15-16

NE

SCA28

UR

SCA4

US

SCA25

CU

LA
R

NO
M

IC

SCA3
SCA18

NI
S

M

AU
TO

OM

SCA36

PA

RK

IN

SO

SCA2

HEARING
LOSS

SCA17

SCA21

DYST
ONIA

CH

NT
ME RS
VE DE
MO SOR
DI

SCA8

EA
OR

SCA27

DRPLA

SCA13
COGNITIVE
IMPAIRMENT

Fig. 637.5 Organization of spinocerebellar ataxias (SCA) according to
main clinical features. (From Rossi M, Perez-­Lloret S, Doldan L, et al.
Autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxias: a systematic review of clinical
features. Eur J Neurol. 2014;21:607–615, Fig. 2.)

3673

disorders and can present in childhood. These include those associated
with CAG (polyglutamine) trinucleotide repeats and noncoding microsatellite expansions. There is also a separate group of dominantly inherited episodic ataxias (EAs) caused by potassium or calcium channel
dysfunction. These disorders present as episodes of ataxia and muscle
weakness and at times may respond to acetazolamide. The dominantly
inherited olivopontocerebellar atrophies include ataxia, cranial nerve
palsies, and abnormal sensory findings in the second or third decade,
but can present in children with rapidly progressive ataxia, nystagmus, dysarthria, and seizures. Roussy-­Levy disease has, in addition
to ataxia, atrophy of the muscles of the lower extremity with a pattern
of wasting similar to that observed in Charcot-­Marie-­Tooth disease.
Ramsay Hunt syndrome has an associated myoclonic epilepsy.
Additional degenerative ataxias include Pelizaeus-­Merzbacher disease, neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses, and late-­onset GM2 gangliosidosis (see Chapter 639). Rare forms of progressive cerebellar ataxia
have been described in association with vitamin E deficiency.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

637.2 Chorea, Athetosis, and Tremor
Jennifer A. Vermilion and Jonathan W. Mink
Chorea, meaning “dance-­like” in Greek, refers to rapid, chaotic movements that seem to flow unpredictably from one body part to another.
Affected individuals often appear restless, and movements exhibit
randomness. They often demonstrate motor impersistence on neurologic examination, showing classic signs such as “darting tongue” (difficulty maintaining tongue protrusion) or “milkmaid grip” (difficulty
maintaining grip). Chorea tends to occur both at rest and with action,
although certain actions or postures can exacerbate chorea. Patients
often attempt to incorporate the involuntary movements into more
purposeful-­seeming movements, making them appear fidgety. Chorea
increases with stress and disappears in sleep. Chorea has traditionally
been divided into primary and secondary forms; however, this classification scheme in movement disorders can cause confusion given the
recent explosion of genetic discoveries in the field. Rather, it may be
more helpful to classify chorea causes by etiology: acquired or inherited (Tables 637.9 and 637.10).
Sydenham chorea (St. Vitus dance; rheumatic chorea) is the most
common acquired chorea of childhood, although the prevalence varies worldwide. It occurs in 10–20% of patients with acute rheumatic
fever, typically weeks to months after a group A β-­hemolytic streptococcal infection (see Chapter 194). Peak incidence is at age 8-­9 years,
with a female predominance of 2:1. There is evidence that group A
β-­hemolytic streptococci promote the generation of cross-­reactive or
polyreactive antibodies through molecular mimicry between streptococcal and host antigens. Specifically, antibodies against the N-­
acetyl-­β-­d-­glucosamine epitope (GlcNAc) of streptococcal group A
carbohydrate appear to target intracellular β-­tubulin and extracellular
lysoganglioside GM1 in human caudate-­putamen preparations. These
antibodies are also capable of causing calcium/calmodulin–dependent
protein kinase II activation, which may cause the neurologic manifestations of Sydenham chorea by increasing dopamine release into the
synapse.
The clinical hallmarks of Sydenham chorea are chorea, hypotonia, and
emotional lability. Onset of the chorea is typically over hours to days,
but it may be more abrupt. Chorea is typically generalized, although
often asymmetric; up to 20% have hemichorea. Parents may describe
the child as seeming clumsy and dropping items while awake with cessation of adventitious movements during sleep. Hypotonia manifests
with the pronator sign (arms and palms turn outward when held overhead) and the choreic hand (spooning of the extended hand by flexion
of the wrist and extension of the fingers). When chorea and hypotonia
are severe, the child may be incapable of feeding, dressing, or walking
without assistance. Speech is often involved, sometimes to the point of
being unintelligible. Periods of uncontrollable crying and extreme mood

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3674 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 637.9  Acquired Causes of Chorea
STRUCTURAL-­BASAL GANGLIA LESIONS
Stroke
Moyamoya disease
Vascular malformations
Hemorrhage
Choreoathetoid cerebral palsy (dyskinetic cerebral palsy)
Postcardiac transplant (postpump chorea)
Mass lesions (CNS lymphoma, metastatic brain tumors)
Multiple sclerosis plaque
Extrapontine myelinolysis
Trauma
PARAINFECTIOUS AND AUTOIMMUNE DISORDERS
Poststreptococcal Sydenham chorea
Chorea secondary to systemic lupus erythematosus
Chorea secondary to antiphospholipid antibody syndrome
Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis
Anti-­NMDA receptor encephalitis
Rasmussen encephalitis
Chorea gravidarum
Postinfectious or postvaccinal encephalitis
Paraneoplastic choreas
Celiac disease
INFECTIOUS DISORDERS
HIV encephalopathy
Toxoplasmosis
Cysticercosis
Diphtheria
Bacterial endocarditis
Neurosyphilis
Scarlet fever
Viral encephalitis (mumps, measles, varicella)
METABOLIC OR TOXIC DISORDERS
Acute intermittent porphyria
Hyponatremia/hypernatremia
Hypocalcemia
Hyperthyroidism
Hypoparathyroidism
Hepatic/renal failure
Carbon monoxide poisoning
Methyl alcohol
Toluene
Manganese poisoning
Mercury poisoning
Organophosphate poisoning
Pheochromocytoma
PSYCHOGENIC DISORDERS
DRUG-­INDUCED DISORDERS
Dopamine-­blocking agents
(upon withdrawal or as a tardive
syndrome)

Phenothiazines
Butyrophenones
Benzamides

Antiparkinsonian drugs

L-­DOPA
Dopamine agonists
Anticholinergics

Antiepileptic drugs

Phenytoin
Carbamazepine
Valproic acid

Psychostimulants

Amphetamines
Methylphenidate
Cocaine

Calcium channel blockers

Cinnarizine
Flunarizine
Verapamil

Others

Lithium
Baclofen
Digoxin
Tricyclic antidepressants
Cyclosporine
Steroids/oral contraceptives
Theophylline
Propofol

swings are characteristic and may precede the onset of the movement
disorder. Patients may also demonstrate inattention, anxiety, obsessive-­
compulsive symptoms, paranoia, and a reluctance to speak. It is not clear
if these psychiatric symptoms represent an increased susceptibility to
developing Sydenham chorea or if they are part of the disorder.
Sydenham chorea is a clinical diagnosis; a combination of acute and
convalescent serum antistreptolysin O titers may help to confirm an
acute streptococcal infection. Negative titers do not exclude the diagnosis. All patients with Sydenham chorea should be evaluated for carditis and treated with long-­term antibiotic prophylaxis to decrease the
risk of rheumatic heart disease with recurrence (see Chapter 487). This
prophylaxis should be continued until the patient is 21 years old. For
patients with chorea that is impairing, treatment options include valproate, carbamazepine, and dopamine receptor antagonists. There have
been conflicting data regarding the efficacy of prednisone, intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG), and other immunomodulatory agents
in Sydenham chorea, making it difficult to recommend their routine
use. One study compared high-­dose prednisone (2 mg/kg/day, max: 60
mg) for 4 weeks to placebo and found that steroids reduced the time
to remission. Another trial of IVIG, plasma exchange, and low-­dose
prednisone demonstrated an overall decreased severity of chorea in the
IVIG and plasma exchange groups at 1-­month follow-­up. There is no
evidence that prednisone, IVIG, or plasma exchange alters the recurrence rate or long-­term outcome. Given the lack of impact on long-­term
outcome and the potential for side effects, immunomodulatory treatments are optional.
Sydenham chorea usually resolves spontaneously within 1 year, but
symptoms may recur in about 20% of patients despite penicillin prophylaxis. Remote recurrence of chorea is rare, but may be provoked
by streptococcal infections, pregnancy (chorea gravidarum), or oral
contraceptive use.
Although less common than Sydenham chorea, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and antiphospholipid antibody syndrome (APS)
(see Chapter 199) are known causes of chorea in children. In some
cases, chorea may be the presenting sign of these disorders and clinically may be indistinguishable from Sydenham chorea.
Anti N-­methyl-­D-­aspartic acid (anti-­NMDA) receptor encephalitis is an immune-­mediated encephalitis with movement disorder as
a prominent feature. Abnormal movements, including chorea, may be
the presenting feature in some cases. Other commonly reported abnormal movements include dystonia, stereotypies (limb and oral), and
motor perseveration. In addition to abnormal movements, psychiatric
symptoms, seizures, and autonomic instability commonly occur. Treatment includes removal of the tumor, if present, and immune therapies
such as steroids, IVIG, plasma exchange, and rituximab.
Additional causes of acquired chorea include metabolic (hyperthyroidism, hypoparathyroidism), infectious (Lyme disease), vascular
(stroke, moyamoya disease, postpump chorea), heredodegenerative
disorders (Wilson disease), and drugs (see Table 637.9). Although chorea is a hallmark of Huntington disease in adults, children who develop
Huntington disease tend to present with rigidity and bradykinesia
(Westphal variant) or dystonia rather than chorea.
Various genetic diseases may manifest with chorea; some present
with predominantly chorea, but most have a combination of neurologic,
psychiatric, and systemic manifestations that accompany the movement
disorder (see Table 637.10). Benign hereditary chorea is a relatively rare
cause of chorea in childhood. It typically presents before age 5 years; the
chorea is either stable or slowly progressive. Chorea tends to improve in
the late teen to young adult years and often remits by mid-­adulthood.
It is most commonly secondary to a pathogenic variant in NKX2-­1,
which encodes for the protein thyroid transcription factor-­1 (TTF1).
The majority of patients (80%) also have hypothyroidism or neonatal
respiratory distress syndrome (brain-­lung-­thyroid syndrome). Variants
in NKX2-­1 confer increased risk of lung cancer or emphysema in adulthood. Although children are considered cognitively normal, there are
reports of an increased incidence of learning disabilities and attention-­
deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in this population.
In ADCY5-­related dyskinesia, chorea is a core feature. There is a phenotypic variability to this disorder, but some patients present with a form
of familial benign chorea with onset of paroxysmal movements starting

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 637 u Movement Disorders

3675

Table 637.10  Inherited Causes of Childhood-­Onset Chorea
DISEASE NAME

INHERITANCE

CHOREA PROMINENT FEATURE
Ataxia-telangiectasia
AR

ASSOCIATED
GENE

AGE OF ONSET

NEUROLOGIC OR PSYCHIATRIC
MANIFESTATIONS

SYSTEMIC
SYMPTOMS

ATM

18 mo to 3 yr

Chorea often initial symptom; also
have oculomotor apraxia, ataxia,
and dystonia

Telangiectasias,
increased
sinopulmonary
infections,
increased
incidence of cancer

Ataxia with oculomotor
apraxia 1 and 2
(especially type 1)

AR

APTX

Onset later than
ataxia-­
telangiectasia

Chorea, dystonia, oculomotor
apraxia, ataxia, distal sensory axonal
neuropathy

Friedreich ataxia

AR

GAAn in FRDA

Over 2 yr, usually
teenagers

Gait ataxia, axonal neuropathy,
areflexia, extensor plantar response.
Can have various movements
(tremor, dystonia, chorea,
myoclonus). Cases of chorea without
cerebellar signs described.

GNAO1-­related
dyskinesias

AR

GNAO1

Infancy

Ballismus, chorea, orofacial
dyskinesias; can alternatively cause
Ohtahara syndrome

FOXG1-­related
dyskinesias

AD

FOXG1

Infancy

Chorea, dystonia, athetosis, hand-­
mouthing stereotypies, postnatal
microcephaly, epilepsy, severe
developmental delay

Benign hereditary chorea

AD

NKX2-­1

Before age 5 yr

Chorea; can have myoclonus, learning
disability

Thyroid disease, lung
disease

ADCY5-­associated
dyskinesias

AD

ADCY5

Infancy to late
adolescence

Chorea, choreic facial twitches
(previously called myokymia); can
have myoclonus or dystonia

Some reports of
congestive heart
failure

PDE10A-­associated
dyskinesias

AD or AR

PDE10A

AD: childhood
AR: infancy

Chorea, MRI striatal changes in AD
form

Paroxysmal
nonkinesigenic
dyskinesias

AD

PNKD

Infancy to 10 yr

Dystonia, chorea, or a combination

3-­methylglutaconic
aciduria type III (Costeff
syndrome)

AR

OPA3

Infancy

Bilateral optic atrophy and chorea
early; spasticity, ataxia, and
dementia later

Congenital cataracts,
facial dysmorphism,
and neuropathy

AR

CTDP1

Infancy or
childhood

Progressive neuropathy, delayed
psychomotor development, mild
chorea, hypomyelination, hearing
loss

Dentatorubral-­
pallidoluysian atrophy

AD

CAGn in
atrophin-­1

Mostly adults
but seen in a
few children

Neurodegeneration, chorea,
tics, dementia, seizures, ataxia,
psychiatric symptoms

Huntington chorea/
disease

AD

CAGn in HTT

Adolescence to
40s

Younger onset without chorea
and with parkinsonism, but later,
teenagers can manifest chorea,
emotional disturbances similar to
adult form

Huntington disease-­
like-­3 (HDL3)

AR

Linked to
chromosome
4p15.3

Childhood

Neurodegeneration, chorea, dystonia,
ataxia, dementia, seizures

Idiopathic basal
ganglia calcification
(IBGC), childhood
onset (bilateral
striopallidodentate
calcinosis)

AR or AD

SLC20A2 or
PDGFRB

Infancy to
second decade
of life

Tetraplegia, chorea, severe cognitive
impairment, microcephaly, basal
ganglia calcifications

Cardiomyopathy,
diabetes

Skeletal
abnormalities,
dysmorphic
face, congenital
cataracts,
microcornea,
hypogonadism

Early death

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3676 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 637.10  Inherited Causes of Childhood-­Onset Chorea—cont’d
DISEASE NAME

INHERITANCE

ASSOCIATED
GENE

NEUROLOGIC OR PSYCHIATRIC
MANIFESTATIONS

SYSTEMIC
SYMPTOMS

Choreoacanthocytosis

AR

VPS13A

Mean age 20 yr
but described
in childhood

Psychiatric symptoms (e.g.,
obsessive-­compulsive disorder) can
precede neurologic symptoms.
Neurodegeneration, progressive
hyperkinetic movements (limb
chorea, orofacial dyskinesias, tics,
dystonia), dementia, seizures,
cognitive decline, sensorimotor
polyneuropathy.

Acanthocytosis,
increased CK
and/or liver
transaminases

Spinocerebellar ataxia 1

AD

CAGn in
ATXN1

Childhood

Neurodegeneration, progressive
ataxia, mild cognitive impairment,
dysarthria, ophthalmoplegia, optic
atrophy, spasticity, dystonia or
chorea

Spinocerebellar ataxia 17

AD

CAGn or CAAn
in TBP

Mostly early
adulthood
but some
teenagers
reported

Neurodegeneration, psychiatric
symptoms (depression,
hallucinations), frontal release signs,
chorea, dystonia, and parkinsonism;
may have ocular movement
abnormalities

Leigh syndrome

X-­linked

PDHA1

Infancy or
childhood

Neurodegeneration, psychomotor
delay, hypotonia and chorea and
other hyperkinetic movements can
be prominent, progresses to feeding
and swallowing defects, nystagmus,
ophthalmoplegia, optic atrophy,
seizures
Lesions in basal ganglia, cerebrum,
cerebellum, spinal cord

Lactic acidemia,
respiratory failure

Nonketotic
hyperglycemia (glycine
encephalopathy)

AR

GLDC, GCST,
or GCSH

Neonates/
infancy

Hypotonia, severe myoclonic epilepsy,
profound cognitive impairment,
restlessness

Hyperglycemia

Infantile bilateral striatal
necrosis

AR

NUP62

Infancy

Developmental regression, intellectual
disability, pendular nystagmus,
optic atrophy, dysphagia, dystonia,
choreoathetosis, spasticity, and
severe bilateral striatal atrophy

CAGn in
ATXN7

Childhood

Neurodegenerative mitochondrial
disorder, progressive ataxia,
dysarthria, dysphagia, optic atrophy,
ophthalmoplegia, spasticity,
dystonia or chorea may occur

Retinal degeneration

CHOREA SOMETIMES PRESENT
Spinocerebellar ataxia 7
AD

AGE OF ONSET

Wilson disease

AR

ATP7B

12 yr to early 20s

Dysarthria, drooling, pharyngeal
dysmotility, clumsiness, tremor
(“wing-­beating”), psychiatric
symptoms (decline in school,
anxiety, depression, psychosis);
chorea and dystonia variable

Hepatic dysfunction
(asymmetric
hepatomegaly,
acute transient
or fulminant
hepatitis),
Kayser-­Fleischer
rings of cornea

Lesch-­Nyhan disease

X-­linked

HPRT

Early childhood

Self-­injurious behaviors, intellectual
disability, motor disability, pyramidal
signs, dystonia superimposed on
hypotonia, may have chorea or
ballismus, abnormal ocular motility

Hyperuricemia,
nephrolithiasis,
gout

Pantothenate
kinase–associated
neurodegeneration
(PKAN), classic form

AR

PANK2

Before 6 yr old
(in classic
onset)

Progressive motor difficulties,
personality changes, cognitive
decline, dysarthria, spasticity; later
onset of movements (dystonia most
common, chorea or tremor may also
be present); “eye of the tiger” sign
on MRI of brain

Pigmentary retinal
degeneration,
acanthocytosis

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 637 u Movement Disorders

3677

Table 637.10  Inherited Causes of Childhood-­Onset Chorea—cont’d
DISEASE NAME

INHERITANCE

ASSOCIATED
GENE

AGE OF ONSET

Paroxysmal kinesigenic
dyskinesia (PKD)

AD

PRRT2

1-­20 yr

Short episodes triggered by sudden
movement; dystonia is most
common movement but can have
chorea

Biopterin-­dependent
hyperphenylalaninemia
(group of disorders)

Usually AR

Multiple
genetic
causes

Neonate

Initially hypotonic with poor suck,
decreased movements, and
microcephaly; months later,
oculogyric crises, swallowing
difficulties, variable hypokinetic and
hyperkinetic movements, seizures,
cognitive impairment

Glutaric aciduria

AR

GCDH

First 6 mo

Hypotonia and jitteriness at
birth; at 6-­18 mo, progressive
hyperkinetic movements (dystonia,
choreoathetosis); may have seizures

Alternating hemiplegia
of childhood

AR

ATP1A-­3

Neonate to
<18 mo

Transient episodes of alternating
hemiplegia/hemiparesis, dystonic
attacks, paroxysmal abnormal ocular
movements, seizures, episodes of
autonomic dysfunction; between
attacks, may have ataxia, dystonia,
and/or choreoathetosis; most have
intellectual disability

Succinate semialdehyde
dehydrogenase
deficiency

AR

ALDH5A

Infancy to early
childhood

Intellectual disability, pronounced
language dysfunction, autistic traits,
hypotonia, aggression, ataxia,
anxiety, hallucinations, can have
choreoathetosis

anywhere from infancy to late adolescence. Although chorea is the most
commonly described movement, there are reports of myoclonic or dystonic movements as well. Movements are more common in the arms and
face and less common in the legs. ADCY5-­related dyskinesia has commonly been associated with choreic facial twitches that were previously
considered facial myokymia (known as familial dyskinesia with facial
myokymia). Interestingly, movements in this form can persist in sleep.
Symptoms can fluctuate such that chorea may be paroxysmal; they tend
to be worsened by specific actions and anxiety. These patients also tend
to have a stable or very slowly progressive course that tends to stabilize
and even improve in middle age. ADCY5-­related dyskinesia can have
a more severe presentation with infantile onset of axial hypotonia and
developmental delay. ADCY5-­related dyskinesia has not been associated
with thyroid or lung disease; however, heart failure has been reported
in five patients. Although these conditions are called benign, these
movements can be disabling and progressive in some patients. Therefore some patients may warrant symptomatic treatment. Although there
is no proven symptomatic treatment for these conditions, there have
been reports of benefit with dopamine receptor–blocking or –depleting
agents. In a few cases, low-­dose levodopa has provided benefit.
A pure, benign, and nonprogressive childhood-­onset chorea has
been described in a few patients with pathogenic variants in PDE10A,
which encodes for a phosphodiesterase. Children with de novo dominant variants characteristically have symmetric T2 hyperintensities in
the bilateral striatum on brain MRI. Children with recessive homozygous variants have been described with an earlier age of onset and a
more severe clinical course.
Paroxysmal dyskinesias can present with chorea or dystonia, or both;
chorea is most commonly associated with paroxysmal nonkinesigenic
dyskinesia (PNKD). This disorder presents in the first decade of life,
with ∼30% of patients manifesting symptoms in the first year of life.
Patients often have both chorea and dystonia, although some patients
manifest only dystonia. Episodes can last minutes to hours, and children are normal between episodes. The episodes are not triggered by
sudden movement but can be precipitated by alcohol, caffeine, or emotional stress. About half of patients report a premonitory sensation

NEUROLOGIC OR PSYCHIATRIC
MANIFESTATIONS

SYSTEMIC
SYMPTOMS

Elevated
phenylalanine level
at birth; autonomic
symptoms start
several months
later

or a sense of anxiety before an episode. Although various genes have
been implicated in this disorder, PNKD (formerly known as MR-­1) is
most commonly associated with PNKD. Patients with a PNKD pathogenic variant often respond to benzodiazepines; avoidance of triggers
is also important. Symptoms typically improve with age. Variants in
KCNMA1 can also cause a PNKD phenotype, although these children
often have other neurologic abnormalities.
Some inherited disorders classified as ataxia syndromes also manifest with significant chorea. Ataxia-­telangiectasia typically presents as
a mixed movement disorder with ataxia, dystonia, and chorea in early
childhood (18 months to 3 years). These symptoms present before the
appearance of telangiectasias. Over time, children have progression
of limb and gait involvement and typically become nonambulatory in
childhood. Children also present with oculomotor apraxia (difficulty in
initiating horizontal and vertical saccades). Ataxia-­telangiectasia is an
autosomal recessive disorder secondary to pathogenic variants in ATM.
Because this gene encodes for a protein involved in DNA repair mechanisms, affected children are at increased risk of sinopulmonary infectious and lymphoreticular neoplasms. When this disease is suspected,
the initial workup involves testing the alpha-­fetoprotein (AFP) level,
which is abnormally increased in this population. Ataxia with oculomotor apraxia type 1 (AOA1) is also associated with a mixed movement disorder and is caused by variants in APTX, which encodes for the
aprataxin protein. Up to 80% of children have chorea and dystonia as
their initial symptoms. Other neurologic symptoms include oculomotor
apraxia, ataxia, and a distal sensory axonal neuropathy. The movement
disorder tends to be most severe early in the disease and improves as the
disease progresses. Unlike ataxia-­telangiectasia, this disorder is not associated with skin findings or an increased incidence of cancer.
Chorea can also be a major manifestation in children with inherited conditions that have a progressive, severe course. Pontocerebellar
hypoplasia type 2A (PCH-­2A) is associated with chorea present from
a young age. The majority of patients have chorea within the first 6
months of life. PCH-­2A is associated with an acquired microcephaly,
extrapyramidal dyskinesias, and spasticity. These children have significant psychomotor delay with early death. Although various genes have

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3678 Part XXV u The Nervous System
been implicated in the different forms of pontocerebellar hypoplasia,
PCH-­2A is associated with pathogenic variants in TSEN54, which
encodes for a protein involved in transfer RNA (tRNA) splicing. Variants in GNAO1, which encodes for the alpha subunit of G proteins,
have been described as causing a particular movement disorder in
affected children. This gene has previously been described as a cause of
early infantile epileptic encephalopathy (Ohtahara syndrome). However, affected children may instead manifest with hypotonia, developmental delay without epilepsy, and a movement disorder characterized
by chorea and ballismus in the first decade of life. Chorea tends to start
acutely during an illness. Some children with GNAO1 variants have a
severe movement disorder without seizures. Orofacial dyskinesias are
common. Children often have periods of movement exacerbations that
can be accompanied by autonomic changes. These movements can be
refractory to treatment and led to death in two of the children in a
study. Deep brain stimulation has been proposed as a potential treatment for these medically refractory children. FOXG1 variants are associated with postnatal microcephaly, an early epileptic encephalopathy,
and abnormal movements. Chorea is commonly reported and may
involve the upper extremities and orolingual muscles. Dystonia, athetosis, and stereotypies are also reported.
Athetosis is characterized by slow, continuous, writhing movements that repeatedly involve the same body part(s), usually the distal
extremities, face, neck, or trunk. Like chorea, athetosis may occur at
rest and is often worsened by voluntary movement. Because athetosis
tends to occur with other movement disorders, such as chorea (choreoathetosis) and dystonia, it is often difficult to distinguish as a discrete
entity. Choreoathetosis is common in dyskinetic cerebral palsy, which
can result from hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy, kernicterus, or other
basal ganglia injuries. Cerebral palsy is a static disturbance in the developing brain that results in motor impairment. Dyskinetic cerebral palsy,
the second most common form after spastic cerebral palsy, typically
presents with dystonia and choreoathetosis. The choreoathetosis is typically more common in the upper body. Choreoathetosis is often seen in
conjunction with rigidity—increased muscle tone that is equal in the
flexors and extensors in all directions of passive movement regardless of
the velocity of the movement. This is to be differentiated from spasticity, a velocity-­dependent (clasp-­knife) form of hypertonia that is seen
with upper motor neuron dysfunction. Case reports in dyskinetic cerebral palsy report chorea improvement with levetiracetam. In addition,
a small study of risperidone in children with dyskinetic cerebral palsy
reported improvement in abnormal movements and behavior.
Tremor is a rhythmic, oscillatory movement around a central point
or plane that results from the action of antagonist muscles. Tremor can
affect the extremities, head, trunk, or voice and can be classified by
both its frequency (slow [4 Hz], intermediate [4-­7 Hz], and fast [>7
Hz]) and by the context in which it is most pronounced. Rest tremor is
maximal when the affected body part is inactive and supported against
gravity, whereas postural tremor is most notable when the patient
sustains a position against gravity. Action tremor occurs with performance of a voluntary activity and can be subclassified into simple
kinetic tremor, which occurs with limb movement, and intention
tremor, which occurs as the patient’s limb approaches a target and is a
feature of cerebellar disease.
Essential tremor (ET) is the most common movement disorder in
adults, and 50% of persons diagnosed with ET report an onset in childhood; thus ET may be the most common tremor disorder in children
as well. Clinical experience in a pediatric movement disorders clinic
suggests that ET is more common in the pediatric population than the
literature would suggest. ET is an autosomal dominant condition with
variable expressivity but complete penetrance by the age of 60 years.
Although the genetics of ET are not fully understood, at least five genes
(EMT1, EMT2, EMT3, EMT4, and EMT5) are linked to this condition. In addition, polymorphisms in the gene LINGO1 (also known as
LRRN6A) have been associated with ET.
ET is characterized by a slowly progressive, bilateral, 4-­to 9-­Hz
postural tremor that involves the upper extremities and occurs in
the absence of other known causes of tremor. Face, neck, and voice
tremors are less common but can occur. Mild asymmetry in the

upper extremities is common, but ET is rarely unilateral. ET may be
worsened by actions, such as trying to pour water from cup to cup.
Affected adults may report a history of ethanol responsiveness. In the
adult literature, there is a consensus on diagnostic criteria; there are no
specific criteria in children. Unlike adults, children do not require a
5-­year duration of symptoms to make the diagnosis of ET. Most young
children come to medical attention once a parent, teacher, or therapist
notices the tremor, rather than because the tremor causes impairment.
Most children with ET do not require pharmacologic intervention. If
they are having difficulty with their handwriting or self-­feeding, an
occupational therapy evaluation and/or assistive devices, such as wrist
weights and weighted silverware, may be helpful. Teenagers tend to
report more impairment from ET. Teenagers who do warrant pharmacotherapy usually respond to the same medications that are used in
adults—propranolol and primidone. Propranolol, which is generally
considered the first-­line treatment, can be started at 10-­40 mg daily
and titrated to effect, with most patients responding to doses of 60-­
80 mg/day. Propranolol should not be used in patients with reactive
airway disease. Primidone can be started at 12.5-­25 mg at bedtime and
increased gradually in a twice-­daily schedule. Most patients respond
to doses of 50-­200 mg/day. Other treatment options for ET reported
in the adult literature include atenolol, gabapentin, pregabalin, topiramate, and alprazolam. Surgical treatments, which include deep brain
stimulation of the thalamus and unilateral thalamotomy, are generally
reserved for adults with medically refractory disabling tremor.
Enhanced physiologic tremor is one of the most common etiologies of
tremor in adolescents. This tremor occurs in healthy people and is characterized by a symmetric hand tremor that is often of faster frequency and
lower amplitude than an ET. Triggers include increased emotions, fatigue,
fever, hunger, and waking from sleep. Substances such as caffeine may
enhance a tremor. Weighted objects may decrease tremor frequency.
In children 3-­7 years old, coordination difficulties due to developmental delay can present with nonprogressive tremor. Many children
with motor delays will have a hand and possibly truncal tremor that
is most apparent with fine motor tasks, such as drawing, using scissors, or playing with small toys. The history often shows that these children are behind typically developing children in terms of fine and/or
gross motor skills and speech articulation. Examination shows that the
movement tends to be a small-­amplitude, regular or irregular postural
or intention tremor. Walking and running may be clumsy. Evidence-­
based treatment has not been established for tremor related to developmental delay; however, referral to occupational therapy may help to
identify strategies to improve coordination in these children.
Infantile tremor syndrome is a disorder of unknown etiology that
presents at age 6-­18 months with regression or plateaued development,
coarse tremor, and anemia. Potential etiologies include deficiencies in
vitamin B12, iron, zinc, or magnesium.
There are numerous secondary etiologies of tremor in children
(Table 637.11). Holmes tremor, previously referred to as midbrain or
“rubral” tremor, is characterized by a slow-­frequency, high-­amplitude
tremor that is present at rest and with intention. It is a symptomatic
tremor, which usually results from lesions of the brainstem, cerebellum, or thalamus. Functional (psychogenic) tremor is distinguished
by its variable appearance, abrupt onset and remission, nonprogressive
course, and association with selective but not task-­specific disabilities.
In some cases, tremor may even occur as a manifestation of another
movement disorder, as is seen with position-­or task-­specific tremor
(e.g., writing tremor), dystonic tremor, and myoclonic tremor.
When evaluating a child with tremor, it is important to screen for
common metabolic disturbances, including electrolyte abnormalities and thyroid disease, assess the child’s caffeine intake, and review
the child’s medication list for known tremor-­inducing agents. It is
also critical to exclude Wilson disease in teenagers with characteristic
“wing-­beating” tremor (low-­frequency/high-­amplitude posture initiated with horizontal position and abduction of arms, flexed elbows,
and downward-­facing palms with resultant shoulder and hand tremors) because this is a treatable condition.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 637 u Movement Disorders
Table 637.11  Selected Causes of Tremor in Children
BENIGN TREMORS
Enhanced physiologic tremor
Developmental delay
Shuddering attacks
Jitteriness
Spasmus nutans
STATIC INJURY/STRUCTURAL TREMORS
Cerebellar malformation
Stroke (particularly in the midbrain or cerebellum)
Multiple sclerosis
HEREDITARY/DEGENERATIVE TREMORS
Familial essential tremor
Fragile X premutation
Wilson disease
Huntington disease
Juvenile parkinsonism (tremor is rare)
Pallidonigral degeneration
METABOLIC TREMORS
Hyperthyroidism
Hyperadrenergic state (including pheochromocytoma and
neuroblastoma)
Hypomagnesemia
Hypocalcemia
Hypoglycemia
Hepatic encephalopathy
Vitamin B12 deficiency
Inborn errors of metabolism
Mitochondrial disorders
DRUGS/TOXINS
Valproate, phenytoin, carbamazepine, lamotrigine, gabapentin,
lithium, tricyclic antidepressants, stimulants (cocaine,
amphetamine, caffeine, thyroxine, beta agonist, bronchodilators),
neuroleptics, cyclosporine, toluene, mercury, thallium, amiodarone,
nicotine, lead, manganese, arsenic, cyanide, naphthalene, ethanol,
lindane, serotonin reuptake inhibitors
PERIPHERAL NEUROPATHIES
FUNCTIONAL (PSYCHOGENIC) TREMORS

637.3 Myoclonus
Jonathan W. Mink
Myoclonus refers to brief, abrupt, involuntary, nonsuppressible, jerky
contractions (or interruption of contractions) involving a single muscle
or muscle group. The rapidity of these movements is often described as
shocklike. In some cases, myoclonus can be elicited by a sensory stimulus (reflex myoclonus; the most common example is the acoustic startle
response in infancy) or volitional movement (action myoclonus). It is
present in normal and pathologic situations, both epileptic and nonepileptic. Epileptic myoclonus is discussed in Chapter 633. Etiologic
classification of myoclonus is summarized in Table 637.12.
Physiologic myoclonus occurs in healthy individuals in specific settings. It includes such entities as hiccups, sleep starts, and sleep myoclonus. Sleep starts, also known as hypnic or hypnagogic myoclonus, occur
with sleep initiation. They are often accompanied by a sense of falling.
Sleep starts are normal physiologic phenomena, and no treatment is
required. Sleep myoclonus (nocturnal myoclonus) is also a part of normal sleep physiology. It typically occurs during rapid eye movement
(REM) sleep owing to transient failure of brainstem inhibition. Sleep
myoclonus tends to persist throughout life. No treatment is required.
Benign myoclonus may occur in association with specific developmental stages. Benign neonatal sleep myoclonus is characterized by
repetitive myoclonic jerks occurring during sleep. The myoclonus is typically more distal than proximal and is more prominent in the upper than
the lower extremities. The myoclonus can be focal, multifocal, unilateral,
or bilateral. Typically, the movements occur in clusters of jerks at 1-­5
Hz over a period of several seconds. Benign neonatal sleep myoclonus

3679

begins during the first week of life, diminishes in the second month, and
is usually gone before 6 months of age. The movements are most likely
to occur during quiet (non-­REM) sleep but have been described in all
sleep stages. Waking the baby causes the movements to abruptly cease.
Neurologic examination and outcome are normal.
Myoclonus also can occur with fever in otherwise normal children.
The myoclonic jerks may be quite frequent, but they are self-­limited,
ceasing when the fever resolves. Febrile myoclonus may be more common in younger children. No treatment is required.
Opsoclonus myoclonus (ataxia) syndrome (OMS/OMAS) is characterized by a combination of rapid, chaotic involuntary eye movements
(opsoclonus), multifocal myoclonus, and ataxia. Irritability is a common
feature. It typically begins abruptly in early childhood, most often before
age 5 years. A common misdiagnosis is acute cerebellar ataxia (ACA)
because both ACA and OMAS have subacute, progressive disturbances
in gait, truncal instability, and behavioral irritability. Irritable toddlers
are difficult to examine thoroughly, adding to the challenge of discerning
the presence of multifocal mini-­myoclonus and action myoclonus plus
ataxia in a toddler with OMAS versus titubation, gait, and limb ataxia in
ACA. At its peak, OMAS can cause marked disability for the child.
OMAS is an autoimmune condition in which there is abnormal B-­cell
trafficking in the central nervous system. It may follow a viral infection
in many cases. A large proportion of children (40% by one estimate) with
OMAS have a neuroblastoma, a potentially fatal neural crest tumor (see
Chapter 547). Conversely, only a small proportion of children with neuroblastoma (probably <5%) have OMAS. The subacute onset of OMAS
and the association with neural crest tumors support an autoimmune
paraneoplastic etiology. Intensive research into multiple circulating autoantibodies, including antibodies to Purkinje cell targets, has not, to date,
identified any unique, consistently present, disease-­associated antibody.
OMAS is a clinical diagnosis. In the presence of subacute irritability,
tremor, and ataxia, a diagnosis of OMAS must be considered, and children
diagnosed with ACA should continue to be monitored for the emergence
of symptoms characteristic of OMAS. The presence of opsoclonus has a
high positive predictive value for OMAS, but its absence does not have a
high negative predictive value. That is because opsoclonus can be subtle,
intermittent, or late, so clinicians and parents need to continue to watch
for it. Brain MRI should be normal, and cerebrospinal fluid unremarkable.
No immune studies are clinically established for this diagnosis. The search
for a neuroblastoma should be thorough and persistent in this clinical setting. MRI with gadolinium or CT with contrast of the chest and abdomen
has the highest yield. Nuclear medicine 131I-­MIBG (metaiodobenzylguanidine) or 111In-­penetreotide (somatostatin receptor ligand) PET scans
and urine collection for elevated 24-­hour urine catecholamines and serum
neuron-­specific enolase may be considered but have a lower yield.
Multimodal treatment is required for OMAS. If related to neuroblastoma, the child will likely need immune-­modulating treatments even
if a tumor is identified and resected. Adrenocorticotrophin (ACTH)
protocols are recommended based on expert consensus and clinical
experience. In addition to ACTH, combination treatment with IVIG,
plasmapheresis, rituximab, or other immune-­modulating therapies may
be needed. Symptomatic pharmacologic and behavioral therapy for
myoclonus, behavioral problems, aggression, and insomnia may also be
beneficial. Physical therapy, occupational therapy, and speech therapy
may be beneficial. Suboptimal cognitive outcomes occur in most cases.
Causes of other types of myoclonus are listed in Table 637.12. Differentiating myoclonus and other movement disorders from a functional
neurologic disorder may be difficult. Clues to a functional disorder are
noted in Table 637.13.
Treatment of myoclonus is symptomatic and may be ineffective in
many cases. Cortical myoclonus may respond to benzodiazepines and
is commonly treated with clonazepam (although sleep myoclonus may
worsen). Valproic acid is sometimes helpful, but it must be used with
caution because of its ability to cause tremor as a side effect, with consequent confusion of symptoms. Other epilepsy medications, including levetiracetam and zonisamide, may be effective in some forms of
myoclonus. Carbamazepine can worsen myoclonus.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3680 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 637.12  Etiologic Classification of Myoclonus
I.	Physiologic myoclonus (normal subjects)
A.	Sleep jerks (hypnic jerks)
B.	Anxiety-­induced
C.	Exercise-­induced
D.	Hiccup (singultus)
E.	Benign infantile myoclonus with feeding
II.	Essential myoclonus (no known cause other than genetic and no
other gross neurologic deficit)
A.	Hereditary (autosomal dominant and most are likely
myoclonus dystonia)
B.	Sporadic
III.	Epileptic myoclonus (seizures dominate and no encephalopathy,
at least initially)
A.	Fragments of epilepsy
Isolated epileptic myoclonic jerks
Photosensitive myoclonus
Myoclonic absences in petit mal
Epilepsia partialis continua
B.	Childhood myoclonic epilepsies
Infantile spasms
Myoclonic astatic epilepsy (Lennox-­Gastaut)
Cryptogenic myoclonus epilepsy (Aicardi)
Juvenile myoclonus epilepsy of Janz
C.	Benign familial myoclonic epilepsy (Rabot)
D.	Progressive myoclonus epilepsy (Unverricht-­Lundborg)
IV.	Symptomatic myoclonus (progressive or static encephalopathy
dominates)
A.	Storage disease
Lafora body disease
Lipidoses (e.g., GM1 and GM2 gangliosidosis, Krabbe)
Ceroid-­lipofuscinosis (Batten)
Sialidosis (“cherry-­red spot”)
B.	Spinocerebellar degeneration
Unverricht-­Lundborg disease
Ataxia telangiectasia
Adult-­onset cerebellar ataxias
Some spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs)
Multiple system atrophy type C
C.	Basal ganglia degenerations
Wilson disease
Dystonia
Pantothenate kinase–associated neurodegeneration
Progressive supranuclear palsy
Multiple system atrophy type P
Huntington disease
Corticobasal ganglionic degeneration
Dentatorubro-­pallidoluysian atrophy
Parkinson disease

D.	Dementias
Creutzfeldt-­Jakob disease
Alzheimer disease
E.	Viral encephalopathies
Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis (SSPE)
Encephalitis lethargica
Arbor virus encephalitis
Herpes simplex encephalitis
Postinfectious encephalitis
Whipple disease
AIDS
SARS-­CoV-­2
F.	Autoimmune
Opsoclonus-­myoclonus syndrome
Celiac disease
G.	Metabolic
Hepatic failure
Renal failure
Dialysis syndrome
Hyponatremia
Hypoglycemia
Infantile myoclonic encephalopathy
Nonketotic hyperglycemia
Mitochondrial encephalomyopathy
Multiple carboxylase deficiency
Biotin deficiency
H.	Toxic encephalopathies
Bismuth
Heavy metal poisons
Methyl bromide, DDT
Drugs, including levodopa
Serotonin syndrome (e.g., SSRIs)
I.	Physical encephalopathies
Posthypoxic (Lance-­Adams)
Posttraumatic
Heat stroke
Electric shock
Decompression injury
J.	Focal central nervous system damage
Poststroke
Postthalamotomy
Tumor
Trauma
Dentato-­olivary lesions (palatal myoclonus/tremor)
K.	Functional

From Jankovic J, Hallett M, Okun MS, et al., eds. Principles and Practice of Movement Disorders, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Table 18.2, p. 498.

637.4 Dystonia
Shannon L. Dean and Erika F. Augustine
Dystonia is a disorder of movement characterized by sustained muscle
contractions, frequently causing twisting and repetitive movements or
abnormal postures (Table 637.14). Major causes of dystonia include
primary generalized dystonia, medications, metabolic disorders, and
perinatal asphyxia (Tables 637.15 and 637.16).

INHERITED PRIMARY DYSTONIAS

Primary generalized dystonia, also referred to as primary torsion
dystonia or dystonia musculorum deformans, is caused by a group of
genetic disorders with onset in childhood (Fig. 637.6). Many of these
disorders are autosomal dominant with incomplete penetrance, but
genetic dystonias may also appear sporadically or be inherited in an
autosomal recessive, X-­linked, or mitochondrial pattern. Children
are more likely to manifest with or progress to generalized dystonia,
whereas segmental or focal dystonia is more common in adolescents
and adults.

One form, which occurs more commonly in the Ashkenazi Jewish
population, is caused by a dominant change in DYT1 coding for the
adenosine triphosphate (ATP)–binding protein torsinA. The initial
manifestation of DYT1 dystonia is often intermittent unilateral posturing of a lower extremity, which assumes an extended and rotated
position. Ultimately, all four extremities and the axial musculature can
be affected, but the dystonia may also remain localized to one limb.
Cranial involvement can occur in DYT1 dystonia, but it is uncommon
compared with non-­DYT1 dystonias. There is a wide clinical spectrum,
varying even within families. If a family history of dystonia is absent,
the diagnosis should still be considered, given the intrafamilial variability in clinical expression.
More than two dozen loci for genes for torsion dystonia have been
identified (DYT1-­DYT31). More sophisticated genetic testing and
genotype-­phenotype correlation have eliminated some of these designations, and others have been linked to specific chromosomal regions
but not yet to a specific gene. In this text we review only those linked
definitively to a specific gene.
One is the autosomal dominant disorder dopa-­responsive dystonia
(DRD, DYT5a), also called Segawa syndrome. The gene for DRD codes

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 637 u Movement Disorders
for guanosine triphosphate cyclohydrolase 1, the rate-­limiting enzyme
for tetrahydrobiopterin synthesis, which is a cofactor for synthesis of the
neurotransmitters dopamine and serotonin. Thus the genetic alteration
results in dopamine deficiency. The hallmark of the disorder, particularly
in adolescents and adults, is diurnal variation: symptoms worsen as the day
progresses and may transiently improve with sleep. Early-­onset patients,
who tend to present with delayed or abnormal gait from dystonia of a
lower extremity, can easily be confused with patients with dystonic cerebral palsy. It should be noted that in the presence of a progressive dystonia, diurnal fluctuation, or loss of previously achieved motor skills, a prior
diagnosis of cerebral palsy should be reexamined. DRD responds dramatically to small daily doses of levodopa. The responsiveness to levodopa is
a sustained benefit, even if the diagnosis is delayed several years, as long as

3681

contractures have not developed. More rarely, an autosomal recessive form
of this disorder is caused by alterations in the TH gene.
Myoclonus dystonia (DYT11), caused by alterations in the SCGE
gene, is characterized by dystonia involving the upper extremities,
head, and/or neck, as well as myoclonic movements in these regions.
Although a combination of myoclonus and dystonia typically occurs,
each manifestation can present in isolation. When repetitive, the myoclonus may take on a tremor-­like appearance, termed dystonic tremor.
Improvement in symptoms after alcohol ingestion, reported by affected
adult family members, may be a helpful clue to this diagnosis.
Common to the inherited dystonias, there is considerable intrafamilial variability in clinical manifestations, distribution, and severity of
dystonia. In primary dystonias, although the main clinical features are
motor, there may be an increased risk for major depression. Anxiety,
obsessive-­compulsive disorder, and depression have all been reported
in myoclonus-­dystonia syndrome. Screening for psychiatric comorbidities should not be overlooked in this population.

Table 637.13  Clues Relating to the Signs and Symptoms
That Suggest a Functional Movement
Disorder

DRUG-­INDUCED DYSTONIAS

A number of medications are capable of inducing involuntary movements or drug-­
induced movement disorders in children and adults.
Dopamine-­blocking agents, including antipsychotics (e.g., haloperidol)
and antiemetics (e.g., metoclopramide, prochlorperazine), as well as atypical antipsychotics (e.g., risperidone, aripiprazole) can produce acute dystonic reactions or delayed (tardive) drug-­induced movement disorders.
Acute dystonic reactions, occurring in the first days of exposure, typically
involve the face and neck and manifest as torticollis, retrocollis, oculogyric
crisis, or tongue protrusion. Life-­threatening presentations with laryngospasm and airway compromise can also occur, requiring prompt recognition and treatment of this entity. Intravenous diphenhydramine 1-­2 mg/
kg/dose (maximum dose 50 mg) may rapidly reverse the drug-­related dystonia. The degree of potency of the dopamine blocker, young age, and prior
dystonic reactions may be predisposing factors. Acute dystonic reactions
have also been described with cetirizine.
Severe rigidity combined with high fever, autonomic symptoms
(tachycardia, diaphoresis), delirium, and dystonia are signs of neuroleptic malignant syndrome, which typically occurs a few days after starting
or increasing the dose of a neuroleptic drug or in the setting of withdrawal from a dopaminergic agent. In contrast to acute dystonic reactions, which take place within days, neuroleptic malignant syndrome
typically occurs within a month of medication initiation or dose increase.
Delayed-­
onset involuntary movements, tardive dyskinesias,
develop in the setting of chronic neuroleptic use, usually longer than
3 months. Involvement of the face, particularly the mouth, lips, and/
or jaw with chewing or tongue thrusting, is characteristic. The risk of
tardive dyskinesia, which is much less frequent in children compared
with adults, increases as the medication dose, duration of treatment,
and polypharmacy increase. There are data to suggest that children

1.	Abrupt onset
2.	Inconsistent movements (changing characteristics over time;
pattern, body distribution, rapidly varying severity)
3.	Incongruous movements and postures (movements that do not
fit with recognized patterns or with normal physiologic patterns)
4.	Presence of certain types of abnormal movements that are fairly
common among individuals with functional movement disorders,
such as:
• Rhythmical shaking
• Bizarre gait
• Deliberate slowness carrying out requested voluntary
movement
• Bursts of verbal gibberish
• Excessive startle (bizarre movements in response to sudden,
unexpected noise or threatening movement)
5.	Presence of additional types of abnormal movements that are
not known to be part of the primary or principal movement
pattern that the patient manifests
6.	Manifesting exhaustion, excessive fatigue
7.	Delayed, often excessive, startle response to a stimulus
8.	Spontaneous remissions
9.	Decrease or disappearance of movements with distraction
10.	Disappearance of tremors when handling treasured objects
11.	Entrainment of the tremor to the rate of the requested rapid
successive movement the patient is asked to perform
12.	Response to placebo, suggestion, or psychotherapy
13.	Dystonia beginning as a fixed posture
14.	Twisting facial movements that move the mouth to one side or
the other (note that organic dystonia of the facial muscles usually
does not move the mouth sideways)
From Jankovic J, Hallett M, Okun MS, et al., eds. Principles and Practice of Movement
Disorders, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Table 27.2, p. 598.

Table 637.14  Classification of Dystonias by Affected Body Part
TYPE OF DYSTONIA

NO. OF BODY PARTS AFFECTED

DETAIL

Focal*

1

• Eyelids (blepharospasm)
• Mouth (oromandibular dystonia, musician’s cramp)
• Larynx (dystonic adductor dysphonia, “whispering dysphonia”)
• Neck (cervical dystonia, previously known as spasmodic torticollis)
• Hand and arm (writer’s cramp)

Segmental

≥2 contiguous body parts

• Axial (neck and trunk)
• Brachial (1 arm and trunk; both arms ± neck ± trunk)
• Crural (1 leg and trunk; both legs ± trunk)

Multifocal

≥2 noncontiguous body parts

Faciobrachial (blepharospasm and writer’s cramp)

Hemidystonia

≥2

Ipsilateral arm and leg

Generalized

≥3

Trunk and ≥2 other sites ± leg involvement

*Some localized dystonias may spread and eventually generalize.
From Klein C, Lohmann K, Marras C, et al. Hereditary dystonia overview. 2003 Oct 28 [Updated 2017 Jun 22]. In: Adam MP, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, et al., eds. GeneReviews [Internet].
Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-­2023, Table 1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3682 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 637.15  Causes of Dystonia in Childhood
STATIC INJURY/STRUCTURAL DISORDERS
Cerebral palsy
Hypoxic-­ischemic injury
Kernicterus
Head trauma
Encephalitis
Tumors
Stroke in the basal ganglia (which may be a result of vascular
abnormalities or varicella)
Congenital malformations
HEREDITARY/DEGENERATIVE DISORDERS
DYT1 (early-­onset primary torsion dystonia, TOR1A)
DYT2 (early-­onset dystonia with craniocervical involvement,
autosomal recessive)
DYT3 (adult-­onset dystonia-­parkinsonism, X-­linked TAF1)
DYT4 (adult-­onset spasmodic dysphonia, TUBB4A)
DYT5 (dopa-­responsive dystonia, GCH1)
DYT6 (adult-­onset torsion dystonia with craniocervical and laryngeal
involvement, THAP1)
DYT7 (adult-­onset cervical dystonia)
DYT8 (paroxysmal nonkinesigenic dyskinesia, MR1)
DYT10 (paroxysmal kinesigenic dyskinesia, PRRT2)
DYT11 (myoclonus dystonia, SGCE)
DYT12 (rapid-­onset dystonia-­parkinsonism, ATP1A3)
DYT16 (early-­onset dystonia-­parkinsonism, autosomal recessive,
PRKRA)
DYT18 (paroxysmal exercise-­induced dyskinesia, SLC2A1)
DYT23 (adult-­onset cervical dystonia and myoclonus, CACNA1B/
CIZ1)
DYT24 (craniocervical dystonia with limb tremor, ANO3)
DYT26 (early-­onset myoclonic dystonia, KCTD17)
DYT27 (early-­onset segmental dystonia, autosomal recessive,
COL6A30
DYT 28 (early-­onset generalized dystonia, KMT2B)
DYT29 (early-­onset dystonia with optic atrophy and basal ganglia
abnormalities, MECR)
DYT30 (progressive early-­onset dystonia, VPS16)
DYT31 (early-­onset multifocal or generalized dystonia, autosomal
recessive, AOPEP)
Fahr disease (often caused by hypoparathyroid disease)
Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation
Huntington disease (particularly the Westphal variant, IT15-­4p16.3)
Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs, including SCA3/Machado-­Joseph
disease)
Neuronal ceroid-­lipofuscinoses (NCLs)
Rett syndrome
Striatal necrosis
Leigh disease
Leber hereditary ocular neuropathy (LHON)
Neuroacanthocytosis
HARP syndrome (hypoprebetalipoproteinemia, acanthocytosis,
retinitis pigmentosa, and pallidal degeneration)
Ataxia-­telangiectasia
POLG1 gene alterations
Tay-­Sachs disease
Sandhoff disease
Niemann-­Pick type C
GM1 gangliosidosis
Mitochondrial membrane protein–associated neurodegeneration
(MPAN)
Metachromatic leukodystrophy (MLD)
Lesch-­Nyhan disease
Pantothenate kinase–associated neurodegeneration (PKAN)

METABOLIC DISEASE
Glutaric aciduria types 1 and 2
Acyl-­coenzyme A (CoA) dehydrogenase deficiencies
Dopa-­responsive dystonia
Aromatic l-­amino acid decarboxylase deficiency
Aminolevulinic acid dehydrase
Biotin-­responsive basal ganglia disease
Mitochondrial disorders
Wilson disease
Vitamin E deficiency
Homocystinuria
Methylmalonic aciduria
Tyrosinemia
DRUGS/TOXINS
Neuroleptic and antiemetic medications (haloperidol,
chlorpromazine, olanzapine, risperidone, prochlorperazine)
Calcium channel blockers
Stimulants (amphetamine, cocaine, ergot alkaloids)
Anticonvulsants (carbamazepine, phenytoin)
Thallium
Manganese
Carbon monoxide
Ethylene glycol
Cyanide
Methanol
Wasp sting
PAROXYSMAL DISORDERS
Paroxysmal kinesigenic choreoathetosis (PKD)
Paroxysmal nonkinesigenic choreoathetosis (PNKD)
Paroxysmal exercise-­induced dystonia (PED)
Complex migraine
Alternating hemiplegia of childhood (AHC)
Paroxysmal torticollis of infancy
DISORDERS THAT MIMIC DYSTONIA
Tonic seizures (including paroxysmal nocturnal dystonia caused by
nocturnal frontal lobe seizures)
Arnold-­Chiari malformation type II
Atlantoaxial subluxation
Syringomyelia
Posterior fossa mass
Cervical spine malformation (including Klippel-­Feil syndrome)
Skew deviation with vertical diplopia causing neck twisting
Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis
Sandifer syndrome (associated with hiatal hernia in infants)
Spasmus nutans
Tics
Infant masturbation
Spasticity
Myotonia
Rigidity
Stiff-­person syndrome
Isaac syndrome (neuromyotonia)
Startle disease (hyperekplexia)
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome
Central herniation with posturing
Psychogenic dystonia

From Sanger TD, Mink JW. Movement disorders. In: Swaiman KF, Ashwal S, Ferriero DM, et al., eds. Swaiman’s Pediatric Neurology, 5th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2012: Box 68-­2.

with autism spectrum disorders may also be at increased risk for this
drug-­induced movement disorder. Unlike acute dystonic reactions and
neuroleptic malignant syndrome, discontinuation of the offending
agent may not result in clinical improvement. In these patients, use of
dopamine-­depletors, such as reserpine, tetrabenazine, or valbenazine,
may prove helpful.

Therapeutic doses of phenytoin, carbamazepine, or valproate
rarely cause progressive dystonia in children with epilepsy, particularly in those who have an underlying structural abnormality of the
brain.
During evaluation of new-­onset dystonia, a careful history of prescriptions and potential medication exposures is critical

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 637 u Movement Disorders

3683

Table 637.16  Examples of Primary and Secondary Dystonia in Childhood
ADDITIONAL CLINICAL
FEATURES

DIAGNOSIS
Aicardi-­Goutières syndrome

Alternating hemiplegia of
childhood

Encephalopathy, developmental
regression
Acquired microcephaly
Sterile pyrexias
Lesions on the digits, ears
(chilblain)
Epilepsy
CT: calcification of the basal
ganglia
Episodic hemiplegia/quadriplegia
Abnormal ocular movements
Autonomic symptoms
Epilepsy
Global developmental impairment
Environmental triggers for spells

Aromatic amino acid
decarboxylase deficiency
(AADC)

Developmental delay
Oculogyric crises
Autonomic dysfunction
Hypotonia

ARX gene alteration (X-­linked)

Male
Cognitive impairment
Infantile spasms, epilepsy
Brain malformation

DIAGNOSIS

ADDITIONAL CLINICAL
FEATURES

Kernicterus

Jaundice in infancy
Hearing loss
Impaired upgaze
Enamel dysplasia
MRI: hyperintense lesions in the
globus pallidus

Leigh syndrome

Motor delays, weakness,
hypotonia
Ataxia, tremor
Elevated lactate
MRI: bilateral symmetric
hyperintense lesions in the basal
ganglia or thalamus

Lesch-­Nyhan syndrome (X-­linked)

Male
Self-­injurious behavior
Hypotonia
Oromandibular dystonia,
inspiratory stridor
Oculomotor apraxia
Cognitive impairment
Elevated uric acid

Myoclonus dystonia

Myoclonus
Head, upper limb involvement

Niemann-­Pick type C

Hepatosplenomegaly
Hypotonia
Supranuclear gaze palsy
Ataxia, dysarthria
Epilepsy
Psychiatric symptoms

Benign paroxysmal torticollis of
infancy

Episodic
Cervical dystonia only
Family history of migraine

Complex regional pain syndrome

Lower limb involvement
Prominent pain

Dopa-­responsive dystonia (DRD)

Diurnal variation

Neuroacanthocytosis

Oromandibular and lingual
dystonia

Dystonia-­deafness optic
neuropathy syndrome

Sensorineural hearing loss in early
childhood
Psychosis
Optic atrophy in adolescence

Neurodegeneration with brain
iron accumulation

Cognitive impairment
Retinal pigmentary degeneration,
optic atrophy

DYT1 dystonia

Lower limb onset followed by
generalization

Rapid-­onset dystonia
parkinsonism (DYT12)

Acute onset
Distribution face > arm > leg
Prominent bulbar signs

Glutaric aciduria type 1

Macrocephaly
Encephalopathic crises
MRI: striatal necrosis

Rett syndrome

GM1 gangliosidosis type 3

Short stature, skeletal dysplasia
Orofacial dystonia
Speech/swallowing disturbance
Parkinsonism
MRI: putaminal hyperintensity

Female
Developmental regression after a
period of normal development
Stereotypic hand movements
Acquired microcephaly
Epilepsy

Spinocerebellar ataxia 17 (SCA17)

Ataxia
Dementia, psychiatric symptoms
Parkinsonism

Tics

Stereotyped movements
Premonitory urge, suppressible

Tyrosine hydroxylase deficiency

Infantile encephalopathy,
hypotonia
Oculogyric crises, ptosis
Autonomic symptoms
Less diurnal fluctuation than DRD

Drug-­induced dystonia

Huntington disease

Parkinsonism
Epilepsy
Family history of Huntington
disease

CEREBRAL PALSY
See Chapter 638.1.

METABOLIC DISORDERS

Disorders of monoamine neurotransmitter metabolism, of which
dopa-­responsive dystonia is one, present in infancy and early childhood with dystonia, hypotonia, oculogyric crises, and/or autonomic

symptoms. Common comorbidities such as epilepsy, developmental
delay, and microcephaly, which are also found in cerebral palsy and
other more common disorders, likely contribute to underdiagnosis of
this group of rare diseases. The more common disorders in this group
include DRD, tyrosine hydroxylase deficiency, and aromatic amino
acid decarboxylase deficiency. With the exception of aromatic amino
acid decarboxylase deficiency, most do respond at least partially to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3684 Part XXV u The Nervous System

Fig. 637.6 Syndromes with dystonia as the present-

ing or a predominant feature; primary dystonias or
dystonia-­
plus syndromes that commonly begin with
dystonia are listed. The most common sites of dystonia onset are indicated on the homunculus in red, with
less common sites of onset in pink. The distribution in
age of onset is indicated by a blue bar, with the mean
age indicated by a blue diamond, and rare but reported outliers indicated by extralinear blue dashes. Typical
rates of progression and the likelihood of generalization are indicated by yellow plots. Note that homunculi
and plots represent the most common clinical presentations, but variations on these axes are not uncommon.
(From Waugh JL, Sharma N. Clinical neurogenetics:
dystonia from phenotype to genotype. Neurol Clin.
2013;31:969–986, Fig. 1.)

levodopa. Abnormalities of the dopamine transporter (DAT) can also
present in infancy with dystonia.
Wilson disease is an autosomal recessive inborn error of copper transport characterized by cirrhosis of the liver and degenerative
changes in the central nervous system, particularly the basal ganglia
(see Chapter 405.2). It has been determined that there are multiple
alterations in the Wilson disease gene (WND), accounting for the variability in presentation of the condition. The neurologic manifestations
of Wilson disease rarely appear before age 10 years, and the initial sign
is often progressive dystonia. Tremors of the extremities develop, unilaterally at first, but they eventually become coarse, generalized, and
incapacitating. Other neurologic signs of Wilson disease relate to a
progressive basal ganglia disease, such as parkinsonism, dysarthria,
dysphonia, and choreoathetosis. Less frequent are ataxia and pyramidal signs. The MRI or CT scan shows ventricular dilation in advanced
cases, with atrophy of the cerebrum, cerebellum, and/or brainstem,
along with signal intensity change in the basal ganglia, thalamus, and/
or brainstem, particularly the midbrain.
Pantothenate kinase–associated neurodegeneration is a rare
autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disorder. Many patients have
alterations in pantothenate kinase 2 (PANK2) localized to mitochondria in neurons. The condition usually begins before 6 years of age
and is characterized by rapidly progressive dystonia, rigidity, and
choreoathetosis. Spasticity, extensor plantar responses, dysarthria,
and intellectual deterioration become evident during adolescence,
and death usually occurs by early adulthood. MRI shows lesions of
the globus pallidus, including low signal intensity in T2-­weighted
images (corresponding to iron pigments) and an anteromedial area
of high signal intensity (tissue necrosis and edema), or eye-­of-­the-­
tiger sign (Fig. 637.7). Neuropathologic examination indicates
excessive accumulation of iron-­containing pigments in the globus
pallidus and substantia nigra. Similar disorders of high brain iron
content without PANK2 gene alterations, including phospholipase

A2–associated neurodegeneration (PLAN), mitochondrial membrane protein–associated neurodegeneration (MPAN), beta-­propeller
protein–associated neurodegeneration (BPAN), neuroferritinopathy,
aceruloplasminemia, and others, have been grouped as disorders of
neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (Table 637.17).
Patterns of iron deposition visualized by brain MRI have shown utility in differentiating these disorders.
Biotin-­responsive basal ganglia disease manifests with episodes
of acute dystonia, external ophthalmoplegia, and encephalopathy.
SLC19A3 is the responsible mutated gene. MRI demonstrates involvement of the basal ganglia, with vasogenic edema and the bat-­wing sign
(Fig. 637.8). Treatment with biotin and thiamine results in improvement in 2-­4 days (Table 637.18).
Although dystonia may present in isolation as the first sign of a metabolic or neurodegenerative disorder, this group of diseases should be
considered mainly in those who demonstrate signs of systemic disease
(e.g., organomegaly, short stature, hearing loss, vision impairment, epilepsy) and those with episodes of severe illness, evidence of regression,
or cognitive impairment. Table 637.16 outlines additional features suggestive of specific disorders.

OTHER DISORDERS

Although uncommon, movement disorders, including dystonia, may
be part of the presenting symptoms of complex regional pain syndrome. Onset of involuntary movements within 1 year of the traumatic
event, an affected lower limb, pain disproportionate to the inciting
event, and changes in the overlying skin and blood flow to the affected
area suggest complex regional pain syndrome. Although sustained
dystonia can produce pain or discomfort, complex regional pain syndrome should be considered in those who have a prominent component of pain and a recent history of trauma to the affected limb.
Paroxysmal dyskinesias can cause a combination of dystonic posturing and choreoathetoid movements (Table 637.19). By far the most

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 637 u Movement Disorders

A

B

Fig.

637.7 Pantothenate kinase–associated neurodegeneration
(PKAN). A, Axial T2-­weighted image showing symmetric hypointensity in the bilateral globi pallidi with central hyperintensity (eye-­of-­the-­
tiger sign, arrows). B, Axial susceptibility-­
weighted image (SWI) image showing hypointensity in the globi pallidi representing increased
iron accumulation (arrows). (From Bosemani T, Meoded A, Poretti A.
Susceptibility-­
weighted imaging in pantothenate kinase-­
associated
neurodegeneration. J Pediatr. 2014;164:212.)

3685

common is paroxysmal kinesigenic dyskinesia (PKD), which most
commonly presents around the age of 10 years with attacks of chorea
or dystonic posturing lasting seconds to minutes. The movements are
most commonly precipitated by voluntary movements and are often
easily controlled by low doses of carbamazepine or other antiepileptic
medications. Many patients have a gene alteration in PRRT2, a transmembrane protein that interacts with SNAP 25. Paroxysmal nonkinesigenic dyskinesia (PNKD) is characterized by prolonged attacks
precipitated by emotional stress or alcohol rather than voluntary movement. The attacks are less frequent, perhaps a few times per year or less,
but they may last hours. PNKD is less responsive to treatment than
PKD. The rarest form of paroxysmal dyskinesia is exercise-­induced
dystonia. Dystonia in this disorder occurs after periods of prolonged
exercise and tends to last between 10 and 30 minutes. Patients may
also suffer from migraines and epilepsy. This disorder is caused by
gene alteration in SLC2A1, which encodes the glucose transporter
type 1 protein and is part of GLUT-­1 deficiency syndrome. Dystonia
may be present in classic GLUT-­1 deficiency, although it is generally
not the presenting sign. Case reports indicate some patients may have
improvement in dystonia with the ketogenic diet.
There are disorders unique to childhood that warrant exploration
in this section as well. Benign paroxysmal torticollis of infancy is

Table 637.17  Overview of NBIA Conditions and Genes (If Known)
CONDITION
(ACRONYM)

SYNONYM

GENE

CHROMOSOMAL AREAS OF HIGHEST
POSITION
IRON DENSITY

PKAN

NBIA1

PANK2

20p13

GP, eye of the tiger sign
(central hyperintensity
within a surrounding
area of hypointensity).

GP with variable involvement of
adjacent structures (putamen and
internal capsule). Spheroid bodies.
Only occasional peripheral
manifestation.

PLAN

NBIA2,
PARK14

PLA2G6

22q12

GP. Additional SN
involvement in some.

Widespread cortical alpha-­synuclein-­
positive Lewy body pathology.
Presence of tau. Degeneration of the
cerebellum, optic pathway and of
brainstem and spinal cord long tracts.

FAHN

SPG35

FA2H

16q23

GP. Often white matter
changes.

No human brain data. In animal
models, cerebellar abnormalities,
demyelination, and profound axonal
loss in the CNS.

MPAN

—

C19orf12

19q12

GP and SN.

GP and SN iron-­containing deposits,
axonal spheroids, Lewy body-­
like inclusions, and tau-­positive
inclusions.

Kufor-­Rakeb disease

PARK9

ATP13A2

1p36

Putamen and caudate.

No human brain data. On peripheral
nerve biopsy cytoplasmic inclusion
bodies resembling irregular primary
lysosomes.

Aceruloplasminemia

—

CP

3q23

Basal ganglia, thalamus,
dentate nuclei,
and cerebral and
cerebellar cortices.
Liver, pancreas.

Basal ganglia and dentate nuclei,
extending to the cerebral cortex.

Neuroferritinopathy

—

FTL

19q13

Caudate, GP, putamen,
SN, and red nuclei.

Ferritin-­positive spherical inclusions in
iron-­rich areas, mainly in the posterior
putamen and cerebellum. Spheroids
immunoreactive to ubiquitin and tau.
Hepatic iron deposits may be present.

SENDA syndrome

—

n.k.

n.k.

GP and SN. White
matter changes.

n.k.

Idiopathic late-­onset
cases

—

Probably
heterogeneous

Probably
heterogeneous

Heterogeneous.

n.k.

PATHOLOGIC MANIFESTATIONS

CP, Ceruloplasmin; FA2H, fatty acid 2-­hydroxylase; FTL, ferritin light chain; GP, globus pallidus; MPAN, mitochondrial-­associated neurodegeneration; NBIA, neurodegeneration
with brain iron accumulation; PANK2, pantothenate kinase 2; PKAN, pantothenate kinase-­associated neurodegeneration; PLA2G6, phospholipase A2; PLAN, phospholipase A2–
associated neurodegeneration; SENDA, static encephalopathy of childhood with neurodegeneration in adulthood; SN, substantia nigra; SPG, spastic paraplegia; n.k., not known.
From Schneider SA, Bhatia KP. Syndromes of neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation. Sem Pediatr Neurol. 2012;19:57–66, Table 1, p. 58.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3686 Part XXV u The Nervous System

A

B

C

Fig. 637.8 Biotin-­responsive basal ganglia disease. An initial brain MRI showed high signal intensity alterations on T2-­weighted images bilaterally

involving the (A) cerebellum (arrows), (B) basal ganglia (white arrows), and medial nucleus of the thalamus (open arrows) and (B, C) cerebral cortex
(black arrows). (Modified from Tabarki B, Al-­Sheikh F, Al-­Shahwan S, Zuccoli G. Bilateral external ophthalmoplegia in biotin-­responsive basal ganglia
disease. J Pediatr. 2013;162:1291–1292.)

Table 637.18  Dystonia Treatment
Nonspecific dystonia
management

Trial of carbidopa/levodopa
Botulinum toxin injection
Also consider: neuroleptics, dopamine
depletors
Surgical options: baclofen pump, deep
brain stimulation

Neurotransmitter
disorders, including
Segawa syndrome

Carbidopa/levodopa (except aromatic
L-­amino acid decarboxylase
deficiency, which may worsen),
dopamine agonists

Acute drug-­induced
dystonic reaction

Diphenhydramine, removal of
offending agent

Tardive dyskinesia

Dopamine depletors, removal of
offending agent

Paroxysmal dyskinesias

Carbamazepine, other AEDs (especially
paroxysmal kinesogenic dyskinesia),
acetazolamide (paroxysmal
nonkinesogenic dyskinesia),
ketogenic diet (exercise-­induced
dyskinesia)

Biotin-­responsive basal
ganglia disease

Biotin and thiamine

Complex regional pain
syndrome and functional
movement disorders

Physical therapy, occupational therapy,
cognitive behavioral therapy

characterized by recurrent episodes of cervical dystonia beginning in
the first few months of life. The torticollis may alternate sides from one
episode to the next and may also persist during sleep. Associated signs
and symptoms include irritability, pallor, vomiting, vertigo, ataxia,
and occasionally limb dystonia. The family history is often notable for
migraine and/or motion sickness in first-­degree relatives. Despite the
high frequency of spells, imaging studies are normal, and the outcome
is uniformly benign with resolution by 3 years of age.
In alternating hemiplegia of childhood (AHC), episodic hemiplegia affecting either side of the body is the hallmark of the disorder. However, patients are also affected by episodes of dystonia, ranging from
minutes to days in duration. On average, both features of the disorder
commence at approximately 6 months of age. Episodic abnormal eye
movements are observed in a large proportion of patients (93%) with
onset as early as the first week of life. AHC is associated with pathogenic variants in ATP1A2 and ATP1A3. The disorder can be triggered

by fluctuations in temperature, certain foods, or water exposure. Over
time, epilepsy and cognitive impairment emerge, and the involuntary
movements change from episodic to constant. Infantile onset and the
paroxysmal nature of symptoms early in the disease course are key features to this diagnosis. Another disorder linked to variants in ATP1A3,
rapid-­onset dystonia parkinsonism (RODP), often presents in adolescents with acute to subacute progressive dystonia and bradykinesia,
often after a stressor such as recent illness. Although the classic forms
of these two disorders, AHC and RODP, are generally caused by nonoverlapping gene alterations, molecular genetics has allowed the identification of patients with intermediate phenotypes.
Although it is a diagnosis of exclusion, the presence of odd movements or selective disability may indicate a functional dystonia in
older children. There is considerable overlap in features of organic and
functional movement disorders, making the diagnosis difficult to
establish. Both organic and psychogenic movement disorders have the
potential to worsen in the setting of stress and may dissipate with relaxation or sleep. The history should include a review of recent stressors,
psychiatric symptoms, and exposure to others with similar disorders.
On examination, a changing movement disorder, inconsistent motor
or sensory exam, or response to suggestion is supportive of a possible
psychogenic movement disorder. Early recognition of this disorder
may lessen morbidity caused by unnecessary diagnostic and interventional procedures (see Table 637.13).
Practice guidance had once involved targeted, single-­gene testing; currently the most appropriate approach to a child with dystonia
not explained by a clear mechanism of injury will be a dystonia gene
sequencing panel, followed by a microarray and then whole exome
or genome sequencing if the panel was unrevealing. This includes
children previously diagnosed with cerebral palsy but without severe
perinatal distress and/or with injury solely confined to the basal ganglia on brain imaging. In families with a known history of a specific
genetic dystonia, single-­gene testing is the most appropriate initial
approach. Because dystonia panels may vary in which genes they
include, a knowledge of phenotypic features expected in various disorders can ensure that the dystonia panel selected is appropriate to
a given patient. An approach to diagnostic testing is noted in Table
637.20 and Figure 637.9.

TREATMENT
Acute Treatment

Status dystonicus, or “dystonic storm,” is a rare but potentially life-­
threatening emergency that often requires management in an intensive care setting. It is characterized by severe frequent dystonic
posturing leading to vital sign instability, exhaustion, and/or muscle
breakdown. It is likely underrecognized. About half of patients have

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 637 u Movement Disorders

3687

Table 637.19  Classification of Primary and Epilepsy Paroxysmal Dyskinesias
PKD

PNKD

PED

PHD*

Inheritance

AD

AD

AD

Usually sporadic

Gender M:F

4:1

2:1

2:3

7:3

Age at onset, yr

<1-­20

<1-­20s

2-­30

4-­20s

Phenomenology of
abnormal movements

Dystonia with or without
chorea/ballism, unilateral
or bilateral

Dystonia with or without
choreoathetosis,
unilateral or bilateral,
rarely spasticity

Dystonia, sometimes
in combination with
choreoathetosis,
unilateral or bilateral

Dystonia, chorea, ballism

Triggers

Sudden movement,
change in direction,
acceleration, startle

Alcohol, caffeine,
emotions, fatigue

Prolonged exercise,
muscle vibration

Sleep

Duration of paroxysms

Seconds up to 5 min

2 min to 4 hr

5 min to 2 hr

30 min up to 50 min

Frequency of paroxysms

1 per month to 100 per day Few per week to few in a
lifetime

Few per month

Few per year to few per
night

Genetics

1.	EKD1: 16p11.2-­q12.1
(DYT10)
with PRRT2 gene within
this region
2.	EKD2: 16q13-­q22.1
(DYT19)
3.	EKD3: no variant on
chromosome 16

1.	PNKD: 2q35 (DYT8)
2.	SCL2A1: chromosome 1
(DYT9)
3.	KCNMA1: 10q22
4.	Locus on 2q31 (DYT20)

1.	SCL2A1: 1p35-­p31.3
(DYT18)

1.	CHRNA4: 20q13.2-­q13.3
2.	CHRNB2: chromosome
1q21
3.	Locus on chromosome
15q24
4.	Locus on chromosome
8p21

Treatment

Anticonvulsants
(carbamazepine,
phenytoin, others)

Avoiding triggers,
benzodiazepines
(clonazepam)

Avoiding triggers,
ketogenic diet (in GLUT-­1
deficiency)

Anticonvulsants

*Also known as autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy.
AD, Autosomal dominant; PED, paroxysmal exercise-­induced dyskinesia; PHD, paroxysmal hypogenic dyskinesia (a seizure disorder); PKD, paroxysmal kinesigenic dyskinesia; PNKD,
paroxysmal nonkinesigenic dyskinesia.
From Joseph SA. Movement disorders in childhood. In: Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, et al., eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based Diagnosis, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2023: Table 40.2, p. 719.

Table 637.20  Genetic Testing
All patients with early-­onset dystonia without a clear family history or
clear mechanism of injury, including those with “cerebral palsy” in
the setting of only mild perinatal insults: comprehensive dystonia
panel, consider microarray and whole exome sequencing if
unrevealing
If the following features are present, ensure the appropriate gene is
included in panel testing:
Limb-­onset dystonia in early adolescence: torsinA (DYT1), especially
with Ashkenazi ancestry
Cervical/cranial onset in mid-­adolescence: THAP1 (DYT6), especially
with strained speech (spasmodic dysphonia)
Normal gait in the morning, disabled by the evening: give levodopa;
if symptoms improve, check guanosine triphosphate (GTP)
cyclohydrolase 1 (DYT5a); tyrosine hydroxylase (DYT5b)
Mixed myoclonus and dystonia with onset throughout childhood:
ε-­sarcoglycan (DYT11), especially if symptoms are alcohol
responsive in family members
Onset of dystonia ± parkinsonism over hours to days: ATP1A3
(DYT12), especially if symptoms progress in a rostral to caudal
fashion
Paroxysmal dystonia ± chorea triggered by:
• Sudden movement: PRRT2 (DYT10), especially if there is a
family history of complex migraines or benign seizures/chorea
in infancy
• Caffeine or alcohol: PNKD (DYT8), especially if symptoms are
rare but last many minutes to hours
• Exertion or if the ratio of cerebrospinal fluid/serum glucose
is less than 0.5, SLC2A1 (DYT18), especially in families with
unexplained cognitive delay or seizure disorder
Modified from Waugh JL, Sharma N. Clinical neurogenetics: dystonia from phenotype
to genotype. Neurol Clin. 2013;31:969–986, Box, p. 975.

an underlying known cause of dystonia, such as cerebral palsy. Infections and changes in medications are frequently cited triggers. In
addition, dystonic storm can also present in children with no prior
history of movement disorders secondary to neurologic insults such
as encephalitis or stroke. There are no consensus guidelines on treatment, but in general aggressive management with antidystonic agents
such as anticholinergics, trihexyphenidyl, benzodiazepines, and
baclofen is recommended. Midazolam infusion is generally chosen
when sedation is needed because of its muscle relaxing properties.
Intubation and other critical care supportive measures are commonly
needed during treatment.

Chronic Treatment

Treatment strategy is summarized in Table 637.18. Children with
Segawa syndrome and other neurotransmitter disorders generally have
a robust response to low-­dose carbidopa-­levodopa. The evidence for
efficacy in other causes of dystonia such as cerebral palsy is mixed.
However, because neurotransmitter disorders are underdiagnosed and
low-­dose carbidopa-­levodopa is generally well tolerated, a treatment
trial is recommended unless there is a clear family history of a non–
dopa-­responsive dystonia.
Children with generalized dystonia, including those with
involvement of the muscles of swallowing, may respond to the
anticholinergic agent trihexyphenidyl. Titration occurs slowly over
the course of months in an effort to limit untoward side effects,
such as urinary retention, mental confusion, or blurred vision. Oral
baclofen may also be used, although sedation may be a problem at
higher doses. Dopamine depletors may be considered in treatment-­
refractory cases. Additional drugs that may be effective include
benzodiazepines, neuroleptics, and antiepileptic drugs such as
carbamazepine.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3688 Part XXV u The Nervous System
DRUG-­INDUCED DYSTONIAS

Childhood-onset dystonia

In the case of drug-­induced dystonias, removal of the offending agent
and treatment with intravenous diphenhydramine typically suffice. For
neuroleptic malignant syndrome, dantrolene may be indicated. As tardive symptoms may not always respond to removal of the offending
agent, dopamine depletors may be necessary

Pilot dose of combination
levodopa and carbidopa

Visit Elsevier Ebooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.
Effective

Not effective

Further investigation
Dopa-responsive dystonia

Continue dopaminergic therapy

Chapter 638

Encephalopathies

Disease-specific
treatment

Elizabeth Barkoudah
Generalized or segmental

Focal

Trihexyphenidyl

Botulinum toxin

Encephalopathy is a generalized disorder of cerebral function that
may be acute or chronic, progressive or static. The etiologies of the
encephalopathies in children include infectious, toxic (carbon monoxide, drugs, lead), metabolic, genetic, and ischemic causes. Hypoxic-­
ischemic encephalopathy is discussed in Chapter 122.4.

Gabapentin

638.1 Cerebral Palsy
Clonidine, tetrabenazine,
baclofen, benzodiazepines

Severely impaired function in
activities of daily living, pain

Consider indications for intrathecal
baclofen or pallidal stimulation

Fig. 637.9 Algorithm showing therapeutic approaches to the man-

agement of childhood-­onset dystonia. Pharmacologic agents should
be used sparingly where possible. High doses and polypharmacy inevitably arise when dystonia is severe enough to cause pain and interferes
with daily cares, sitting comfort, and sleep. As with intractable epilepsy,
consideration for functional neurosurgery should be considered when
two or more drugs have failed to control dystonia. (From Lin JP. Advances in pharmacotherapies for movement disorders in children: current
limitations and future progress. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2017;29:652–664,
Fig. 6.)

Oral medications are not the only options for treatment. Segmental dystonia, such as torticollis, often responds well to botulinum toxin
injections. Safe dosage restrictions limit the use of botulinum toxin in
generalized dystonia, but it may be used as a supplemental treatment
if symptoms in particular muscle groups are the most bothersome or
functionally impairing.
Intrathecal baclofen delivered through an implantable constant-­
infusion pump may be helpful in some patients. It is often more effective in the lower extremities than the upper extremities.
Deep brain stimulation with leads implanted in the globus pallidus
is most helpful for children with severe primary generalized dystonia.
Deep brain stimulation may also be of benefit in children with secondary dystonias, such as cerebral palsy, although the effect is not as robust.
A combination of factors are thought to reduce the efficacy in cerebral
palsy, including a lack of normal neural substrate, reduced opportunity
for motor learning during critical developmental windows, and the frequent presence of other neurologic impairments such as spasticity and
weakness. It should only be considered if a trial of two to three oral
agents has been unsuccessful.

Elizabeth Barkoudah
See also Chapters 56 and 637.4.
Cerebral palsy (CP) is a complex and heterogeneous disorder denoting a group of permanent motor conditions that cause physical disability in human development, chiefly in the various areas of body
movement. It can be defined as a central motor dysfunction affecting
muscle tone, posture, and movement that is attributed to nonprogressive disturbances in the developing fetal or infant brain. Despite being
described as a nonprogressive disorder (historically referred to as static
encephalopathy by some), the clinical expression of brain injury or
insult changes over time. Therefore the condition should be viewed as
a dynamic disorder that evolves because of factors such as growth, nervous system maturation, and aging.
Several classification systems are used to describe CP, which
reflects the complexity underlying the heterogeneity of cause, distribution, type of motor involvement, and severity. Consideration of
associated manifestations such as cognitive deficits, seizures, communication difficulties, visual impairment, and so on, as well as
addressing the medical, surgical, and psychosocial needs requires a
multidisciplinary approach.

EPIDEMIOLOGY AND ETIOLOGY

Cerebral palsy is the most common neuromotor disorder in childhood, with an overall incidence of 2.6-­2.9 cases per 1,000 live
births in the United States. Within developed countries, both cross-­
sectional and cohort-­based studies estimate prevalence of CP as
nearly 1-­4 per 1,000 live births. In developing countries, available
estimates of prevalence are similar. The estimated lifetime cost to
care for someone with CP in 2003, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), was $1 million. Adjusting for
inflation, this is now $1.2 million per individual and will continue
to increase over time.
CP is caused by a broad group of developmental, genetic, metabolic,
ischemic, infectious, and other etiologies that produce a common
group of neurologic phenotypes. Thus CP should be based on phenotype rather than etiology. The prevalence of CP is higher for children born preterm or at a low birthweight, though this is influenced
by sex, ethnicity, and socioeconomic status. There is a 30–40% greater
prevalence in males. Prevalence is higher in low-­and middle-­versus

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 638 u Encephalopathies
high-­income communities. Rates of CP have only recently begun to
decrease in developed countries, though direct interpretation of trends
is complicated by changing patterns of neonatal care and survivorhood.
Although overall prevalence has fluctuated, the specific etiologies and
injury patterns have shifted over time given advances in perinatal and
neonatal management.
In addition to prematurity and birthweight, numerous other prenatal and perinatal risk factors have been reported, though for many of
these, a causal relationship has not been established. These risk factors
include antenatal infection (chorioamnionitis, urinary tract infection),
multiple pregnancy, and neonatal infection. Infertility treatments are
also associated with a higher rate of CP, probably because these treatments are often associated with multiple pregnancies. CP is most often
multifactorial, and multiple risk factors coexist.
The cerebral disruption associated with CP can occur prenatally,
perinatally, or postnatally in the first 2 years of life given that brain
development is ongoing during this critical period. Congenital CP (due
to cerebral injury/maldevelopment before or during birth) accounts
for 85–90% of total cases, whereas acquired CP (due to cerebral injury
after 1 month of life) is responsible for the remaining cases.
One can also consider different etiologies based on premature versus term births. The major lesions that contribute to CP in preterm
infants are intracerebral hemorrhage and periventricular leukomalacia (PVL). Although the incidence of intracerebral hemorrhage
has declined significantly, PVL remains a major problem. The incidence of cystic PVL caused by a more diffuse injury pattern is being
replaced by focal necrosis. PVL reflects the enhanced vulnerability
of immature oligodendroglia in premature infants to oxidative stress
caused by ischemia or infectious/inflammatory insults. White matter
abnormalities (loss of volume of periventricular white matter, extent
of cystic changes, ventricular dilation, thinning of the corpus callosum) present on MRI at 40 weeks of gestational age in former preterm
infants are a predictor of later CP. MRI with diffusion tensor imaging
is being used to map white matter tracts more precisely in patients
with spastic diplegia, and this technique has shown that thalamocortical sensory pathways are often injured as severely as motor corticospinal pathways (Fig. 638.1).
Lateral

3689

In term births, causes historically have primarily been thought to be
by events during labor and delivery causing hypoxia. The mechanisms
are predominately the result of cerebral ischemia and excitotoxicity.
The cause can be obvious (i.e., placental abruption, meconium aspiration), though at other times the etiology can be difficult to pinpoint.
Risk factors can include eclampsia, hypercoagulability, and placental
pathology. For some, no predisposing clinical factors are identified.
Hypoxic-­ischemic encephalopathy (HIE) may be decreasing as an
apparent cause of CP in developed countries. Therapeutic hypothermia
may reduce the risk of CP in term patients with HIE.
There are several causes of acquired CP. The most common cause in
this category is perinatal stroke, which can be ischemic, hemorrhagic,
or thromboembolic in nature. The second most common cause is meningitis or encephalitis during infancy. Kernicterus is a rare cause of
CP in developed countries, though cases (particularly in very preterm
infants) persist.
Cryptogenic CP traditionally refers to an individual in which no
clear perinatal etiology has been identified and accounts for ∼30% of
cases. Chromosomal copy number variants and single gene disorders
have been identified in ∼30% of patients with CP. Monogenic genetic
variants have been identified in ∼30% of cases who met diagnostic criteria for CP. A wide range of genes have been implicated in CP phenotypes, though a few are relatively more frequently seen including
TUBA1A, TUBB4A, COL4A1, SPAST, CTNNB1, GNAO1, STXBP1,
and KIF1A. Factors associated with exome sequencing–identified gene
variants include patients without a perinatal risk factor, those with a
positive family history, and patients with intellectual disability, epilepsy, or autism spectrum disorders.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

There are several classification systems to describe CP, a reflection of
the complexity underlying the heterogeneity of cause, distribution,
type of motor involvement, and severity (Table 638.1). Classification
aids in understanding cause, coordinating care, monitoring comorbidities, treatment offerings and their prognosis, and long-­term outcomes. One such classification system starts by determining the type of
motor involvement: spastic or extrapyramidal. Spastic CP can then be

Posterior thalamic
radiation

Fibers penetrating
the posterior limb
of internal capsule

AP

Left
superior
oblique

Fig. 638.1 Diffusion tensor image

of white matter pathways in the brains
of two patients with spastic diplegia
on the right compared with a normal
child on the far left. Yellow fibers are
corticospinal pathways projected from
the motor cerebral cortex at the top
downward into the brainstem, whereas
red fibers are thalamocortical sensory
fibers projected from the thalamus
upward to the cortex. In children with
spastic diplegia, both the corticospinal and thalamocortical pathways are
reduced in size but the ascending
thalamocortical pathways are more
affected. (From Nagae LM, Hoon AH
Jr, Stashinko E, et al. Diffusion tensor
imaging in children with periventricular
leukomalacia: variability of injuries to
white matter tracts. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2007;28:1213–1222.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3690 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 638.1  Classification of Cerebral Palsy and Major Causes
MOTOR SYNDROME (APPROX % OF CP)

NEUROPATHOLOGY/MRI

MAJOR CAUSES

Spastic diplegia (35%)

Periventricular leukomalacia
Periventricular cysts or scars in white matter,
enlargement of ventricles, squared-­off
posterior ventricles

Prematurity
Ischemia
Infection
Endocrine/metabolic (e.g., thyroid)

Spastic quadriplegia (20%)

Periventricular leukomalacia

Ischemia, infection

Multicystic encephalomalacia
Cortical malformations

Endocrine/metabolic, genetic/developmental

Hemiplegia (25%)

Stroke: in utero or neonatal
Focal infarct or cortical, subcortical damage
Cortical malformations

Thrombophilic disorders
Infection
Genetic/developmental
Periventricular hemorrhagic infarction

Extrapyramidal (athetoid, dyskinetic) (15%)

Asphyxia: symmetric scars in putamen and
thalamus
Kernicterus: scars in globus pallidus,
hippocampus
Mitochondrial: scarring of globus pallidus,
caudate, putamen, brainstem
No lesions: ? dopa-­responsive dystonia

Hypoxia
Kernicterus
Mitochondrial
Genetic/metabolic

further truncated topographically (Fig. 638.2), whereas extrapyramidal is further categorized based on the type of involuntary movement
seen. In extrapyramidal CP, the brain injury or insult spares the pyramidal tracts that cause spasticity resulting in disorders of movement,
coordination, and balance. Clinically, these patients exhibit dystonia
and/or choreoathetosis (collectively referred to as dyskinetic) or ataxia
associated with lesions in the cerebellum or its connections. Spastic CP
accounts for 80% of cases, whereas extrapyramidal makes up 20% of
cases (15% dyskinetic and 5% ataxic).
Historically, CP has been classified as mild, moderate, and severe
without specified criteria for each group and primarily used for diagnostic purposes. The Gross Motor Function Classification System
(GMFCS) was developed to categorize CP based on abilities and limitations in motor functioning. Goals included improved communication
for treatment decisions, research into treatment outcomes, improved
understanding and communication of the development of a child with
CP, and anticipated future ambulatory needs. The emphasis is on usual
rather than best motor performance in a variety of settings: home,
school, and community.
Spastic hemiplegia has decreased spontaneous movements on the
affected side and shows hand (handedness) preference at a very early
age. The arm is often more involved than the leg, and difficulty in hand
manipulation is evident by 1 year of age. Walking is usually delayed
until 18-­24 months, and a circumductive gait is apparent. Examination of the extremities may show growth arrest leading to shortened
limbs and decreased muscle bulk on the affected side. Spasticity refers
to the quality of increased muscle tone, which increases with the speed
of passive muscle stretching and is greatest in antigravity muscles. It is
apparent in the affected extremities, particularly at the ankle, causing
an equinovarus deformity of the foot. An affected child often walks
on tiptoe (toe-­walking) because of the increased tone in the antigravity gastrocnemius muscles and tight contracted Achilles tendon; the
affected upper extremity assumes a flexed posture when the child runs.
Ankle clonus and a Babinski sign may be present, the deep tendon
reflexes are increased, and weakness of the hand and foot dorsiflexors
is evident. Difficulty in selective motor control is also present.
Spastic monoplegia is when only one limb is affected and may
not be as obvious as other types of CP. Depending on which limb is
affected, the child’s motor disability ranges from challenges with either
fine or gross motor skills. A monoplegia that affects the arm may result
in challenges with bimanual tasks, whereas when the legs are involved,
toe walking may be seen.
Spastic diplegia is bilateral spasticity of the legs that is greater than
in the arms. Spastic diplegia is strongly associated with injury to the
immature white matter during the vulnerable period of immature

oligodendroglia between 20 and 34 weeks of gestation, hence seen in
those born prematurely. The first clinical indication of spastic diplegia is often noted when an affected infant begins to crawl. The child
uses the arms in a normal reciprocal fashion but tends to drag the legs
behind more as a rudder (commando crawl) rather than using the normal four-­limbed crawling movement. If the spasticity is severe, application of a diaper is difficult because of the excessive adduction of the
hips. Examination of the child reveals symmetric spasticity in the legs
with brisk reflexes, ankle clonus, and a bilateral Babinski sign. When
the child is suspended by the axillae, an extended scissoring posture
of the lower extremities is maintained. Walking can be significantly
delayed, the feet are held in a position of equinovarus, and the child
walks on tiptoes. Severe spastic diplegia is characterized by disuse atrophy, impaired growth of the lower extremities, and disproportionate
growth with normal development of the upper torso.
Spastic quadriplegia is the most severe form of CP because of
marked motor impairment of all extremities and the high association
with other comorbidities, including intellectual disabilities, seizure
disorders, communication and visual impairment, and feeding difficulties. Swallowing difficulties are common as a result of supranuclear
bulbar palsies, often leading to aspiration pneumonia and growth failure. Neurologic examination shows increased tone and spasticity in
all extremities, decreased spontaneous movements, brisk reflexes, and
plantar extensor responses. Flexion contractures of the knees, elbows,
and wrists are often present by late childhood. Children with spastic
quadriparesis can also have extrapyramidal findings given the diffuse
involvement of the brain injury.
Extrapyramidal CP can be divided into the two main types of
involuntary movement seen: ataxia and dyskinesias. In this type of CP,
injury is typically to the subcortical areas, which are centers for coordination in movement and balance. Injury may not produce weakness,
but rather the inability to voluntarily control movements. This type is
less common than spastic CP and makes up approximately 15–20% of
patients with CP.
Ataxic CP is the rarest form whose clinical picture is variable ranging from hypotonia to mild spasticity in addition to incoordination
depending on the other systems involved. Walking gait is often very
wide and sometimes irregular. Control of eye movements and depth
perception can be impaired. Often, fine motor skills requiring coordination of the eyes and hands, such as writing, are difficult. Other
causes of ataxia in infancy and childhood, including hydrocephalus,
neoplasms, and degenerative disorders, should be ruled out before CP
is diagnosed (see Chapter 637.1).
Dyskinetic CP is further divided into two groups: athetoid and
dystonic. Athetoid CP includes cases with involuntary movement,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 638 u Encephalopathies

3691

Nearly all individuals with CP will have one or more medical, neurologic, or psychiatric comorbidities. Neuropsychiatric comorbidities
that occur at higher rates with CP include intellectual disability, anxiety, depression, and attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
compared with the general population. Other associated comorbidities are common and include chronic pain, sleep difficulties, urinary
dysfunction, decreased bone health, sialorrhea, respiratory disorders,
feeding and growth challenges, gastrointestinal disorders including constipation and dysmotility, speech/communication difficulties,
visual impairment, and hearing loss.

Unilateral Cerebral Palsy

DIAGNOSIS

Monoplegia

Hemiplegia

Bilateral Cerebral Palsy

Diplegia

Triplegia

Quadriplegia

Fig 638.2 Topographical description in spastic cerebral palsy. Spastic

cerebral palsy accounts for 70–80% of cases and is caused by an injury of the pyramidal tracts affecting voluntary movement. Monoplegia
and hemiplegia affect one side of the body; in monoplegia one limb
is affected, whereas in hemiplegia both the arm and leg on one side
are affected. Hemiplegia can be asymmetric, affecting the arm or leg
greater than the other extremity. Diplegia, triplegia, and quadriplegia
affect both sides of the body. In diplegia, the predominant picture is involvement of the lower extremities. However, the arms can be affected
though not to the same degree. In triplegia, both lower extremities and
one arm are affected. A common picture is diplegia from periventricular
leukomalacia and hemiplegia from an interventricular hemorrhage. This
results in one lower extremity being more severely affected because of
a dual mechanism of injury. In quadriplegia, all extremities are involved.
(From Graham HK, Rosenbaum P, Paneth N, et al. Cerebral palsy. Nat
Rev Dis Primers. 2016;2:15082, Fig. 2.)

especially in the arms, legs, and hands. With the current management
of Rh and ABO incompatibility, the incidence of CP characterized by
athetosis has markedly decreased (see Chapter 637). Athetoid CP is
often caused by kernicterus secondary to high levels of bilirubin, and
in this case the MRI scan shows lesions in the globus pallidus bilaterally, or it may be normal. Cases are still seen as a result of HIE as well.
The affected infant is initially hypotonic, but a tendency toward arching and opisthotonus (dystonia) is noted, and obligatory tonic neck
reflexes are present. These primitive motor patterns preclude orderly
motor development such as reaching, rolling, and sitting. Dystonic CP
encompasses cases that affect the trunk muscles more than the limbs
and results in a fixed, twisted posture. Toward the end of the first year,
repetitive, involuntary movements become more consistent with the
full-­blown picture of dystonic CP. Dystonia in CP presents as hypertonia, involuntary postures and movements, or a combination.

CP is a clinical diagnosis that considers elements from the history,
physical examination, and ancillary testing including neuroimaging.
The history should focus on whether there was perinatal or postnatal
injury to the brain, what factors led to this injury, and contributory
pregnancy factors. Another important factor is the developmental trajectory. It is important to quantify rates of development in the various domains and whether that trajectory has been one of continued
acquisition of skills, plateauing, or regression. This—especially no loss
of acquired milestones (regression)—helps preclude a progressive disorder of the central nervous system (CNS), including degenerative diseases, metabolic disorders, spinal cord tumor, or muscular dystrophy.
Multiple components to the physical examination are necessary to characterize abnormalities of tone, reflexes, movements, posture, and balance
that may be consistent with the diagnosis of CP. The physical examination should focus on the following features: presence of any limb deformities, curvature of the spine, range of motion of joints, muscle tone, muscle
strength, reflexes, presence of any movement disorders, and gait.
An MRI scan of the brain is indicated to determine the location and
extent of structural lesions or associated congenital malformations; an
MRI scan of the spinal cord is indicated if there is any question about spinal
cord pathology. An MRI with abnormalities consistent with CP supports
the diagnosis and increases the level of certainty, but the diagnosis remains
a clinical one. An early diagnosis of CP is desirable to initiate appropriate
services and therapies and to provide a definitive diagnosis for families.
Additional studies may include tests of hearing and visual function. Genetic
evaluation should be considered in patients with congenital malformations,
evidence of metabolic disorders (e.g., amino acids, organic acids, MR spectroscopy), clinical features atypical of CP, or when there are no perinatal risk factors
especially in term infants (Fig. 638.3, Tables 638.2 and 638.3).
The differential diagnosis must include disorders that may mimic the
various types of CP (see Fig. 638.3). These may include the hereditary
spastic diplegias (Table 638.4), monoamine transmitter disorders such as
dihydroxyphenylalanine (DOPA)-­responsive dystonia (Segawa disease)
(Table 638.5 and Fig. 638.4), and many treatable inborn errors of metabolism, including disorders of amino acids, creatine, fatty acid oxidation,
lysosomes, mitochondria, organic acids, and vitamin cofactors.

TREATMENT

The treatment strategy for CP is best developed in a multidisciplinary
patient-­centered setting, where medical interventions are embedded in
a rehabilitation context considering the patient’s individual goals (see
Chapter 752). The overarching goal for patients with CP is to maximize
functioning by improved biomechanics resulting from abnormal tone,
musculoskeletal deformities, and muscle weakness. Other goals outside
of those related to the neuromotor component can be equally important
when they pertain to quality of life, comfort, and social stigmatization.
Clear communication and coordination among the multidisciplinary
team (physiatry, orthopedic, neurology/neurodevelopmentalists, neurosurgery) as well as physical and occupational therapy, speech pathology, social work, primary care physicians, developmental pediatricians,
and educators maximize the chances of success.
Parents should be taught how to work with their child in daily activities such as feeding, carrying, dressing, bathing, and playing in ways that
reduce the effects of abnormal muscle tone. Families and children also
need to be instructed in the performance of a series of exercises designed
to promote developmental progress, prevent long-­term complications
such as the development of contractures, preserve range of motion,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3692 Part XXV u The Nervous System
History/exam inconsistent with CP
due to perinatal brain injury

Abnormal
MRI brain +/– spinal cord

Directed genetic testing
based on specific findingsa

Normal/non-specific
Initial biochemical and genetic studies to consider
Infantile developmental delay,
mixed motor syndrome
• Serum TSH
• Serum uric acid
• Serum amino acids
• Serum lactate, pyruvate
• Serum acylcarnitines
• Serum biotinidase activity
• Urine organic acids
• CSF studiesb
• SNP-CGH microarray*

Spasticity

Dystonia/chorea

Ataxia

• Serum ammonia
• Serum lactate
• Serum amino acids
(including arginine, serine)
• Urine organic acids
• Serum biotinidase activity

• Serum TSH
• Serum uric acid
• Serum AFP
• Serum lactate, pyruvate
• Serum acylcarnitines
• Urine organic acids
• Urine purines, pyrimidines
• Urine creatine, GAA
• CSF studiesb
• Genetic testing for NKX2.1
• SNP-CGH microarray*

• Serum AFP
• Serum lactate, pyruvate
• Serum biotinidase activity
• Urine organic acids
• Mitochondrial genetic
analysis, CoQ10 level
• SNP-CGH microarray*

• Genetic testing for HSP
• SNP-CGH microarray*

Consider multi-gene panel or WES based on
phenotype, clinical and family history

Fig. 638.3 Genetic mimics of cerebral palsy. Algorithm showing the general diagnostic approach to the patient with an infantile-­onset, appar-

ently nonprogressive motor disorder. Studies are grouped by predominant clinical presentation; it may be appropriate to consider investigations
from more than one group depending on the specific clinical context. *In many situations WES has replaced microarray testing. aSee examples in
Tables 638.2 and 638.3 bCSF studies: glucose (+ serum glucose), lactate, pyruvate, neurotransmitter metabolites (biogenic amines + GABA), pterins,
5-­methyltetrahydrofolate; HSP, hereditary spastic paraplegia. (From Pearson TS, Pons R, Ghaoui R, Sue CM. Genetic mimics of cerebral palsy. Mov
Disord. 2019;34:625–636, Fig. 1, p. 627.)

Table 638.2  Clinical Features That Should Prompt
Evaluation for Genetic and Metabolic
Conditions in a Patient Presenting with
Symptoms of CP
Absent history of any perinatal risk factor for brain injury
Family history of sibling with similar neurologic symptoms
Motor symptom onset after an initial period of normal development
Developmental regression
Progressive neurologic symptoms
Paroxysmal motor symptoms or marked fluctuation of motor
symptoms
Clinical exacerbation in the setting of a catabolic state (e.g., febrile
illness)
Isolated generalized hypotonia
Prominent ataxia
Signs of peripheral neuromuscular disease (reduced or absent
reflexes, sensory loss)
Eye movement abnormalities (e.g., oculogyria, oculomotor apraxia,
or paroxysmal saccadic eye-­head movements)

Table 638.3  Brain MRI Findings Suggestive of Selected
Genetic CP Mimics
FINDING

SELECTED CONDITIONS

Hypomyelination

PLP1-­related dysmyelinating
disorders
H-­ABC (TUBB4A variant)
AGS (may also have basal
ganglia and WM calcification)
GM1 gangliosidosis

Demyelination

Krabbe disease
Metachromatic leukodystrophy

Thin corpus callosum

HSP (i.e., SPG4, SPG11, SPG15,
and others)

Globus pallidus lesions

T2-­hypointense: NBIA (SN also
involved in BPAN, MPAN),
fucosidosis
T2-­hyperintense: MMA, PDH
deficiency, creatine deficiency
syndromes

Focal atrophy or hypoplasia

Glutaric aciduria type 1
(frontotemporal)
H-­ABC (cerebellum ± putamen)
Joubert syndrome (cerebellum)

From Pearson TS, Pons R, Ghaoui R, et al. Genetic mimics of cerebral palsy. Mov
Disord. 2019;34:625–636, Table. 1, p. 628.

and strengthen weak muscles. Therapists help children to achieve their
full potential and often recommend further evaluations and adaptive
equipment.
Rehabilitative strategies include orthotics, casting, and physiotherapy (see Chapter 752). Adaptive equipment can help individuals with CP
achieve a greater level of independence and autonomy. Equipment such
as braces, wheelchairs, and walkers can significantly improve mobility
and increase self-­confidence. Orthotics are devices that are used to help
prevent foot and ankle deformities, improve stability during walking, and

AGS, Aicardi-­Goutières syndrome; BPAN, beta-­propeller protein–associated
neurodegeneration; H-­ABC, hypomyelination with atrophy of the basal ganglia
and cerebellum; HSP, hereditary spastic paraplegia; MMA, methylmalonic aciduria;
MPAN, mitochondrial membrane protein-­associated neurodegeneration; NBIA,
neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation; PDH, pyruvate dehydrogenase;
WM, white matter.
From Pearson TS, Pons R, Ghaoui R, et al. Genetic mimics of cerebral palsy. Mov
Disord. 2019;34:625–636, Table 2, p. 628.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 638 u Encephalopathies

3693

Table 638.4  Clinical and Neuroimaging Findings in Hereditary Spastic Paraplegias (HSP) with Pediatric Onset*
HSP FORM

HSP TYPE

INHERITANCE

GENE

CHILDHOOD
ONSET

DISEASE CHARACTERISTICS†

NEUROIMAGING
FINDINGS (BRAIN)

Pure

SPG3A

AD

ATL1

+++

None

Normal

Pure

SPG4

AD

SPAST

++

None

Leukoencephalopathy,
thin corpus callosum

Pure

SPG6

AD

NIPA1

+

None

Normal

Pure

SPG10

AD

KIF5A

+++

Neuropathy

Normal

Pure

SPG12

AD

RTN2

+++

None

Normal

Pure

SPG31

AD

REEP1

++

None

Normal

Complicated

SPG1

X-­linked

L1CAM

++

Intellectual disability, adducted
thumb

Thin corpus callosum

Complicated

SPG2

X-­linked

PLP1

+++

Intellectual disability, epilepsy

Normal

Complicated

SPG7

AR

SPG7

+

Optic atrophy, neuropathy,
cerebellar ataxia

Cerebellar atrophy

Complicated

SPG11

AR

KIAA1840

+++

Intellectual disability, neuropathy

Leukoencephalopathy,
thin corpus callosum

Complicated

SPG15

AR

ZFYVE26

+++

Intellectual disability, retinopathy,
cerebellar ataxia

Leukoencephalopathy,
thin corpus callosum

Complicated

SPG17

AR

BSCL2

+

Neuropathy

Normal

*Onset before 18 yr of age.
†Other than the classic HSP symptoms, including spastic paraparesis, atrophy of the distal lower extremities, and neurogenic bladder dysfunction.

AD, autosomal dominant; AR., autosomal recessive; +, occasional; ++, common; +++, characteristic.
From Lee RW, Poretti A, Cohen JS, et al. A diagnostic approach for cerebral palsy in the genomic era. Neurol Med. 2014;16:821–844, Table 5, p. 832.

Table 638.5  Clinical Features of the Monoamine Neurotransmitter Disorders
MOTOR
AND
EXTRA­PYRAMIDAL EXTRA­PYRAMIDAL PYRAMIDAL
COGNITIVE HYPERKINETIC
HYPOKINETIC
TRACT
DELAY
FEATURES
FEATURES
FEATURES
EPILEPSY

ENZYME
DEFICIENCY

AGE AT
PRESENTATION

AUTONOMIC
FEATURES

NEURO­PSYCHIATRIC
FEATURES

AD
GTPCH-­D

Childhood (but
can occur at any
age)

Not
common

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

SR-­D

Infancy

In most

Yes

Yes

AR
GTPCH-­D

Infancy

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

PTPS-­D

Infancy to
childhood

In most

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

DHPR-­D

Infancy to
childhood

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

PCD-­D

Infancy

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

TH-­D

Infancy to early
childhood

In most

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

AADC-­D

Mainly infancy
(but can occur
at any age)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

PLP-­DE

Infancy to early
childhood

In most

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

DTDS

Infancy

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes, in older
children

No

Yes

No

AD GTPCH-D, autosomal dominant GTP cyclohydrolase deficiency; SR-D, D-Serine; AR GTPCH-D, autosomal recessive GTP cyclohydrolase deficiency; PTPS-D, 6-pyruvoyl tetrahydropterin synthase
deficiency; DHPR-D, dihydropteridine reductase deficiency; PCD-D, pterin-4α carbinolamine dehydrase deficiency; TH-D, tyrosine hydroxylase deficiency; AADC-D, aromatic l-amino acid
decarboxylase deficiency; PLP-DE, pyridoxal 5 phosphate dependent enzymes; DTDS, dopamine transporter deficiency syndrome.
From Kurian MA, Gissen P, Smith M, et al. The monoamine neurotransmitter disorders: an expanding range of neurological syndromes. Lancet Neurol. 2011;10:721–731, Table, p. 722.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3694 Part XXV u The Nervous System
The monoamine neurotransmitter disorders

Primary monoamine
neurotransmitter disorders

Secondary monoamine neurotransmitter
defects in neurologic disorders

Monoamine neurotransmitter
disorders of unknown origin

Mitochondrial diseases
Rett syndrome
Epileptic encephalopathies
Pontocerebellar hypoplasia
Perinatal asphyxia
Disorders of folate metabolism
Phenylketonuria
Lesch-Nyhan disease
Opsoclonus-myoclonus
Leukodystrophies
Neuropsychiatric disorders
Dystonic disorders
Neuromuscular disorders
Spontaneous periodic hypothermia
and hyperhidrosis
Pelizeaus-Merzbacher
HIE
PKAN
Cerebral palsy
Autistic spectrum disorder
Non-specific developmental delay

Disorders of selective serotonin
deficiency
DNRD
Idiopathic focal dystonia
PKD

Cofactor deficiency

Enzyme deficiency

Defective monoamine
transport

Vitamin B6 BH4 deficiency
deficiency

TH-D
AADC-D

DTDS

PLP-DE
P-DE

Phenylalanine
level normal

Phenylalanine
level abnormal

AD GTPCH-D
SR-D

AR GTPCH-D
PTPS-D
DHPR-D

Fig. 638.4 Classification of the monoamine neurotransmitter disorders. BH4, Tetrahydrobiopterin; TH-­D, tyrosine hydroxylase deficiency; AADC­ , aromatic L-­amino acid decarboxylase deficiency; DTDS, dopamine transporter deficiency syndrome; PLP-­DE, pyridoxal-­phosphate–dependent
D
epilepsy; P-­DE, pyridoxine-­dependent epilepsy; AD GTPCH-­D, autosomal dominant GTP cyclohydrolase 1 deficiency; SR-­D, sepiapterin reductase
deficiency; AR GTPCH-­D, autosomal recessive GTP cyclohydrolase 1 deficiency; PTPS-­D, 6-­pyruvoyltetrahydropterin synthase deficiency; DHPR-­D,
dihydropteridine reductase deficiency; HIE, hypoxic-­ischemic encephalopathy; PKAN, pantothenate kinase associated neurodegeneration; DNRD,
dopa-­nonresponsive dystonia; PKD, paroxysmal kinesigenic dyskinesia. (From Kurian MA, Gissen P, Smith M, et al. The monoamine neurotransmitter
disorders: an expanding range of neurological syndromes. Lancet Neurol. 2011;10:721–731, Fig. 1.)

sometimes relieve pain. Additional equipment needs address activities of
daily living such as bathing and hygiene, communication, and driving.
Pharmacotherapy is often the first-­line approach used to manage
the various tone abnormalities seen in CP and includes both enteral
options and targeted injections. Systemic medications are often chosen for more widespread management of spasticity and dyskinesias.
Although baclofen is routinely favored, other antispasticity medications such as tizanidine, dantrolene, and benzodiazepines are also
available. Second-­line medications such as clonidine or gabapentin
may provide dual benefit for both tone management and other neurologic associations, including sleep disruption, dysautonomia, pain, and
neuroirritability. Medications used to treat dystonia include enteral
baclofen, benzodiazepines, trihexyphenidyl, clonidine, dantrolene,
levodopamine, and gabapentin, but practice varies widely. Tetrabenazine can be useful for hyperkinetic movement disorders, including athetosis or chorea.
The management of focal/segmental spasticity or dystonia includes
chemodenervation agents that target these specific locations. Targeted injections are often used in combination with systemic medications to augment tone management in specific areas that are more
problematic. Examples include botulinum toxin A (BoNT-­A), phenol, and ethyl alcohol. Targeted injections combined with rehabilitative therapies can allow for improved motor functioning and delay
or avoid orthopedic surgery; these injections require repeat administration. Typically repeat injections are performed every 4-­6 months,
primarily to avoid the development of resistance; 3 months may be
necessary. Injections into salivary glands may also help reduce the
severity of drooling if it is not adequately treated with anticholinergic
agents.
Neurosurgical options include intrathecal baclofen (ITB), selective
dorsal rhizotomy (SDR), and deep brain stimulation (DBS). ITB can be
considered in patients whose spasticity is not adequately treated with
enteral baclofen or who are experiencing side effects such as sedation,

weakness, or gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms. Baclofen is delivered
with an implanted pump in children with severe spasticity; it is useful
because it delivers the drug directly around the spinal cord, where it
reduces neurotransmission of afferent nerve fibers. Direct delivery to
the spinal cord overcomes the problem of CNS side effects caused by
the large oral doses needed to penetrate the blood-­brain barrier. ITB
may reduce dystonia with evidence for benefit with higher catheter
placement.
The main goal of SDR is to improve the gait or functioning in those
that function at GMFCS I-­III with good selective motor control and
minimal weakness. However, SDR is being looked at for management of tone, minimizing pain, and ease of caregiving in patients
functioning on a GMFCS IV-­V level. Because SDR is an irreversible
treatment for spasticity, optimal selection of ideal candidates from
a multidisciplinary approach is necessary to avoid short-­and long-­
term complications. SDR’s spasticity benefits are caused by a partial
sensory deafferentation of the spinal cord. This is achieved by resection of dorsal nerve rootlets based on abnormal motor responses to
electrical stimulation (Fig. 638.5). The total number of nerve rootlets resected ranges from 25% to 40%, though in some institutions
it exceeds >40%. Combining both ventral and dorsal rhizotomies
can help manage both spasticity and dystonia. SDR manages lower
extremity tone equally as the ITB pump, may provide more upper-­
extremity tone control compared with the ITB pump, and improves
bladder function.
DBS can be considered if there is severe hypertonia with combined spasticity and dystonia. DBS is a neurosurgical procedure that
evolved from the recognition that pallidotomies and thalamotomies
could help patients with medically refractory dystonia. It involves
the introduction of stimulating electrodes in areas of the brain such
as the globus pallidus and the subthalamic nucleus, which are connected to an extracranial pulse generator (see Chapter 637). After
the surgical procedure, the beneficial effects are not immediately

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 638 u Encephalopathies

3695

Encephalopathy–strokes, seizures,
developmental delay and regression
Ptosis, PEO, optic
atrophy, pigmentary
retinopathy

SNHL
Cardiomyopathy,
conduction defects

A

Liver failure

Enteropathy

Anemia

Diabetes, pancreatic exocrine
insufficiency
Renal tubulopathy
Myopathy

B
Fig. 638.5 Schematic of the technique of selective dorsal rhizotomy.
A, After laminectomy, the dura is opened and the dorsal spinal rootlets
are exposed. The rootlets are stimulated so that abnormal rootlet activity can be identified. B, A proportion of rootlets is transected. (From
Koman LA, Smith BP, Shilt JS. Cerebral palsy. Lancet. 004;363:1619–
1631. Reproduced with permission from Wake Forest University Orthopaedic Press.)

visible, often taking several months. The procedure is associated
with perioperative risks as well as infection and hardware complications. Therefore patient selection and consideration of the appropriate target for stimulation for DBS are key. Most agree that the
presence of spasticity, contractures/deformities, and myelopathy
are poor predictors of response and that neurosurgical expertise,
anatomic factors, and severity/time of dystonic symptoms may
influence response.
Orthopedic interventions address musculoskeletal pathology, including fixed muscle contractures, torsion of long bones,
hip displacement, and spine deformities. Several surgical methods exist for lengthening the muscle-­tendon units for contraction
management, though these are rarely necessary before 6 years of
age. Before this, prevention of contracture development is key
and often is a combination of tone management, bracing, and
stretching exercises. Femoral and tibial torsion occur, respectively,
because of failure of remodeling fetal anteversion and mostly as
a response to abnormal biomechanical forces during walking.
Derotational osteotomies are ideally performed between 6 and
12 years of age. With increasing GMFCS level comes increased
risk of developing hip displacement and neuromuscular scoliosis.
Monitoring and prevention strategies are paramount, as both hip
displacement and scoliosis may progress with age. Conservative
treatment and surgical approaches can be challenging when balancing the complexity of these surgical interventions and outcome
goals defined presurgically.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

638.2 Mitochondrial Encephalomyopathies
Shamima Rahman
Mitochondrial encephalomyopathies are complex neurologic disorders caused by disturbed mitochondrial function. Mitochondria are
dynamic cellular organelles with multitudinous roles, most notably
energy generation via oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS), but
other mitochondrial functions include intermediary metabolism (the
Krebs cycle, fatty acid beta oxidation, and part of the urea cycle are
housed in the mitochondrion), calcium homeostasis, intracellular signaling, apoptosis, and biosynthesis of coenzyme Q10, heme, iron-­sulfur

Peripheral neuropathy

Fig. 638.6 Clinical features of mitochondrial encephalomyopathies.
PEO, progressive external ophthalmoplegia; SNHL, sensorineural hearing loss. (Adapted from Rahman S. Mitochondrial disease in children.
J Intern Med. 2020;287[6]:609–633.)

clusters, and lipoic acid. Aberrant mitochondrial function most commonly involves disturbed energy generation via the OXPHOS system,
but other mechanisms include oxidative stress mediated by increased
production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), alterations of other metabolic processes within the mitochondria (such as pyruvate dehydrogenase, the Krebs cycle, vitamin metabolism and transport, and cofactor
biosynthesis) and of the mitochondrial lipid membranes, protein quality control, import system, and organelle dynamics (disturbed fission
and fusion).
Mitochondria are unique among cellular organelles in that they
contain their own genome: the maternally inherited circular mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) molecule comprising 16,569 base pairs in
humans encoding 37 genes: 13 protein-­coding genes, 22 transfer RNAs
(tRNAs), and 2 ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs). The mitochondrial genome
is present in multiple copies within each mitochondrion, and there
are hundreds to thousands of mtDNA molecules per cell. mtDNA
gene variants may be heteroplasmic (only a percentage of the mtDNA
is mutated) or homoplasmic (100% of the mtDNA is mutated). Primary mitochondrial disease may be caused by maternally inherited
or sporadic variants affecting the mtDNA or by recessive, dominant,
X-­linked, or de novo variants in nearly 400 nuclear genes involved in
mitochondrial function and structure.
Mitochondrial disorders, especially those presenting in childhood,
have a predilection for high-­energy-­consuming organs: the brain, skeletal muscle, eyes, ears, heart, kidneys, and liver. Neurologic features of
primary mitochondrial disease in childhood include hypotonia, dystonia, spasticity, ptosis, progressive external ophthalmoplegia (PEO), seizures, and ataxia. Multisystem features that may be observed in children
with mitochondrial disease are illustrated in Figure 638.6. Some mitochondrial syndromes with characteristic constellations of symptoms
and signs were recognized many decades before their genetic basis was
understood; several of these syndromes are summarized in Table 638.6.
Mitochondrial encephalomyopathies can be considered according
to age at onset of symptoms. In early infancy the most frequent presentations include Leigh syndrome, the mtDNA depletion syndromes
(MDDS), disorders of coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10) biosynthesis, and reversible infantile respiratory chain disease (RIRCD). Clinical syndromes
observed later in childhood include Kearns-­Sayre syndrome (KSS),
mitochondrial encephalomyopathy with lactic acidosis and strokelike episodes (MELAS), myoclonic epilepsy with ragged red fibers
(MERRF), and neurogenic muscle weakness, ataxia, and retinitis pigmentosa (NARP). However, many children presenting with mitochondrial disease have overlapping features not specific to an individual

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3696 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 638.6  Clinical Manifestations of Syndromic Mitochondrial Encephalomyopathies
TISSUE

SYMPTOMS/SIGNS

LSS

KSS

MELAS

MERRF

CNS

Regression

+

+

+

+

Seizures

±

+

+

Ataxia

±

+

+

Cortical blindness

±

+

Deafness

±

+

+

NARP

LHON

+

+

Migraine

+

Hemiparesis

+

Myoclonus

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

Movement disorder

+

Nerve

Peripheral neuropathy

±

+

Muscle

Ophthalmoplegia

±

+

Weakness

+

+

+

+

RRF on muscle biopsy

±

+

+

+

Ptosis

±

+

Pigmentary
retinopathy

±

+

Optic atrophy

+

+

+

+

±

Eye

Heart

Endocrine

Kidney

Conduction block

+

Cardiomyopathy

±

+

Lactic acidosis

+

+

+

Diabetes mellitus

±

+

+

+

Short stature

+

+

+

+

Tubulopathy

±

+

+

+

+

KSS, Kearns-­Sayre syndrome; LHON, Leber hereditary optic neuropathy; MELAS, mitochondrial myopathy, encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, and strokelike episodes; MERRF,
myoclonic epilepsy with ragged red fibers; NARP, neuropathy, ataxia, and retinitis pigmentosa; RRF, ragged red fibers.
Courtesy Prof. Shamima Rahman, Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom.

syndrome, whereas others may present with a single clinical feature,
such as an epileptic encephalopathy, leukoencephalopathy, myopathy,
or isolated optic atrophy.

LEIGH SYNDROME

Leigh syndrome, or subacute necrotizing encephalomyelopathy, is a
clinical syndrome of neurodevelopmental delay and/or regression and
variable other neurologic features, including dystonia, hypotonia, spasticity, ataxia, and seizures, with characteristic MRI brain appearances
and biochemical evidence of mitochondrial dysfunction. Peak onset is
usually in the first 2 years of life (mean 7 months), although longer surviving cases and adult onset are both recognized. Initial symptoms may
be nonneurologic, including feeding difficulties, vomiting, and poor
weight gain in infancy. Eye involvement is a frequent finding, including
nystagmus, ptosis, PEO, optic atrophy, and retinitis pigmentosa. MRI
reveals bilateral, usually symmetric T2-­weighted hyperintense lesions
variably affecting the basal ganglia, thalamus, midbrain, and brainstem
structures (Fig. 638.7). These imaging lesions reflect the neuropathology, which consists of spongiform lesions with cavitation, neuronal
loss, demyelination, and capillary proliferation.
Biochemical features are variable in Leigh syndrome and include
elevated lactate in blood and/or cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and isolated
or combined deficiency of one or more OXPHOS enzymes. Normal
biochemical findings do not exclude the diagnosis. Leigh syndrome
is genetically heterogeneous, and more than 100 monogenic causes
have been identified, including variants in both mtDNA-­
encoded

genes (responsible for 25–30% of cases) and nuclear genes. Modes of
inheritance include maternal (for mtDNA variants), autosomal recessive, X-­linked, and de novo dominant. MEGDEL (3-­methylglutaconic
aciduria with deafness and encephalopathy, Leigh-­like) syndrome is
a subtype of Leigh syndrome caused by biallelic variants in SERAC1
encoding a protein involved in remodeling mitochondrial membrane
lipids. Affected infants typically fail the newborn hearing screen and
have problems with hypoglycemia and hyperammonemia related to
hepatic dysfunction. Some infants succumb to liver failure, but hepatic
function improves in most affected individuals, who later progress to
a neurodegenerative course with prominent dystonia and loss of skills.
A few causes of Leigh syndrome are potentially treatable. These
include deficiencies of biotinidase (an enzyme required for biotin
recycling within the cell), the thiamine transporter SLC19A3 (also
associated with biotin-­
thiamine–responsive basal ganglia disease),
and proteins required for biosynthesis of CoQ10, a mobile electron carrier in the mitochondrial respiratory chain. All other forms of Leigh
syndrome have no curative treatments and are associated with a progressive neurodegenerative course with early death, usually caused by
respiratory failure secondary to brainstem lesions affecting the respiratory center. Median age at death was reported as 2.4 years in one
cohort, but this is variable and related to the underlying genetic cause.
Longer survival has been reported in some forms of Leigh syndrome,
including MEGDEL and deficiencies of SURF1 (an assembly factor
for OXPHOS complex IV) and SUCLA2 (a subunit of the Krebs cycle
enzyme succinyl-­CoA ligase).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 638 u Encephalopathies
NAA

NAA

Cho Cr

Cho Cr
MI

Lactate

MI

3697

Lactate

B

E

Lactate

NAA

NAA
Cho
Cr

Cho
Cr

Lactate

A

D

C

F

Fig. 638.7 Complex I deficiency in an 8-­yr-­old child with magnetic resonance examinations acquired approximately 3 mo apart. Axial T2-­weighted

(A), short echo magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) (B), and long echo MRS (C) images were obtained. The imaging reveals a pattern characteristic of Leigh syndrome with an abnormal hyperintense signal bilaterally within the caudate and globus pallidus. The MRS image acquired in
the left basal ganglia at a period of clinical exacerbation caused by febrile illness demonstrates a dramatic elevation of lactate compared with her
routinely observed levels as shown in axial T2-­weighted (D), short echo MRS (E), and long echo MRS (F) images. The spectra acquired 3 mo later
demonstrate a significant reduction in lactate. A comparison of the imaging data is unremarkable between the examinations. The dramatic elevation
of lactate revealed on MRS in (B) and (C) corresponds to worsening clinical symptoms (seizures and leg stiffening). The lactate levels observed in
(E) and (F) are typical and consistent with this mitochondrial defect. (From Cecil KM. MR spectroscopy of metabolic disorders. Neuroimaging Clin
N Am. 2006;16:87–116.)

Table 638.7  Mitochondrial DNA Depletion Syndromes
GENE*

FUNCTION

CLINICAL FEATURES

mtDNA DEPLETION

MULTIPLE DELETIONS

POLG

mtDNA replication

Alpers, juvenile epilepsy
syndromes, ataxia, PEO

+

+

TWNK

mtDNA replication

Hepatocerebral disease,
IOSCA, juvenile epilepsy
syndromes, PEO

+

+

TFAM

mtDNA replication

Hepatocerebral disease

+

MGME1

mtDNA replication

Encephalomyopathic

+

+

SLC25A4

Nucleoside metabolism

Encephalomyopathic, cardiac

+

+

DGUOK

Nucleoside metabolism

Hepatocerebral disease

+

+

TK2

Nucleoside metabolism

Progressive myopathy

+

+

MPV17

Nucleoside metabolism

Hepatocerebral disease

+

+

RRM2B

Nucleoside metabolism

Encephalomyopathic, SNHL,
renal tubulopathy

+

+

SUCLA2

Nucleoside metabolism

Encephalomyopathic (LSS),
SNHL

+

SUCLG1

Nucleoside metabolism

Encephalomyopathic,
hepatocerebral disease

+

TYMP

Nucleoside metabolism

MNGIE

+

+

*All are recessive disorders, but, in addition, de novo dominant variants of SLC25A4 may also present as MDDS.
IOSCA, Infantile-­onset spinocerebellar ataxia; LSS, Leigh syndrome spectrum; MNGIE, mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalopathy; PEO, progressive external
ophthalmoplegia.
Courtesy Prof. Shamima Rahman, Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom.

MITOCHONDRIAL DNA DEPLETION SYNDROMES

The most prevalent MDDS is Alpers-­Huttenlocher syndrome (progressive neuronal degeneration of childhood with epilepsy, PNDE)
caused by recessively inherited gene variants in POLG encoding the
catalytic subunit of DNA polymerase γ, the polymerase responsible for
replicating the mtDNA. Affected individuals frequently present with
intractable epilepsy, particularly epilepsia partialis continua, around
12 months of age. A characteristic EEG finding in the early stages of
the disease is rhythmic high amplitude with delta spikes (RHADS).

Repeated episodes of status epilepticus frequently lead to a median
age of death of around 16 months (there is typically a median of 4
months between presentation with seizures and death). Sodium valproate is absolutely contraindicated in Alpers-­Huttenlocher syndrome
and other presentations of POLG disease because exposure to valproate
may trigger fatal hepatic failure.
Recessive pathologic variants of at least 12 genes have been linked to
infantile-­and childhood-­onset MDDS (Table 638.7). There is often a
period of normal development lasting weeks to months before clinical

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3698 Part XXV u The Nervous System

A

B

C

Fig. 638.8 Mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis, and strokelike symptoms (MELAS) in a 13-­yr-­old male. Axial diffusion-­weighted im-

aging (A), axial apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) map (B), and an axial arterial spin labeling color map (C) are shown. Scattered foci of vasogenic
edema denoted by arrows corresponding to increased perfusion are identified in the acute phase of the disease in the right cerebral hemisphere.
(From Zuccoli G, Cecil KM. Inherited metabolic and neurogenerative disorders. In: Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 13th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019: Fig. 33.8, p. 312.)

manifestations become apparent. Associated organ involvement may
provide a clue to the underlying genetic diagnosis: sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL) and methylmalonic aciduria occur in SUCLA2 defects,
SNHL and renal tubular involvement in RRM2B defects, and hepatic
involvement is associated with DGUOK, MPV17, POLG, TWNK,
TFAM, and SUCLG1 gene variants. Thymidine kinase 2 (TK2) deficiency appears to be a special case because this disorder leads to a pure
myopathic presentation in most affected cases. Clinical response to
nucleoside supplementation has been reported for TK2 deficiency but
not for any other form of MDDS.

DISORDERS OF COENZYME Q10 BIOSYNTHESIS

CoQ10 functions as a mobile electron carrier and antioxidant in the
mitochondrial inner membrane. CoQ10 is synthesized by a complex
biosynthetic pathway, 10 defects of which have been linked to human
disease. Clinical presentations of these recessive disorders include
an infantile encephalomyopathy with prominent seizures and dystonia variably associated with multisystem features: SNHL, optic
atrophy, pigmentary retinopathy, cardiomyopathy, and renal disease.
Other presentations include ataxia, myopathy, and steroid-­resistant
nephrotic syndrome. Affected patients should be treated with high-­
dose CoQ10 supplementation, although clinical response is variable.

REVERSIBLE INFANTILE RESPIRATORY CHAIN
DEFICIENCY

RIRCD, also known as benign reversible mitochondrial myopathy, typically presents after a period of normal development lasting 3-­6 weeks
with profound lactic acidosis and progressive muscle weakness, often
leading to a need for enteral tube feeding and, in some cases where
the respiratory muscles are severely affected, artificial ventilation.
A ventilatory requirement may persist for up to 18 months. Muscle
biopsy reveals ragged red and cytochrome c oxidase negative fibers
with multiple OXPHOS enzyme deficiencies on spectrophotometric
assay. This condition is linked to two homoplasmic variants at the same
nucleotide in mtDNA: m.14674T>G and m.14674T>C. Although all
maternally related individuals are homoplasmic for the variant, only
a small proportion are clinically affected. Studies have also identified potential modifying variants in several nuclear-­encoded genes
involved in mitochondrial translation, particularly EARS2. Spontaneous recovery of muscle strength is associated with excellent neurodevelopmental outcomes. Because it is not possible to distinguish RIRCD

from fatal infantile mitochondrial myopathies, rapid testing for the
m.14674T>G/C variants is recommended in all infants presenting with
severe muscle weakness and lactic acidosis, so that ventilatory support
can be provided to affected infants if needed.
Another form of RIRCD is a reversible hepatopathy caused by recessive variants in the TRMU gene encoding a protein required to modify
mitochondrial tRNAs. Affected infants present with acute liver failure,
variably associated with encephalomyopathic features.

KEARNS-­SAYRE SYNDROME

KSS is defined by a clinical triad of PEO, pigmentary retinopathy, and
heart block, with age of onset <20 years. Other neurologic features
include cerebellar ataxia, elevated CSF protein levels, progressive
myopathy, and cognitive decline. A peculiar feature of KSS is white
matter disease associated with cerebral folate deficiency. Low levels
of CSF 5-­methyltetrahydrofolate (5-­MTHF) and clinical response
to folinic acid supplementation have been documented in some
patients. Variable associated multisystem disease features include
SNHL, renal tubulopathy, endocrine dysfunction (diabetes mellitus,
hypoparathyroidism, and short stature with growth hormone deficiency in some cases), and cardiomyopathy. KSS is usually a sporadic
condition caused by single large-­scale mtDNA deletions (SLSMDs);
many individuals have a common 4.9kb mtDNA deletion. SLSMDs
are associated with a continuous clinical spectrum ranging from
infantile-­onset Pearson syndrome to adult-­onset isolated PEO without systemic features.

MITOCHONDRIAL ENCEPHALOMYOPATHY WITH
LACTIC ACIDOSIS AND STROKELIKE EPISODES

MELAS is a maternally inherited disorder that typically presents
toward the end of the first decade with migraine headache, vomiting,
and seizures, which may lead to a strokelike episode. MRI of the brain
reveals focal lesions with a parieto-­occipital predilection not confined
to a vascular territory (Fig. 638.8). Other clinical features include
hemianopia during the strokelike episodes, ptosis, optic atrophy, pigmentary retinopathy, SNHL, exercise intolerance, cognitive decline, GI
dysmotility, cardiomyopathy, renal impairment, and diabetes mellitus.
Eighty percent of cases have a common maternally inherited mtDNA
gene variant m.3243A>G in the MT-­TL1 gene encoding a tRNA for
leucine. This gene variant is present in 1 in 400 of the general population, yet MELAS is a rare disorder. Most individuals harboring the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 638 u Encephalopathies
m.3243A>G variant are asymptomatic or oligosymptomatic or have
non-­MELAS presentations, including maternally inherited diabetes
and deafness (MIDD), cardiomyopathy, sudden unexpected death, or
isolated renal involvement (focal segmental glomerulosclerosis). Other
causes of MELAS include other mtDNA variants, particularly in the
MT-­TL1 gene or in mtDNA-­encoded subunits of complex I (especially
ND5), and occasionally POLG disease can mimic MELAS.

MYOCLONIC EPILEPSY WITH RAGGED RED FIBERS

MERRF is a maternally inherited syndrome characterized by progressive myoclonic epilepsy and cerebellar ataxia with nystagmus and
dysarthria. Onset may be in late childhood or adult life, and the disorder may be rapidly progressive or have a more indolent course. Other
neurologic features include other seizure types, spasticity, peripheral
neuropathy, SNHL, ptosis, PEO, optic atrophy, cognitive decline, and
psychiatric manifestations. MERRF can also mimic MELAS, including strokelike episodes. MERRF is typically a multisystemic disorder;
extraneurologic features include multiple symmetric lipomatosis,
endocrine disturbance (growth hormone deficiency, hypothyroidism, adrenal insufficiency), and cardiomyopathy. A common mtDNA
pathologic variant, m.8344A>G in the MT-­TK gene encoding the
tRNA for lysine, accounts for 80% of cases of MERRF. Patients with
a very high percentage of this variant (typically >90%) present with
Leigh syndrome in infancy. The remaining patients with MERRF
have other mtDNA tRNA gene variants; occasionally POLG disease
may mimic MERRF.

NEUROGENIC MUSCLE WEAKNESS, ATAXIA, AND
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA

NARP is a maternally inherited disorder caused by a relatively common mtDNA gene variant, m.8993T>G, in the MT-­ATP6 gene encoding the ATP6 subunit of ATP synthase (OXPHOS complex V). Patients
usually have a gene variant load of ∼70%, but those with a higher variant load (typically >90%) of the same variant present with maternally
inherited Leigh syndrome. Clinical presentation of NARP is usually
in late childhood or early adult life with numbness and paresthesias
caused by the sensory neuropathy associated with muscle weakness
and ataxia. Retinitis pigmentosa initially causes poor night vision and
progresses slowly to severe visual loss. Other clinical features include
developmental delay, learning disability, dementia, seizures, SNHL,
diabetes mellitus, and cardiac conduction defects. MT-­ATP6 variants
have also been reported to cause axonal Charcot-­Marie-­Tooth disease
without CNS or other features.

MITOCHONDRIAL NEUROGASTROINTESTINAL
ENCEPHALOMYOPATHY

Mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalomyopathy (MNGIE) is
a late-­onset MDDS characterized by widespread demyelinating polyneuropathy leading to predominant GI symptoms and peripheral neuropathy with a relatively asymptomatic leukoencephalopathy. Onset
of symptoms is usually toward the end of the second decade, but presentation in early childhood may occur. Major symptoms relate to GI
dysmotility and pseudo-obstruction (nausea, vomiting, early satiety,
abdominal pain, diarrhea) leading to severe weight loss and cachexia.
Other clinical features include ptosis, PEO, SNHL, painful paresthesias, and foot drop. The disorder is caused by recessive variants in the
TYMP gene encoding thymidine phosphorylase, a cytosolic enzyme
whose function is essential to the maintenance of intramitochondrial
nucleotide pools. Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell or liver transplantation may be beneficial if performed early in the disease course.

JUVENILE POLG SYNDROMES

POLG variants may also present in later childhood or adult life with
a range of clinical presentations, including PEO, proximal or distal
myopathy, and juvenile and adult-­onset epilepsy syndromes. Myoclonic epilepsy, myopathy, and sensory ataxia (MEMSA), incorporating an entity previously known as spinocerebellar ataxia with epilepsy
(SCAE), typically presents with cerebellar ataxia in adolescence or
young adult life, with later development of epilepsy. The seizures are

3699

focal initially, often affecting the right hand. Later they become generalized, including epilepsia partialis continua (EPC), and are refractory
to therapy. The ataxia neuropathy spectrum (ANS) is characterized by
ataxia and neuropathy and includes the previous acronyms MIRAS
(mitochondrial recessive ataxia syndrome) and SANDO (sensory
ataxia, neuropathy, dysarthria, ophthalmoplegia). ANS also frequently
leads to an encephalopathy with seizures, so there is some overlap
between MEMSA and ANS. POLG disease may also mimic MELAS,
MERRF, and MNGIE. Variants in the MT-­ATP6 gene have also been
linked to this condition.

MITOCHONDRIAL LEUKOENCEPHALOPATHIES

Several recessive mitochondrial disorders cause cavitating leukoencephalopathies (Table 638.8) that typically present in infancy or early
childhood with acute-­or subacute-­onset of motor regression. Other
clinical features include epileptic encephalopathy, hemiparesis, spastic
paraparesis, bulbar problems, and visual loss (optic atrophy). Mitochondrial leukoencephalopathies may also present later in childhood
or in adult life. Some of the mitochondrial tRNA aminoacyl synthetase deficiencies appear to cause specific white matter changes. Other
genetic causes of mitochondrial leukoencephalopathy include variants
in subunits of complexes I and II and defects of iron-­sulfur cluster biosynthesis (see Table 638.8).

LEBER HEREDITARY OPTIC NEUROPATHY AND
AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT OPTIC ATROPHY

Leber hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) and autosomal dominant
optic atrophy (ADOA) are two mitochondrial optic neuropathies that
may occasionally present with additional encephalomyopathic features.
LHON is maternally inherited and typically presents in the second or
third decade of life (mean onset ∼20 years, but childhood presentation is well-­recognized) with subacute or acute visual loss sequentially
affecting both eyes. Three common mtDNA variants in genes encoding
complex I subunits (m.3460G>A in MT-­ND1, m.11778G>A in MT-­
ND4, and m.14484T>C in MT-­ND6) account for 90% of cases. Penetrance is incomplete, and there is an extreme male preponderance,
which may be explained by a protective effect of estrogen in females
with LHON variants. In most cases LHON presents as an isolated
optic neuropathy, but other clinical manifestations in occasional cases
include dystonia (with bilateral striatal necrosis), peripheral neuropathy, or cardiac conduction defects.
ADOA, also known as Kjer disease, is the most frequent genetic optic
neuropathy and is caused by dominant variants of OPA1, encoding a
protein needed for mitochondrial fusion. Usually this is an isolated
optic neuropathy but may be associated with SNHL. In some patients
there are biallelic variants of OPA1 leading to multiple mtDNA deletions and additional manifestations, including PEO, RRF myopathy
and white matter lesions, and cerebellar atrophy associated with ataxia,
pyramidal signs, spasticity, and learning disability.

NONSYNDROMIC MITOCHONDRIAL DISORDERS

In childhood, many patients affected by mitochondrial disease present with complex multisystem features that do not align closely with
any of the specific known mitochondrial syndromes or with nonsyndromic features, such as isolated epilepsy, leukoencephalopathy, or
myopathy. These patients may lack biochemical features of mitochondrial disease such as lactic acidosis and are identified by exome and
genome sequencing as a first-­line diagnostic strategy in children with
encephalomyopathies.

APPROACH TO DIAGNOSIS

When a mitochondrial disease is suspected, it is important to take
a thorough personal and family history, including enquiring about
early deaths within the extended family, and to screen for multisystemic involvement. This may include formal ophthalmologic, audiologic, and cardiac evaluation. There is no single diagnostic test that
can detect all mitochondrial diseases. There are some characteristic
MRI appearances, such as bilateral symmetric involvement of the
basal ganglia and/or brainstem in Leigh syndrome, strokelike lesions

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3700 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 638.8  Mitochondrial Leukoencephalopathies
GENE DEFECT(S)

CLASS OF MITOCHONDRIAL DISORDER

TYPE OF LEUKOENCEPHALOPATHY

NDUFV1

Complex I deficiency

Cystic leukoencephalopathy

NDUFA2

Complex I deficiency

Cystic leukoencephalopathy with tigroid-­like changes

NUBPL

Complex I deficiency

Complex leukoencephalopathy involving deep
cerebral white matter, basal ganglia, thalami and
corpus callosum, with progressive cerebellar atrophy

SDHA, SDHB, SDHAF1

Complex II deficiency

Cystic leukoencephalopathy with succinate peak on
MRS

LYRM7

Complex III deficiency

Cystic leukoencephalopathy

COA7

Complex IV deficiency

Cystic leukoencephalopathy with spinal cord
hypotrophy

COA8

Complex IV deficiency

Cystic leukoencephalopathy with posterior
predominance

TYMP

Disorder of mtDNA maintenance

Demyelinating leukoencephalopathy

mtDNA deletion

Disorder of mitochondrial translation

T2-­hyperintense abnormalities of subcortical cerebral
white matter, globus pallidus and substantia nigra
(Kearns-­Sayre syndrome)

DARS2

Disorder of mitochondrial translation

Leukoencephalopathy with Brainstem and Spinal cord
involvement and Lactate elevation on proton MRS
(LBSL)

EARS2

Disorder of mitochondrial translation

Leukoencephalopathy (sparing periventricular rim)
with Thalamus and Brainstem involvement and
Lactate elevation on proton MRS (LTBL)

IBA57, ISCA2, NFU1

Iron-­sulfur cluster biosynthesis defect

Cystic leukoencephalopathy

Courtesy Prof. Shamima Rahman, Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom.

in MELAS, and the specific leukoencephalopathies outlined in Tables
638.6 and 638.8. However, brain MRI rarely leads to a specific genetic
diagnosis other than in these distinctive leukoencephalopathies. Metabolic investigations that may provide diagnostic clues include blood
lactate, plasma amino acids and acylcarnitines, urine organic acids,
and CSF lactate, amino acids, neurotransmitters, and 5-­MTHF. The
traditional approach to diagnose a mitochondrial disease included
a muscle biopsy, which was subject to histologic, histochemical,
and electron microscopic analysis, as well as spectrophotometric or
polarographic assay of the individual OXPHOS enzyme complexes.
However, in most centers muscle biopsy has been replaced by first-­
line genetic approaches that utilize next-­generation sequencing to
sequence the mtDNA, a large panel of nuclear genes, the exome or the
whole genome. Muscle biopsy still retains a place in the investigation
of critically unwell children with suspected mitochondrial disease and
to provide functional validation of variants of unknown significance
identified by genetic testing.

MANAGEMENT

cardiac pacing (which can be lifesaving in heart block caused by KSS),
and medical management of heart failure.
Emerging therapies under investigation for mitochondrial encephalomyopathies can be divided broadly into pharmacologic and genetic
approaches. Pharmacologic therapies under development include
redox modulation and strategies to replenish reduced nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide (NAD) boost mitochondrial biogenesis, and
stabilize cardiolipin, the membrane lipid unique to mitochondria. A
successful trial of adeno-­associated virus (AAV) gene replacement has
been published for LHON caused by MT-­ND4 variants, and gene therapy has been reported for mouse models of several nuclear-­encoded
mitochondrial diseases but has yet to be translated to the clinic.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

638.3 Other Encephalopathies
Michael Perry and Cheryl Hemingway

There are no curative therapies for most mitochondrial encephalomyopathies, but there are a few notable exceptions. Leigh syndrome
caused by deficiency of the SLC19A3 thiamine transporter may
respond to a combination of biotin and thiamine, and some patients
with disorders of CoQ10 biosynthesis may improve with high-­dose
CoQ10 supplementation. High-­dose CoQ10 supplementation appears
to be particularly effective in preventing (but not reversing) the
renal manifestations of CoQ10 deficiency but has proved ineffective in treating the CNS manifestations of this disorder in prenatal/
neonatal-­onset CoQ10 biosynthesis disorders associated with COQ4
and COQ9 variants.
Symptomatic therapies are the mainstay of management for children
with mitochondrial encephalomyopathies. Supportive measures may
include antiepileptic drugs, hearing aids, cochlear implantation, ptosis surgery, enteral feeding, pancreatic enzyme supplements, hormone
replacement (thyroxine, cortisol, growth hormone, insulin, estrogen),

POSTERIOR REVERSIBLE ENCEPHALOPATHY
SYNDROME

Posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES) is a rare clinical
syndrome of acute neurologic dysfunction in the presence of vasogenic
subcortical brain edema.
The pathophysiologic mechanisms underlying PRES are poorly
understood. Endothelial injury, however, with subsequent blood-­brain
barrier breakdown and vasogenic edema, appears to be a critical factor. Sudden increases in blood pressure exceeding capacity for cerebral
blood flow autoregulation, direct cytokine effects, and cytotoxic drugs
are all plausible mediators of the endothelial dysfunction. The posterior circulation may be more vulnerable to increased blood pressure
because of a relative lack of sympathetic innervation. Children taking
immunosuppressant or cytotoxic drugs (e.g., calcineurin inhibitors,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 638 u Encephalopathies

A

3701

C

B

Fig. 638.9 Posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES). A, Emergent head CT was performed for acute hypertension in this 2-­yr-­old

female with a history of severe aplastic anemia undergoing bone marrow transplantation. A symmetric pattern of posterior-­predominant vasogenic
edema was evident. Also noteworthy is the moderate parenchymal volume loss, likely related to the patient’s other underlying medical conditions.
Subsequently obtained T2-­weighted (B) and FLAIR (C) MRIs showed a symmetric abnormally high signal in the posterior cerebral white matter. (From
Nazarian JP, Wolansky L, Gupta A, Coffey M. Demyelinating disease and leukoencephalopathies. In: Haaga JR, Boll DT, eds. CT and MRI of the
Whole Body, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017: Fig. 19.18, p. 580.)

cyclosporine, tacrolimus) in the context of organ transplantation, cancer, and autoimmune disease are at highest risk of developing PRES;
renal disease (e.g., glomerulonephritis, IgA vasculitis) is also a risk
factor.
Neurologic symptoms in PRES (i.e., seizures, encephalopathy, headache, and visual disturbances) develop over hours to days. Seizures
occur almost universally; a focal onset with subsequent generalization
is common, and status epilepticus may occur. Encephalopathy can
range from mild alteration of mental state to coma. Focal deficits (e.g.,
hemiparesis) are seen in a small minority of patients.
MRI characteristically shows asymmetric T2/FLAIR high-­
signal
intensities corresponding to vasogenic edema predominantly in the
parieto-­occipital regions (Fig. 638.9). The basal ganglia, cerebellar
hemispheres, and brainstem may also be involved. The changes are
almost always seen bilaterally and invariably involve the subcortical
white matter with or without hemorrhage (intraparenchymal, petechial, or subarachnoid), restricted diffusion, or contrast enhancement
(leptomeningeal, cortical, or nodular). Radiologic resolution typically
occurs in days to weeks.
There are no PRES-­specific treatments. Care is therefore supportive
and should be directed at restoration of a normotensive state, control of
seizures with appropriate anticonvulsants, and discontinuation of any
offending agent (e.g., cytotoxic drugs). Continuous infusions of antihypertensives may be useful to prevent dramatic fluctuations of blood pressure.
Contrary to what its name suggests, PRES is not always reversible
(nor does it always occur posteriorly). Despite this, the prognosis is
generally favorable with complete recovery seen in up to 85% of children. Clinical and radiologic improvement becomes evident days to
weeks after symptom onset. Hemorrhage is most often responsible for
permanent disability.

ACUTE NECROTIZING ENCEPHALOPATHY

Acute necrotizing encephalopathy (ANE) is a rare severe encephalopathy characterized by a rapid and fulminant course. It is seen most
often in children under 2 years old in East Asian countries, particularly Japan and Taiwan. Most cases are monophasic and sporadic.
However, a familial and recurrent form has been reported in White
children in North America and Europe. Approximately half of these
cases are associated with pathogenic variants in the mitochondria-­
related RAN-­binding protein 2 (RANBP2) gene; this variant is termed
ANE1. The pathogenesis is not well understood but may be driven by
hyper-­cytokinemia (e.g., interleukin [IL]-­6) triggered by a preceding

Table 638.9  Diagnostic Criteria for Acute Necrotizing
Encephalopathy of Childhood
1.	Acute encephalopathy after (1-­3 days) a febrile disease. Rapid
deterioration in the level of consciousness. Seizures.
2.	No cerebrospinal fluid pleocytosis. Increase in cerebrospinal fluid
protein.
3.	CT or MRI evidence of symmetric, multifocal brain lesions.
Involvement of the bilateral thalami. Lesions also common in the
cerebral periventricular white matter, internal capsule, putamen,
upper brainstem tegmentum, and cerebellar medulla. No
involvement of other central nervous system regions.
4.	Elevation of serum aminotransferases of variable degrees. No
increase in blood ammonia.
5.	Exclusion of mimics.
A.	Differential diagnosis from clinical viewpoints.
Overwhelming bacterial and viral infections, and fulminant
hepatitis; toxic shock, hemolytic-­uremic syndrome, and other
toxin-­induced diseases; Reye syndrome, hemorrhagic shock
and encephalopathy syndrome, and heat stroke
B.	Differential diagnosis from radiologic viewpoints.
Leigh encephalopathy and related mitochondrial cytopathies;
glutaric acidemia, methylmalonic acidemia, and infantile
bilateral striatal necrosis; Wernicke encephalopathy
and carbon monoxide poisoning; acute disseminated
encephalomyelitis, acute hemorrhagic leukoencephalitis,
other types of encephalitis, and vasculitis; arterial or venous
infection, and the effects of severe hypoxia or head trauma
		

Modified from Hoshino A, Saitoh M, Oka A, et al. Epidemiology of acute
encephalopathy in Japan, with emphasis on the association of viruses and syndromes.
Brain Dev. 2012;34:337–343, Table 1.

viral infection (e.g., influenza, rotavirus, respiratory syncytial virus
[RSV], parainfluenza virus, enterovirus, human herpesvirus [HHV]-­
6, SARS-­CoV-­2) in a genetically susceptible host.
ANE presents with a dramatic encephalopathy after a febrile, “viral”
prodrome. Neurologic deficits are profound with rapid progression
to coma. Seizures are normally present, and progression of systemic
inflammatory dysregulation such as shock, organ failure, and disseminated intravascular coagulation is common. Elevated hepatic enzymes
without hyperammonemia are a unique feature. MRI is characterized
by bilateral symmetric thalamic lesions with or without lesions in the
tegmentum, cerebellar medulla, internal capsule, or periventricular
white matter (Fig. 638.10). Table 638.9 lists the diagnostic criteria.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3702 Part XXV u The Nervous System

A

B

C

D

E

F

Fig. 638.10 Acute necrotizing encephalopathy. MRI at presentation. A, Axial diffusion-­weighted image. B, Axial apparent diffusion coefficient

(ADC) map. C, Axial T2-­weighted image. D, Axial fluid-­attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) image. E, Contrast-­enhanced axial T1-­weighted image.
F, Axial susceptibility weighted image. Diffusion-­weighted images (A) and corresponding ADC map (B) clearly show multiple areas of restricted diffusion against a background of increased diffusion involving both thalami, which are swollen. On T2-­weighted (C) and FLAIR (D) images, the thalami
are markedly swollen and hyperintense. On T1-­weighted images obtained after intravenous gadolinium chelate injection (E), multiple necrotic
portions are well delineated by peripheral faint, linear enhancement. Incidental choroid plexus cysts are detected. Susceptibility weighted image
(F) shows multiple hypointense spots, consistent with petechial hemorrhage. (From Bergamino L, Capra V, Biancheri R, et al. Immunomodulatory
therapy in recurrent acute necrotizing encephalopathy ANE1: is it useful? Brain Dev. 2012;34:384–391, Fig. 1.)

There are no formal treatment guidelines. There is limited evidence
from small case series demonstrating some response to early (<24
hours from symptom onset) and aggressive high-­dose pulsed IV methylprednisolone. Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) may also be of
some benefit. Treatment is otherwise supportive, usually in an intensive care setting. Prognosis in ANE is poor, particularly in children
with brainstem involvement. Mortality rates approach 40%, and severe
neurologic sequelae are typical in surviving children.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

638.4 Autoimmune Encephalitis
Thaís Armangué and Josep Dalmau
Autoimmune encephalitis comprises an expanding group of clinical
syndromes that can occur at all ages (<1 year to adult) but preferentially affect children and younger adults. Some of these disorders
are associated with antibodies against neuronal cell surface proteins
and synaptic receptors involved in synaptic transmission, plasticity, or neuronal excitability. The syndromes vary according to the

associated antibody, with phenotypes that resemble those in which
the function of the target antigen is pharmacologically or genetically modified.
Most of these disorders are severe and potentially fatal, but patients
frequently respond to immunotherapy with good outcomes. Moreover,
because of the broad spectrum of symptoms—including alterations of
behavior, psychosis, catatonia, insomnia, memory deficits, seizures,
abnormal movements, and autonomic dysregulation—patients usually
require a multidisciplinary treatment approach.
The identification of autoimmune mechanisms has provided a definitive diagnosis to many cases of encephalitis previously considered idiopathic, infectious, or postinfectious even though no causative agents
were found. More than half of cases previously defined as encephalitis lethargica or choreoathetosis post–herpes simplex encephalitis are
currently known to be anti–N-­methyl-­d-­aspartate receptor (NMDAR)
encephalitis.
The mechanisms that trigger the production of the antibodies are
unknown. In a small subgroup of adolescent or young adult patients,
the presence of a tumor that expresses the target neuronal antigen
likely contributes to the triggering of the immune response. In addition, the high prevalence of prodromal viral-­like symptoms has suggested that nonspecific viral infections may contribute to altering the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 638 u Encephalopathies
immune tolerance for neuronal proteins and increasing the permeability of the blood-­brain barrier to antibodies. Nonetheless, in many
of these diseases the blood-­brain barrier appears intact, and there is
evidence that the autoantibodies are synthesized within the CNS by
plasma cells that form part of the local brain and meningeal inflammatory infiltrates.

GENERAL DIAGNOSTIC APPROACH TO
AUTOIMMUNE ENCEPHALITIS

Most autoimmune encephalitides have a rapid presentation of multiple
symptoms, usually in less than 3 months, including neurologic and/or
psychiatric alterations frequently associated with seizures or abnormal
EEG, and CSF or MRI evidence of inflammatory changes.
Depending on the combination of clinical features and presence of
neuronal-­specific antibodies, three diagnostic categories have been
established: possible autoimmune encephalitis, probable antibody-­
negative autoimmune encephalitis, and definite antibody-­
positive
autoimmune encephalitis (Table 638.10).
In the pediatric population, the number of autoimmune encephalitis cases associated with well-­defined antibodies is substantially lower
than that affecting the adult population (Table 638.11).

ANTI-­N-­METHYL-­D-­ASPARTATE RECEPTOR
ENCEPHALITIS

In this disease, the immunoglobulin G antibodies target the GluN1
subunit of the NMDA receptor. The estimated annual incidence of this
disorder is 1.2-­1.5 cases per million persons, and it is considered the
second most common cause of autoimmune encephalitis after acute
disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM) in children and adolescents. Overall, the disease predominates in females (80%); in patients
younger than 12 years, the frequency of males is >40%. The resulting
syndrome is highly predictable and usually evolves in stages. In teenagers and young adults, the disorder usually presents with prominent
psychiatric manifestations that may include rapidly progressive anxiety,
agitation, delusional thoughts, bizarre behavior, labile affect, mood
disturbances (mania), catatonic features, memory deficit, language
disintegration, aggression, and insomnia or other sleep disturbances.
In many cases, these symptoms had been preceded by a few days of
prodromal headache, fever, or viral infection–like symptoms. Patients
are often misdiagnosed with new-­onset psychosis or a primary psychiatric disorder. However, in a few days or weeks, additional symptoms
occur, including a decreased level of consciousness, seizures (including status epilepticus), limb or oral dyskinesias, choreoathetoid movements, and autonomic instability that usually includes tachycardia,
bradycardia, fluctuation of blood pressure, hypoventilation, hyperthermia, and sialorrhea. In rare instances, bradycardia and cardiac pauses
occur, at times requiring the transient use of a pacemaker. The disorder
also occurs in toddlers and infants (the youngest patient identified to
date was 2 months old), and although the evolution of the syndrome
is similar to that of adults, young patients more frequently present
with seizures and movement disorders. Because of the age of patients,
the psychiatric-­
behavioral features may be missed. In this young
age-­group, behavior changes include irritability, new-­onset temper
tantrums, agitation, aggression, reduced speech, mutism, and autistic-­
like regression. Moreover, compared with adults, some children also
develop cerebellar ataxia and hemiparesis; in contrast, autonomic dysfunction is usually milder and less severe in children.
Brain MRI studies are abnormal in approximately 35% of patients,
usually showing nonspecific cortical and subcortical T2–fluid-­
attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) signal abnormalities, sometimes
with transient cortical or meningeal enhancement; nonspecific white
matter abnormalities can occur. However, if white matter changes are
predominant, an overlapping syndrome with a demyelinating disease
should be suspected (Fig. 638.11A). The CSF is initially abnormal in
approximately 80% of patients, showing moderate lymphocytic pleocytosis and, less frequently, increased protein synthesis and oligoclonal
bands. The EEG is abnormal in virtually all patients; it usually shows
focal or diffuse slow activity in the delta and theta ranges, which does
not correlate with abnormal movements. In addition, many patients

3703

develop epileptic activity, requiring video monitoring for adequate
clinical management. A distinctive EEG pattern called extreme delta
brush, characterized by beta-­delta complexes, occurs in 30% of adults
and less frequently in children (Fig. 638.12).
The diagnosis of the disorder is established by demonstrating
NMDAR antibodies in CSF. The sensitivity is higher in CSF compared
with serum (100% vs 85%), and the levels of antibodies in CSF appear
to correlate better with the outcome. Antibodies may remain detectable, albeit at lower titers, after patients recover.
The presence of an underlying tumor, usually a teratoma, is age and
sex dependent. Whereas 40% of females older than 12 years have an
underlying teratoma of the ovary, the presence of a tumor is unusual
in young males and females or young adult male patients. In children,
an MRI of the abdomen and pelvis and abdominal and testicular ultrasound are the preferred tumor screening tests.
In a small number of patients, anti-­NMDAR encephalitis occurs
simultaneously with or after infections with a variety of pathogens,
including Mycoplasma pneumoniae, herpes simplex virus (HSV),
human herpesvirus 6, enterovirus, COVID-­19, and influenza virus.
With the exception of HSV1, a pathogenic link with most of these
infections has not been established. There is evidence that about
50% of patients with HSV encephalitis develop antibodies against
the GluN1 subunit of the NMDAR and other neuronal cell surface
proteins and receptors, and of these about half the patients develop
new or relapsing neurologic symptoms 2-­12 weeks after completing
treatment for HSV encephalitis. In children younger than 4 years,
this type of autoimmune encephalitis usually manifests with choreoathetosis and dyskinesias (known as choreoathetosis post-­HSV
encephalitis; see Videos 638.1, 638.2, and 638.3). In contrast, older
children and adults more often develop predominantly behavioral
symptoms. A similar complication has been reported in patients
with Japanese encephalitis, who develop autoimmune encephalitis
(usually with NMDAR antibodies) after the viral encephalitis has
subsided.
There is evidence that tumor removal, when appropriate, and
prompt immunotherapy improve the outcome. Most children receive
first-­
line immunotherapies, including corticosteroids, IVIG, or
plasma exchange. However, because these treatments fail in ∼50% of
patients, and with multiple reports showing that rituximab is effective, this treatment is increasingly being used in combination with
IVIG and steroids or after first-­line immunotherapies fail. Cyclophosphamide can be effective when there has been no response to these
treatments.
Approximately 80% of patients recover substantially or fully; mortality is estimated to be ∼5%, usually as a result of infections or autonomic dysregulation during the acute phase of the disease. Recovery is
usually slow and can take as long as 2 years after symptom onset. The
last symptoms to improve are problems in social interactions and language and executive functions. Relapses occur in approximately 15%
of patients; they can develop as partial syndromes, are usually milder
than the initial episode, and respond equally well to immunotherapy.
Initial comprehensive immunotherapy and rituximab appear to prevent or reduce the number of relapses. The efficacy of chronic immunosuppression with drugs such as azathioprine or mycophenolate mofetil
in preventing relapses is unknown. Young children with autoimmune
encephalitis, post-­HSV encephalitis, and NMDAR antibodies have a
poorer prognosis than patients with classical anti-­NMDAR encephalitis (see Fig. 638.11B).
The differential diagnosis of anti-­NMDAR encephalitis is extensive and varies according to the stage of the disease (Table 638.12).
The most frequently considered disorders are viral encephalitis, neuroleptic malignant syndrome, acute psychosis, and drug
misuse.

OTHER TYPES OF ENCEPHALITIS ASSOCIATED
WITH ANTIBODIES AGAINST NEURONAL CELL
SURFACE ANTIGENS

Encephalitis with antibodies against the γ-­aminobutyric acid A
receptor (GABAAR) is a rare autoimmune encephalitis that can affect

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3704 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 638.10  Classification Criteria for Possible and Definite Antibody-­Positive Autoimmune Encephalitis and Probable
Antibody-­Negative Pediatric Autoimmune Encephalitis
DIAGNOSTIC CATEGORIES
CATEGORICAL
FEATURES OF
AUTOIMMUNE
ENCEPHALITIS

SPECIFIC DIAGNOSTIC
FEATURES

POSSIBLE AE

PROBABLE
DEFINITE
ANTIBODY-­NEGATIVE AE ANTIBODY-­POSITIVE AE

1.	Evidence of acute or
subacute symptom
onset

Onset of neurologic and/
or psychiatric symptoms
over ≤3 mo in a
previously healthy child

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.	Clinical evidence of
neurologic dysfunction

Features include:

≥2 features present

≥2 features present

≥2 features present

Not available*

≥1 feature present

≥1b feature present

Altered mental status/
level of consciousness
or EEG with slowing
or epileptiform activity
(focal or generalized)
Focal neurologic deficits
Cognitive difficultiesa
Acute developmental
regression
Movement disorder
(except tics)
Psychiatric symptoms
Seizures not explained
by a previously known
seizure disorder or other
condition
3.	Paraclinical evidence of
neuroinflammation

Features include:
CSF inflammatory changes
(leukocytosis >5 cells/
mm3 and/or oligoclonal
banding)
MRI features of encephalitis
Brain biopsy showing
inflammatory infiltrates
and excluding other
disorders

4.	Autoimmune
encephalitis serology

Presence in serum and/or
CSF of well-­characterized
autoantibodies
associated with
autoimmune
encephalitisb

Not available

No

Yes

5.	Exclusion of other
etiologies

Reasonable exclusion
of alternative causes,
including other causes of
CNS inflammation

Yes

Yes

Yes

aSevere cognitive dysfunction that is not attributable to a primary psychiatric syndrome as documented by a qualified clinician (e.g., neurologist, psychiatrist, and neuropsychologist)

or a significant drop in IQ (>20 points).
bWhen antibodies against N-­methyl-­d-­aspartate receptor (NMDAR), gamma-­aminobutyric acid A receptor (GABA R), or glutamic acid decarboxylase 65 (GAD65) are present in the
A

CSF, further paraclinical biomarkers of neuroinflammation are not required to diagnose definite autoimmune encephalitis. When only serum antibodies are present, one or more
paraclinical marker(s) of neuroinflammation is required.
*If clinical criteria of possible AE are met, the authors recommend proceeding with paraclinical and antibody testing and consider initiating immune therapy if the paraclinical tests
are abnormal.
AE, Autoimmune encephalitis.
Adapted from Cellucci T, Van Matter H, Graus F, et al. Clinical approach to the diagnosis of autoimmune encephalitis in the pediatric patient. Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm.
2020;7:e663.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 638 u Encephalopathies

3705

Table 638.11  Autoimmune Encephalitis in Children
ANTIBODIES AND/OR
MECHANISMS

SYNDROME

ANCILLARY TEST

TREATMENT/PROGNOSIS

Anti-­NMDAR
encephalitis

Antibodies against the
GluN1 subunit of the
NMDAR. In children, most
cases are idiopathic. In a
subgroup of patients, the
disease is triggered by
the presence of a tumor.
In another subgroup, the
disease is triggered by HSV
encephalitis.

Psychiatric symptoms,
decreased verbal output,
sleep disorder (mainly
insomnia), seizures,
dyskinesias (orofacial,
limbs), dystonia,
rigidity and other
abnormal movements,
autonomic dysfunction,
hypoventilation

EEG: almost always abnormal
(epileptic and/or slow
activity). In some patients
it shows the pattern of
extreme delta brush.
Brain MRI: nonspecific
abnormal findings in ∼35%
CSF: pleocytosis and/or
increased proteins in ∼80%

80% substantial or
complete recovery
after immunotherapy
and tumor removal (if
appropriate). About 50%
of patients need second-­
line immunotherapies.*
Relapses in ∼15% of
patients.
Worse outcome when post-­
HSV encephalitis

Encephalitis
associated
with GABAAR
antibodies

Antibodies against α1, β3, or
γ2 subunits of the GABAAR.
∼40% of adults have an
underlying tumor (thymoma).
Children usually do not have
tumor association.

Refractory seizures,
epilepsia partialis
continua. Patients may
develop limb or orofacial
dyskinesias.

EEG: almost always abnormal;
frequent epileptic activity
MRI: multifocal
corticosubcortical FLAIR/T2
hyperintensities in 77% of
patients
CSF: pleocytosis and/or
increased proteins

80% show moderate or
good recovery after
immunotherapy.

Encephalitis
with mGluR5
antibodies**
(Ophelia
syndrome)

Antibodies against mGluR5
Frequent association with
Hodgkin lymphoma

Abnormal behavior,
seizures, memory deficits

EEG: frequently abnormal
with nonspecific findings
MRI: normal or nonspecific
findings
CSF: frequent pleocytosis
and/or increased proteins

Good recovery after
tumor treatment and
immunotherapy

Other
autoimmune
encephalitis**
(very infrequent
in children)

Antibodies against neuronal
cell surface (GABABR, DPPX,
GlyR, mGluR2, LGI1, Caspr2,
GluK2) or intraneuronal
antigens (Hu, Ma2, GAD65
amphiphysin)
All these antibodies rarely
associate with tumors in
children.

The syndrome varies
depending on the
autoantibody, and the
phenotypes are often
different from those
reported in adults.
GABABR: encephalitis,
seizures, cerebellar ataxia
DPPX: CNS
hyperexcitability, PERM
GlyR: PERM, stiff person
syndrome***
mGluR2: paraneoplastic
cerebellar ataxia
LGI1: similar syndrome
as that of the adults
but without FBDS and
hyponatremia.
Caspr2: similar syndrome
as that of the adults
and hypertensive
encephalopathy,
hormonal dysfunction,
palmoplantar erythema
Gluk2: cerebellitis and/or
autoimmune encephalitis
with prominent ataxia
Hu: brainstem or limbic
encephalitis
GAD65****: encephalitis
with epilepsy

MRI: variable changes
depending on the
syndrome.
CSF: frequent pleocytosis
and/or increased proteins

Disorders with antibodies
against cell surface
antigens are substantially
more responsive to
immunotherapy than those
with antibodies against
intracellular antigens.

Encephalitis
associated
with MOG
antibodies

In children the most common
clinical manifestation is
ADEM

Seizures, motor deficits,
ataxia, or visual
dysfunction accompanied
by encephalopathy

MRI with T2/FLAIR large,
hazy abnormalities, with or
without involvement of the
deep gray matter
Some patients develop
encephalitis with
predominant cortical
involvement
CSF: frequent pleocytosis
and/or increased proteins

In ∼70-80% of patients, the
disease is monophasic and
shows good response to
steroids. Some patients
develop relapsing
disease (with prolonged
detection of serum MOG
antibodies).

DISEASE

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3706 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 638.11  Autoimmune Encephalitis in Children—cont’d
DISEASE

ANTIBODIES AND/OR
MECHANISMS

SYNDROME

ANCILLARY TEST

TREATMENT/PROGNOSIS

NMOSD

Patients can have AQP4 or
MOG antibodies; some
patients are seronegative.

Typical involvement of
Characteristic involvement
optic nerves and spinal
of brain areas rich in AQP4
cord
(periaqueductal gray matter,
Encephalopathy in the
hypothalamus, optic nerve
context of diencephalic or
and central involvement of
area postrema syndromes
the spinal cord)

High risk of relapses and long-­
term disability. Requires
chronic immunotherapy.
Patients with MOG
antibodies have better long-­
term outcome than those
with AQP4 antibodies or
seronegative cases.

Acute cerebellar
ataxia and acute
cerebellitis

Frequently triggered by
infections. Most patients
do not have detectable
autoantibodies (a few
patients have GluK2
antibodies).

Ataxia and dysmetria.
Some patients present
with headache, vomiting,
and decreased level of
consciousness caused by
intracranial hypertension

MRI: normal in acute
cerebellar ataxia; several
MRI patterns in acute
cerebellitis: diffuse
(more frequent) or focal
bihemispheric acute
cerebellitis with T2/FLAIR
hyperintensities in the
cerebellar parenchyma;
hemicerebellitis (only one
hemisphere involved).

Usually self-­limiting
and benign course
in acute cerebellar
ataxia; Immunotherapy
is usually effective in
acute cerebellitis, but
some patients may need
urgent decompressive
craniectomy, and residual
neurologic symptoms are
frequent.

Opsoclonus-­
Most patients do not have
myoclonus and
detectable autoantibodies
other cerebellar-­ (a few patients with
brainstem
neuroblastoma have Hu
encephalitis
antibodies). Neuroblastoma
occurs in 50% of children
<2 yr old; teratoma in
teenagers and young adults.

Opsoclonus often
accompanied by
irritability, ataxia, falling,
myoclonus, tremor, and
drooling

MRI: usually normal; it may
show cerebellar atrophy
over time.
EEG: Normal.
CSF: may be normal or show
abnormalities suggesting
B-­cell activation.

Neuroblastoma treatment (if
it applies).
Partial neurologic response
to immunotherapy in many
young children regardless
of presence or absence
of neuroblastoma. (Better
outcomes if aggressive
immunotherapy is used.)
Good response to
treatment in teenagers
with teratoma-­associated
opsoclonus.

Bickerstaff
encephalitis

GQ1b antibodies (∼65%,
nonspecific for this disorder)

Ophthalmoplegia, ataxia,
and decreased level of
consciousness. Frequent
hyperreflexia. Patients
may develop hyporeflexia
and overlap with Miller-­
Fisher syndrome.

MRI: abnormal in ∼30% (T2-­
signal abnormalities in the
brainstem, thalamus, and
cerebellum)
Nerve conduction studies:
abnormal in ∼45%
(predominant axonal
degeneration, and less
often demyelination)

Good response to steroids,
IVIG, or plasma exchange

Steroid responsive TPO antibodies† (nonspecific
encephalopathy
for this disorder)
with autoimmune
thyroiditis (SREAT)
(Hashimoto
encephalitis)

Strokelike symptoms,
tremor, myoclonus,
aphasia, seizures, ataxia,
sleep and behavioral
problems

48% hypothyroidism (usually
subclinical), MRI often
normal
EEG: slow activity
CSF: elevated protein

Steroid-­responsive. Partial
responses are frequent.

Rasmussen
encephalitis

Most likely immune mediated
(unclear mechanism)

Progressive refractory
partial seizures, cognitive
decline, focal deficits, and
brain hemiatrophy

MRI: progressive unilateral
hemispheric atrophy

Limited response to
immunotherapy.
The most effective
treatment is functional
hemispherectomy.

Basal ganglia
encephalitis

Infrequent antibodies against
D2R

Lethargy, abnormal
movements, behavioral
change, agitation,
psychosis

MRI: Basal ganglia T2/FLAIR
abnormalities, but may be
normal in up to 50%
CSF: frequently, elevated
protein

Mostly monophasic,
variable outcome; 40%
complete recovery with
immunotherapy.

CLIPPERS

No specific autoantibody
association
Probably represents different
diseases. Important
differential diagnosis with
lymphoma

Episodic diplopia or
facial paresthesias with
subsequent development
of symptoms of brainstem
and occasionally spinal
cord dysfunction

MRI: symmetric curvilinear
gadolinium enhancement
peppering the pons and
extending variably into the
medulla, brachium pontis,
cerebellum, midbrain, and,
occasionally, spinal cord

Steroid-­responsive but
patients may require
chronic steroid or other
immunosuppressive
therapy.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 638.11  Autoimmune Encephalitis in Children—cont’d
DISEASE
ROHHAD

ANTIBODIES AND/OR
MECHANISMS

SYNDROME

ANCILLARY TEST

TREATMENT/PROGNOSIS

Postulated autoimmune or
genetic; some patients have
antibodies against ZSCAN1.
Frequently associated with
neural crest tumors

Rapid-­onset obesity,
hyperphagia, abnormal
behavior, autonomic
dysfunction, and central
hypoventilation

Brain MRI, usually normal

Symptomatic treatment.
In some patients,
limited response to
immunotherapy.

*Includes rituximab and cyclophosphamide.
**Commercial testing panels do not include GluK2, D2R, or mGluR antibodies. Therefore when one of these conditions is suspected, the samples should be investigated in a
research laboratory.
***Low titers of GlyR ab have been reported in the serum of multiple different disorders, and their clinical significance is unclear; demonstration of antibodies in CSF has higher
disease-­specificity and is found usually associated with PERM.
****Lower titers of GAD65 antibodies in serum are found in patients with diabetes mellitus (∼100-­fold lower titers than those associated with GAD-­antibody–associated neurologic
disorders), other non-­neurologic autoimmune conditions, and healthy persons.
†Diagnosis of exclusion, after ruling out relevant autoantibodies (e.g., NMDAR, AMPAR, among others).
AQP4, Aquaporin 4; CLIPPERS, chronic lymphocytic inflammation with pontine perivascular enhancement responsive to steroids; Caspr2, contactin-­associated protein-­like 2; CSF,
cerebrospinal fluid; D2R, dopamine 2 receptor; DPPX, dipeptidyl-­peptidase-­like protein-­6; EEG, electroencephalography; FBDS, faciobrachial dystonic seizures; FLAIR, fluid-­
attenuated inversion recovery; GABAAR, γ-­aminobutyric acid-­A receptor; GABABR, γ-­aminobutyric acid-­B receptor; GAD65, glutamic acid decarboxylase 65; GluK2, glutamate
kainate receptor 2; HSV, herpes simplex virus; IVIG, intravenous immunoglobulin; LGI1, leucine-­rich glioma-­inactivated 1; mGluR, metabotropic glutamate receptor; MOG, myelin
oligodendrocyte glycoprotein; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; NMDAR, N-­methyl-­d-­aspartate receptor; NMOSD, neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder; PERM, progressive
encephalomyelitis with rigidity and myoclonus; ROHHAD, rapid-­onset obesity with hypothalamic dysfunction, hypoventilation, and autonomic dysregulation; TPO, thyroid
peroxidase; ZSCAN1, Zinc finger and SCAN domain-containing protein 1.

A

B

C

D

E

F

Fig 638.11 Brain MRI patterns in autoimmune encephalitis. A, FLAIR MRI image of a patient with anti-­NMDAR encephalitis and concurrent

MOG antibodies; it shows a prominent right frontal abnormality compatible with demyelination. B, T1-­weighted MRI image of a 2-­yr-­old male with
anti-­NMDAR encephalitis after herpes simplex encephalitis. There are extensive necrotic areas in temporal regions that are residual from the viral
encephalitis, without new MRI lesions produced by the autoimmune encephalitis. C, FLAIR MRI image from a patient with anti-­GABAAR encephalitis; it shows multiple cortical-­subcortical bilateral right frontal predominant hyperintensities. D, FLAIR MRI image showing typical features of limbic
encephalitis with bilateral medial temporal lobe abnormalities; this adult patient with autopsy-­proven limbic encephalitis did not have serum or
CSF antineuronal antibodies. E, FLAIR MRI image showing extensive cortical involvement in a 9-­yr-­old with fatal encephalitis associated with MOG
antibodies and severe intracranial hypertension. F, Typical FLAIR MRI findings in a 4-­yr-­old female with acute disseminated encephalomyelitis associated with MOG antibodies; it shows bilateral large abnormalities in the white matter. Left side of images = right side of brain. (A and D from Graus
F, Titulaer MJ, Balu R, et al. A clinical approach to diagnosis of autoimmune encephalitis. Lancet Neurol. 2016;15:391–404. Fig. 2.; C courtesy Dr.
Mateus Mistieri Simabukuro; B, E, and F courtesy Drs. Thaís Armangué and Josep O. Dalmau.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3708 Part XXV u The Nervous System

Fig. 638.12 Electroencephalogram showing a pat-

tern called extreme delta brush in a 14-­yr-­old female
with anti–N-­methyl-­d-­
aspartate receptor (NMDAR)
encephalitis. This pattern has been found to be characteristic of anti-­NMDAR encephalitis. It consists of a
nearly continuous combination of delta activity with
superimposed fast activity, usually in the beta range,
symmetrically involving all regions, with a frontal preference in patients who are not under sedation or anesthesia. (From Armangue T, Titulaer MJ, Málaga I, et al.
Pediatric anti-­N-­methyl-­D-­aspartate receptor encephalitis: clinical analysis and novel findings in a series of 20
patients. J Pediatr. 2012;162:850–856, Fig. 2.)

children (40% of patients are <18 years) and develops with status epilepticus, refractory seizures, or epilepsia partialis continua in association with antibodies against the α1, β3, or γ2 subunits of the GABAAR.
Young children can develop abnormal movements suggestive of anti-­
NMDAR encephalitis but with studies negative for NMDAR antibodies. Unlike other types of autoimmune encephalitis in which the
brain MRI is usually normal or shows nonspecific findings, pediatric
and adult patients with this disorder frequently develop multifocal
hyperintense cortical-­subcortical FLAIR/T2 abnormalities (see Fig.
638.11C). In adults, this encephalitis may occur with thymoma, but
children rarely have an underlying tumor.
Ophelia syndrome is a form of encephalitis that occurs in association with Hodgkin lymphoma and predominantly affects young
adults, teenagers, or children. Some patients develop antibodies
against mGluR5, a receptor involved in learning and memory. Neurologic symptoms are highly responsive to treatment of the tumor and
immunotherapy.
Autoimmune limbic encephalitis refers to an inflammatory
process of the limbic system, including the medial temporal lobes,
amygdala, and cingulate gyri (see Fig. 638.11D). In adults, the most
frequent immune-­mediated limbic encephalitis occurs in association with antibodies against proteins that were once thought to be
voltage-­gated potassium channels (VGKCs) but which, in fact, target
a secreted neuronal protein called leucine-­rich glioma-­inactivated 1
(LGI1) and a protein called Caspr2 expressed in the brain and the
juxtaparanodal regions of myelinated nerves. Adult patients with
LGI1 antibody–associated limbic encephalitis often develop hyponatremia; in some patients, the disorder is preceded by dystonic
or myoclonic-­like movements, described as faciobrachial dystonic
seizures. Adult patients with Caspr2 antibodies can develop limbic
encephalitis, neuromyotonia, or Morvan syndrome, which includes
encephalopathy, seizures, a sleep disorder, autonomic dysfunction,
and neuromyotonia. In children, encephalitis with LGI1 or Caspr2
antibodies is extremely rare. Children with LGI1 antibodies do not
develop hyponatremia or faciobrachial dystonic seizures. Younger
children with Caspr2 antibodies often have similar symptoms to
those of the adults, which can also be accompanied by generalized
weakness, flaccid paresis, hypertensive encephalopathy, hormonal
dysfunction, and palmoplantar erythema or eczema that has been
attributed to sweating and itching. Children with Caspr2 antibodies
do not have associated tumors.
VGKC-­complex antibodies have very limited clinical utility unless
they are specifically characterized as antibodies against LGI1 or Caspr2
proteins. Thus a positive test for VGKC-­complex antibodies without
further information on LGI1 or Caspr2 specificity should be interpreted with caution because it does not necessarily indicate autoimmune encephalitis.
Excluding patients with anti-­
NMDAR– or GABAAR antibody–
associated encephalitis, an exceptionally low number of children with

limbic and other types of neuronal antibody-­associated encephalitis
have been reported in the English literature, some of them with antibodies against neuronal cell surface proteins (GABABR, DPPX, GlyR)
or intracellular proteins (Hu, Ma2, GAD65, amphiphysin). In some
patients, an underlying malignancy was identified, including leukemia,
ganglioneuroblastoma, neuroblastoma, or small cell carcinoma of the
ovary.
Determination of the type of autoantibodies and location of the target
antigens is important because an encephalitis in which the antigens are
on the cell surface (e.g., NMDAR or GABAAR) responds better to immunotherapy than one in which the antigens are intracellular (e.g., GAD65).

ACQUIRED DEMYELINATING SYNDROMES WITH
ENCEPHALOPATHY

ADEM is the most frequent autoimmune encephalitis in children (see
Chapter 640.1). Symptoms may include seizures, motor deficits, ataxia,
and visual dysfunction, among others. The brain MRI typically shows
multifocal demyelinating lesions that can also involve the basal ganglia, brainstem, or cerebellum, with variable contrast enhancement (see
Fig. 638.11F). Antibodies against myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein
(MOG) occur in 50–60% of patients with ADEM and have a negative
predictive value for evolution to multiple sclerosis in children with a
first demyelinating event (see Chapter 640.1). Some children with MOG
antibodies develop a clinical picture resembling autoimmune encephalitis with MRI FLAIR/T2 increased signal involving cortical regions, with
variable contrast enhancement, or presenting as nondemyelinating focal
or diffuse lesions (see Fig. 638.11E). MOG antibodies may also coexist with NMDAR antibodies; these patients usually develop overlapping
syndromes related to these autoimmunities.
Neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (NMOSD) can present
as an encephalopathy with predominant involvement of diencephalic
and area postrema regions. These patients often harbor aquaporin 4
(AQP4) antibodies or MOG antibodies. Determination of these antibodies should be considered in patients with encephalopathy and MRI
findings showing involvement of AQP4-­rich regions, such as the periaqueductal gray matter, hypothalamus, optic nerves, and central region
of the spinal cord (see Chapter 640.2).

HASHIMOTO ENCEPHALOPATHY

Hashimoto encephalopathy, also known as steroid-­responsive
encephalopathy with autoimmune thyroiditis (SREAT), is a controversial disorder defined by the detection of thyroid peroxidase (TPO)
antibodies in patients with acute or subacute encephalitis that responds
to corticosteroids. Clinical features are not specific and may include
strokelike episodes, tremor, myoclonus, transient aphasia, sleep and
behavior abnormalities, hallucinations, seizures, and ataxia. The CSF,
MRI, and EEG findings are not specific. The diagnosis of this disorder
should be based on the exclusion of other inflammatory and autoimmune diseases. Pretreatment criteria of Hashimoto encephalopathy do

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 638 u Encephalopathies

3709

Table 638.12  Differential Diagnosis of Anti-­NMDAR and Other Types of Autoimmune Encephalitis in Children
DISORDER

COMMENTS

Viral encephalitis

Viral encephalitis is often suggested by the acute onset of symptoms, CSF pleocytosis, and
hyperthermia. Most viral encephalitides (except rabies) occur with higher levels of CSF pleocytosis and
protein concentration. Psychosis and dyskinesias are significantly less frequent in viral encephalitis than
in anti-­NMDAR encephalitis.

New neurological symptoms postHSV encephalitis

Occurs ∼2-­12 wk after successful treatment of HSV encephalitis. This may represent a true viral relapse
of encephalitis (CSF PCR-­positive, progression of necrotic MRI changes, response to acyclovir) or
an autoimmune disorder (CSF PCR-­negative, no new necrotic lesions on MRI, lack of response to
acyclovir). In a proportion of the latter patients, the disorder is anti-­NMDAR encephalitis.

New-­onset psychosis

Because most patients with anti-­NMDAR encephalitis present with psychosis, a psychiatric disorder is
frequently considered. When the disease evolves, the development of neurologic symptoms usually
reveals the diagnosis.

Drugs/toxins

The acute development of personality and behavioral changes and symptoms suggesting involvement
of dopaminergic pathways (rigidity, dystonia, orofacial movements) usually leads to a suspicion of drug
use (e.g., ketamine, phencyclidine, synthetic cannabinoids, among others).

Neuroleptic malignant syndrome
(NMS)

The occurrence of an altered level of consciousness, episodes of rigidity, hyperthermia, and autonomic
instability often suggest NMS. In addition, some patients with anti-­NMDAR encephalitis have elevated
serum creatine kinase and rhabdomyolysis (in the absence of antipsychotic medication). The frequent
use of neuroleptics to control the abnormal behavior adds further confusion between both syndromes.
The presence of dyskinesias and catatonia suggest anti-­NMDAR encephalitis.

Limbic encephalitis (LE)

Criteria of LE are well defined. Patients with LE do not have dyskinesias or central hypoventilation;
the MRI usually shows abnormalities restricted to the medial temporal lobes, and the EEG findings
(epileptic or slow activity) are largely restricted to the temporal lobes.

Encephalitis lethargica

This is an ill-­defined entity, likely representing multiple disorders. Criteria include acute or subacute
encephalitis with at least three of the following: signs of basal ganglia involvement; oculogyric crises;
ophthalmoplegia; obsessive-­compulsive behavior; akinetic mutism; central respiratory irregularities;
and somnolence and/or sleep inversion. Many patients categorized as encephalitis lethargica
hyperkinetica have anti-­NMDAR encephalitis.

Childhood disintegrative disorder/
late-­onset autism

Children with anti-­NMDAR encephalitis often show cognitive regression, rapid loss of language function,
autistic features, and seizures, suggesting a childhood disintegrative disorder. Although the prognosis
of CDD is poor, most patients with anti-­NMDAR encephalitis respond to immunotherapy and have a
substantial clinical recovery.

Kleine-­Levin syndrome

Symptoms of hypersomnia, compulsive hyperphagia, hypersexuality, apathy, and childlike behavior,
which are typical components of Kleine-­Levin syndrome, may occur transiently during the process of
recovery of anti-­NMDAR encephalitis or as permanent sequelae. However, different from the KleineLevin syndrome, the symptoms in anti-NMDAR encephalitis are not relapsing-­remitting

Inborn errors of metabolism

Glutaric aciduria type I can present in previously asymptomatic patients as episodes of encephalopathy
with dystonia, coinciding with an infection or febrile process. Several inborn errors of metabolism
can also occur with acute or subacute encephalopathy with extrapyramidal signs, including
3-­methylglutaconic aciduria, creatine transport deficiency, mitochondrial disorders (Leigh syndrome),
Wilson syndrome, and Lesch-­Nyhan syndrome. Pantothenate kinase–associated neurodegeneration,
porphyria, and urea cycle defects should also be considered.

Genetic disorders that can manifest
as autoimmune encephalitis

HLH (often initial presentation as primary CNS with later 1-­2 yr onset of systemic features) RANBP2
variants, interferonopathies, autoinflammatory syndromes including cryopyrin-­associated periodic
syndromes, Aicardi-Goutières syndrome, and CTLA4 deficiency can present with clinical features
mimicking ADEM or autoimmune or infectious encephalitis. MRI often shows hyperintense T2/FLAIR
abnormalities involving white matter with contrast enhancement in HLH and CTLA4 deficiency; both
thalami in RANBP2 variants; and may show striatal necrosis with or without associated hypomyelination
in ADAR1 interferonopathy. CSF is abnormal in most patients. Some patients develop systemic
symptoms (e.g., fever, arthralgias or rash in autoinflammatory syndromes, or autoimmune cytopenias or
hypogammaglobulinemia in CTLA4 deficiency) that can help to make the diagnosis, which is confirmed
by genetic testing.

Monoamine neurotransmitter
disorders

Deficiency of dopamine or serotonin, or both, can result in encephalopathy, epilepsy, and pyramidal
and extrapyramidal symptoms. The diagnosis is established by examining the CSF for levels of these
neurotransmitters.

Acquired demyelinating disorders

ADEM and NMOSD are immune-­mediated inflammatory and demyelinating disorders of the central
nervous system. These disorders should be considered in the differential diagnosis of multifocal
neurologic abnormalities and encephalopathy in children. As with anti-­NMDAR encephalitis, these
disorders may be preceded by an infection and can show pleocytosis. The diagnosis is suggested by
the MRI findings. In NMOSD, the presence of AQP4 antibodies in serum or CSF is associated with
relapses and poor prognosis. MOG antibodies occur in ∼50% of children with ADEM and some patients
with NMOSD.
Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3710 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 638.12  Differential Diagnosis of Anti-­NMDAR and Other Types of Autoimmune Encephalitis in Children—cont’d
DISORDER

COMMENTS

CNS vasculitis

CNS vasculitis (including RVCLS:TREX1) results in neurologic deficits and psychiatric manifestations.
The diagnosis is established by angiography in large-­vessel angiitis and brain biopsy in small vessel
angiitis. In the latter, serum inflammatory markers (erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-­reactive protein,
Complement 3, von Willebrand factor antigen) are usually elevated, and the MRI shows FLAIR/T2
abnormalities in the white and/or gray matter suggesting ischemia and microhemorrhages, but are not
restricted to vascular territories and frequent leptomeningeal and/or local enhancement.

Systemic rheumatic disorders

Systemic lupus erythematosus and other rheumatic disorders can result in encephalopathy and multifocal
neurologic and psychiatric manifestations. These disorders are usually suggested by the presence of
signs and symptoms of involvement of systemic organs: skin, joints, kidneys, blood-­forming cells, and
blood vessels.

ADEM, Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis; CDD, childhood disintegrative disorder; CNS, central nervous system; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; HSV, herpes simplex virus; EEG,
electroencephalography; FLAIR, fluid-­attenuated inversion recovery; HLH, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis; LE, limbic encephalitis; MOG, myelin oligodendrocyte
glycoprotein; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; NMDAR, N-­methyl-­d-­aspartate receptor; NMOSD, neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders; NMS, neuroleptic malignant
syndrome; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; RANBP2, Ras-­related nuclear protein-­binding protein 2; RVCLS, retinovasculopathy and cerebral leukodystrophy with systemic features,
CTLA4, cytotoxic T-­lymphocyte–associated protein 4; ADAR1, adenosine deaminase acting on RNA 1.

not predict steroid responsiveness. Because TPO antibodies occur in
approximately 10% of asymptomatic children (i.e., nonencephalopathic
and, in most cases, euthyroid) and can also be found in some patients
who have more relevant antibody-­associated diseases, the detection of
TPO antibodies should be viewed as a marker of autoimmunity rather
than a disease-­specific or pathogenic antibody. Therefore detection of
TPO antibodies should not prevent testing for more relevant antibodies, such as NMDAR antibodies.
Acute cerebellar ataxia and acute cerebellitis are the most frequent causes of cerebellar dysfunction in children. Ataxia and dysmetria are usually the main presenting symptoms, but some patients
present with headache, vomiting, and decreased level of consciousness caused by intracranial hypertension. Brain MRI is normal in
patients with acute cerebellar ataxia, but in cases of cerebellitis it
shows T2/FLAIR hyperintensities in the white and gray matter of
the cerebellum along with edema that may cause obstruction of
the fourth ventricle and hydrocephalus. Treatment with steroids is
usually effective, but some patients may need decompressive craniectomy. Whereas acute cerebellar ataxia with normal MRI is often
self-­limiting and has a benign course, cerebellitis with MRI abnormalities associates with a less favorable prognosis and almost half of
them have residual neurologic deficits. The most frequent cause of
acute cerebellar ataxia and cerebellitis is a viral infection; much less
frequently, they may occur after bacterial infections or vaccines. A
few cases with antibodies against the glutamate kainate 2 (GluK2)
receptor have been reported.

In addition, insomnia and an abnormal response to pain are common. Relapses occur in 50% of patients, usually as a result of an
intercurrent infection or drug tapering. Patients treated with more
aggressive immunosuppression (often including rituximab) have better outcomes compared with historic control series or patients who
did not receive these treatments. Delay in treatment appears to be
associated with a poorer neurologic outcome; therefore in cases with
neuroblastoma, removal of the tumor should not delay the start of
immunotherapy.
In teenagers and young adults, opsoclonus-­
myoclonus and
brainstem-­
cerebellar encephalitis without opsoclonus are often
considered idiopathic or postinfectious; however, there is evidence
that some of these patients have an underlying teratoma, usually
in the ovaries. These patients do not harbor NMDAR antibodies,
and compared with those with anti-­NMDAR encephalitis, they are
less likely to present with psychiatric symptoms or dyskinesias.
Although these patients do not appear to have neuronal antibodies, the CSF often shows pleocytosis and an elevated protein concentration. Treatment with immunotherapy (corticosteroids, IVIG,
and/or plasma exchange) and removal of the ovarian teratoma frequently associate with full recovery. The prognosis of opsoclonus-­
myoclonus in teenagers and young adults seems better than that
of young children (with or without neuroblastoma) or of the paraneoplastic opsoclonus of older patients, usually related to breast,
ovarian, or lung cancer.

OPSOCLONUS-­MYOCLONUS AND OTHER TYPES
OF RARE BRAINSTEM-­CEREBELLAR ENCEPHALITIS

This term is used to describe patients with rapid progression (<4 weeks)
of bilateral external ophthalmoplegia, ataxia, and decreased level
of consciousness. Although this entity has been described more frequently in adults, children as young as 3 years old have been identified.
Most patients are treated with steroids, IVIG, or plasma exchange; they
often have a good outcome. Serum GQ1b immunoglobulin G antibodies are found in 66% of patients. Brain MRI abnormalities occur in 30%
of patients and usually include increased T2-­signal abnormalities in the
brainstem, thalamus, and cerebellum and sometimes in the cerebral
white matter. Some patients develop hyporeflexia and limb weakness,
with predominant axonal involvement, overlapping with symptoms
of Miller-­Fisher syndrome and the axonal subtype of Guillain-­Barré
syndrome.

Opsoclonus-­myoclonus occurs in infants, teenagers, and adults,
although it probably represents different diseases and pathogenic
mechanisms. In infants, the syndrome usually develops in the first
2 years of life (mean: 20 months), and at least 50% of patients have
an underlying neuroblastoma. The child often presents with irritability, ataxia, falling, myoclonus, tremor, and drooling. Additional
symptoms may include a refusal to walk or sit, speech problems,
hypotonia, and the typical features of opsoclonus characterized by
rapid, chaotic, multidirectional eye movements without saccadic
intervals. Because opsoclonus may be absent at symptom presentation, patients may initially be diagnosed with acute cerebellitis.
Typically, CSF abnormalities suggest B-­cell activation, and the presence of antibodies against neuronal proteins has been demonstrated
in rare instances, but the identification of a specific autoantigen has
been elusive.
Immunotherapy, including corticosteroids and IVIG, often
improves the abnormal eye movements, but residual behavioral,
language, and cognitive problems persist in the majority of patients.

BICKERSTAFF ENCEPHALITIS

CHRONIC LYMPHOCYTIC INFLAMMATION WITH
PONTINE PERIVASCULAR ENHANCEMENT
RESPONSIVE TO STEROIDS

This is a clinically and radiologically distinct pontine-­predominant
encephalomyelitis. Patients usually present with episodic diplopia
or facial paresthesias with subsequent development of symptoms of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 639 u Neurodegenerative Disorders of Childhood
brainstem, cerebellum, and, occasionally, spinal cord dysfunction.
A brain MRI shows symmetric curvilinear gadolinium enhancement peppering the pons and extending variably into the medulla,
brachium pontis, cerebellum, and midbrain and occasionally into
the spinal cord. The clinical and radiologic findings usually respond
to high-­dose steroids but may worsen after steroid tapering, requiring chronic steroid or other immunosuppressive therapy. The differential diagnosis is extensive and includes infections, acquired
demyelinating syndromes, granulomatous disease, lymphoma, or
vasculitis. Biopsy studies may be needed to exclude these and other
conditions.

AUTOIMMUNE ENCEPHALOPATHIES ASSOCIATED
WITH EPILEPSY AND STATUS EPILEPTICUS

Rasmussen encephalitis is an inflammatory encephalopathy characterized by progressive refractory focal seizures, cognitive deterioration, and focal neurologic deficits that occur with gradual
atrophy of one brain hemisphere. The disorder frequently presents
in children 6-­8 years old, although adolescents and adults can be
affected. The etiology is unknown, and therefore multiple theories
are proposed, including the presence of neuronal antibodies and
T-­cell–mediated mechanisms triggered by a viral infection. None
of these mechanisms satisfactorily explain the unilateral brain
involvement characteristic of the disorder. Treatment with high-­
dose steroids, plasma exchange, or IVIG can ameliorate symptoms
in early stages of the disease. Multiple different approaches with
immunotherapy, including rituximab, tacrolimus, azathioprine,
adalimumab, mycophenolate mofetil, natalizumab, or anakinra
have not substantially changed the poor outcome of most patients.
The most effective treatment for control of the seizures is functional hemispherectomy, which consists of surgical disconnection
of the affected hemisphere.

OTHER SUSPECTED TYPES OF AUTOIMMUNE
ENCEPHALITIS

Vasculitis of the CNS and rheumatic diseases associated with autoimmune mechanisms that can result in encephalitis are discussed in
Chapter 642.
Rapid-­onset obesity with hypothalamic dysfunction, hypoventilation, and autonomic dysregulation (ROHHAD) is discussed in Chapter
468.3.
The term basal ganglia encephalitis is used to describe patients
with predominant or isolated involvement of the basal ganglia.
These patients typically have abnormal movements such as dystonia,
chorea, or parkinsonism and neuropsychiatric disease. Although
these clinical manifestations may have multiple etiologies, including metabolic, toxic, genetic, and infectious processes, an immune-­
mediated etiology has been postulated in some patients. There have
been no clinical trials, but case reports and small noncontrolled case
series describe the potential benefit of immunotherapy. Antibodies
against the dopamine-­2 receptor have been infrequently identified
in these patients.
Pseudomigraine syndrome with CSF pleocytosis (PMP) or headache with neurologic deficits and CSF lymphocytosis (HaNDL) is
an ill-­defined entity that predominantly affects young male adults
with a family history of migraine, although adolescents can be
affected. This syndrome is characterized by repeat episodes of severe
headache with transient neurologic deficits, accompanied by aseptic CSF lymphocytosis and a normal brain MRI. Patients frequently
show a high CSF opening pressure, an elevated CSF protein concentration, and focal EEG slowing, which normalize after the episodes
of headache. Because of the inflammatory characteristics of the CSF
and the high prevalence of prodromal viral-­like symptoms, an infectious–immune-­mediated mechanism has been proposed. Other theories include spreading cortical depression and trigeminal-­vascular
activation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

3711

Chapter 639

Neurodegenerative
Disorders of Childhood
Kristin A. Seaborg and Jennifer M. Kwon
Neurodegenerative disorders of childhood encompass a large, heterogeneous group of diseases caused by specific genetic and biochemical
defects. Although many children with neurodegenerative disorders first
present with developmental delay or seizures, the hallmark of a neurodegenerative disease is regression and progressive deterioration of
neurologic function with loss of speech, vision, hearing, locomotion,
feeding difficulties, and cognitive decline. The age of onset, rate of progression, and principal neurologic findings determine whether the disease affects primarily the white or the gray matter. Upper motor neuron
signs and progressive spasticity are the hallmarks of white matter disorders; convulsions and intellectual and visual impairments that occur
early in the disease course are the hallmarks of gray matter disorders.
A precise history confirms regression or delay of developmental milestones, and the neurologic examination localizes the process within
the nervous system. At that point, modern neuroimaging techniques
and specific biochemical and molecular diagnostic tests are used to
arrive at a diagnosis. Although available therapies are often limited, it
is important to make the correct diagnosis so that genetic counseling
may be offered and prevention strategies can be implemented. Bone
marrow transplantation, enzyme replacement therapies, cell-­
based
gene therapy, immune modulation, and dietary restrictions may prevent the progression of disease in certain individuals who are either
presymptomatic or very early in their disease course. For all conditions
in which the specific genetic defect is known, prevention by prenatal
diagnosis through chorionic villus sampling or amniocentesis is possible, as is carrier detection. Table 639.1 summarizes selected inherited
neurodegenerative and metabolic disorders by their usual age of onset.

639.1 Sphingolipidoses
Kristin A. Seaborg and Jennifer M. Kwon
The sphingolipidoses are characterized by intracellular storage of lipid
substrates resulting from defective catabolism of the sphingolipids comprising cellular membranes (Fig. 639.1). Poorly degraded sphingolipids
accumulate in neuronal lysosomes leading to cellular dysfunction and
death. There are multiple sphingolipidoses, including Niemann-­Pick
disease, Gaucher disease, GM1 gangliosidosis, GM2 gangliosidosis,
Krabbe disease (KD), and metachromatic leukodystrophy. Niemann-­
Pick disease and Gaucher disease are discussed in Chapter 106.4.

GANGLIOSIDOSES

See also Chapter 106.4.
Gangliosides are sphingolipids consisting of an oligosaccharide
chain attached to a hydroxyl group of ceramide and sialic acid bound
to galactose. The gangliosides are catabolized by sequential cleavage
of the sugar molecules by specific exoglycosidases. Abnormalities in
catabolism result in an accumulation of the ganglioside within the cell,
resulting in disease. Defects in ganglioside degradation include GM1
gangliosidosis and the GM2 gangliosidoses.

GM1 Gangliosidosis

GM1 gangliosidosis is an autosomal recessive condition caused by
deficiency of acid β-­galactosidase from pathogenic variants in GLB1.
It is further classified by age at presentation: infantile (type I), juvenile (type II), and adult (type III), where the age of onset and severity

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3712 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 639.1  Selected Metabolic Conditions Associated with Developmental Regression
AGE AT ONSET (YR)

CONDITIONS

COMMENTS

<2, often with hepatomegaly or
hepatic effects

Fructose intolerance

Vomiting, hypoglycemia, poor feeding, failure to thrive
(when given fructose)

Galactosemia

Lethargy, hypotonia, icterus, cataract, hypoglycemia
(when given lactose)

Glycogenosis (glycogen storage disease) types I-­IV

Hypoglycemia, cardiomegaly (type II)

Mucopolysaccharidosis types I and II

Coarse facies, stiff joints

GM1 gangliosidosis

Coarse facies, macroglossia, cherry-­red spot in macula

Niemann-­Pick disease, infantile type

Gray matter disease, failure to thrive

Zellweger syndrome

Hypotonia, high forehead, flat facies

Gaucher disease (neuronopathic form)

Extensor posturing, irritability

Carbohydrate-­deficient glycoprotein syndromes

Dysmyelination, cerebellar hypoplasia

Krabbe disease

Irritability, extensor posturing, optic atrophy, and
blindness

Rett syndrome

Girls with deceleration of head growth, loss of hand
skills, hand wringing, impaired language skills, gait
apraxia

Maple syrup urine disease

Poor feeding, tremors, myoclonus, opisthotonos

Phenylketonuria

Light pigmentation, microcephaly

Menkes kinky hair disease

Hypertonia, irritability, seizures, abnormal hair

Tay-­Sachs disease, GM2 gangliosidoses

Seizures, cherry-­red spot of macula, increased startle
response

Subacute necrotizing encephalopathy or Leigh
disease

White matter disease, basal ganglia, brainstem lesions

Canavan disease

White matter disease, macrocephaly

Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation
disease (see Table 639.4)

Cerebellar atrophy, optic atrophy, iron accumulation in
basal ganglia, movement disorder

Niemann-­Pick disease types III and IV

Hepatosplenomegaly, gait difficulty

Wilson disease

Liver disease, Kayser-­Fleischer ring; deterioration of
cognition is late

Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis

Gray matter disease

Mitochondrial encephalopathies (e.g., myoclonic
epilepsy with ragged red fibers [MERRF])

Gray matter disease

Ataxia-­telangiectasia

Basal ganglia disease

Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation
syndrome

Basal ganglia disease

Metachromatic leukodystrophy

White matter disease

Adrenoleukodystrophy

White matter disease, behavior problems, deteriorating
school performance, vision loss

Adrenoleukodystrophy

Same as for adrenoleukodystrophy in 2-­to 5-­yr-­olds

Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis, juvenile and adult
forms

Gray matter disease

Refsum disease

Peripheral neuropathy, ataxia, retinitis pigmentosa

Sialidosis II, juvenile form

Cherry-­red macula, myoclonus, ataxia, coarse facies

<2, without hepatomegaly

2-­5

5-­15

Adapted from Kliegman RM, Greenbaum LA, Lye PS, eds. Practical Strategies in Pediatric Diagnosis and Therapy, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2004:542.

depends on the degree of β-­galactosidase deficiency. Diagnosis can be
made by enzyme assay or by identification of biallelic pathogenic variants in GLB1 by molecular genetic testing. Prenatal diagnosis is possible by enzyme or direct molecular testing of cultured amniotic cells.
Infantile GM1 gangliosidosis presents during the neonatal period
with poor sucking and inadequate weight gain. Development is delayed,

and generalized seizures are prominent. The phenotype is characterized
by coarse facial features, prominent forehead, depressed nasal bridge,
large tongue (macroglossia), and gum hypertrophy. There is early hepatosplenomegaly from intracellular accumulation of foamy histiocytes
and kyphoscoliosis from anterior beaking of the vertebral bodies. The
neurologic examination is notable for progressive blindness, deafness,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 639 u Neurodegenerative Disorders of Childhood

3713

Gal-GalNAc
Gal

Glc-Ceramide (GM1 Ganglioside)

NANA

GM1 gangliosidoses
Gal

Gal

GalNAc

Sandhoff disease Similar to Tay-Sachs,
may have HSM,
dysostosis multiplex

Glc-Ceramide (GM2)

Tay-Sachs Disease Neurodegeneration,
CRS, large head,
acoustic startle
GalNac

NANA

Gal

GalNac-Gal-Gal-Glc-Ceramide (Globoside)

-Galactosidase

GalNAc

NANA

Neurodegeneration,
HSM, CRS,
skeletal deformities

-Hexosaminidase A
Glc-Ceramide (GM3)

Gal

Neuraminidase

NANA

-Hexosaminidase A & B
Gal-Gal-Glc-Ceramide
Fabry disease Angiokeratomas,
kidney/heart disease,
burning dysesthesias

-Galactosidase

Glc-Ceramide
(Lactosyl Ceramide)

Gal

-Galactosidase

Gal

Sphingomyelinase

Glc-Ceramide

Phosphorylcholine-Ceramide

Gaucher disease Most common
HSM, osteoporosis,
CNS disease rare
-Glucosidase

Choline P
Niemann-Pick A/B

Glc

Neurodegeneration
HSM

Ceramide
Farber disease

Gal

-Galactosidase

Fatty Acid

Ceramidase

Painful joint deformities,
subcutaneous lipid
nodules, hoarse cry

Sphingosine
Krabbe

Spasticity, irritability,
blindness, failure to thrive

Gal-Ceramide
SO3H
Arylsulfatase A
MLD

Spasticity, dementia,
areflexia

SO3H-Gal-Ceramide

Fig. 639.1 Sphingolipid degradation pathway showing the sites of enzyme deficiencies and their associated disorders. Sphingolipids are com-

posed of a ceramide backbone with oligosaccharide side chains. CRS, cherry-­red spot (retinal); Gal-­, galactosyl-­; GalNAc, N-­acetyl-­galactose; Glc-­,
glucosyl-­; HSM, hepatosplenomegaly; MLD, metachromatic leukodystrophy; NANA, N-­acetyl-­neuraminic acid.

spastic quadriplegia, and decerebrate rigidity. A cherry-­red spot in the
macula is visualized in approximately 50% of cases (Fig. 639.2). Treatment is supportive, and children rarely survive beyond age 2-­3 years.
Death is often from aspiration pneumonia.
Type II GM1 gangliosidosis presents later in infancy, before 3
years. Initial symptoms consist of weakness, ataxia, and regression of
language. Thereafter, convulsions, spasticity, decerebrate rigidity, and
blindness are the major findings. Unlike type I, coarse facial features
and hepatosplenomegaly are not usually seen. Lumbar vertebrae may
show minor beaking. Children rarely survive beyond 10 years of age.
Adult GM1 gangliosidosis is a slowly progressive disease with onset
between ages 3 and 30 years consisting of spasticity, ataxia, dysarthria,
cardiomyopathy, and a gradual loss of cognitive function.

GM2 Gangliosidoses

The GM2 gangliosidoses are a heterogeneous group of autosomal recessive disorders caused by abnormal catabolism of the GM2 ganglioside,
which accumulates in neuronal lysosomes. GM2 catabolism requires
functional isoenzymes β-­hexosaminidase and GM2 activator protein.
Tay-­Sachs disease (TSD), Sandhoff disease, juvenile GM2 gangliosidosis, and adult GM2 gangliosidosis are caused by genetic variants in the
genes that encode the alpha and beta subunits of β-­hexosaminidase
and lead to decreased or absent β-­hexosaminidase activity with subsequent accumulation of GM2.
TSD is most prevalent in the Ashkenazi Jewish population, with an
approximate carrier rate of 1 in 30 Jews in the United States. TSD is
caused by pathogenic variants in HEXA on chromosome 15q23, which

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3714 Part XXV u The Nervous System

Fig. 639.2 A cherry-­red spot in a patient with GM1 gangliosidosis.

Note the whitish ring of sphingolipid-­laden ganglion cells surrounding
the fovea. (From Leavitt JA, Kotagal S. The “cherry red” spot. Pediatr
Neurol. 2007;37:74–75, Fig. 1.)

encodes the α subunit of β-­hexosaminidase. Affected infants often have
a marked startle reaction to noise that is evident soon after birth but
otherwise have normal development until ∼6 months of age. They then
begin to lag in developmental milestones and gradually lose the ability to stand, sit, and vocalize by age 1. Children with TSD have earlier
onset of dysphagia than children with other GM2 gangliosidoses. Early
hypotonia develops into progressive spasticity and relentless deterioration follows, with convulsions, blindness, deafness, and cherry-­red
spots in almost all patients (see Fig. 639.2). Macrocephaly becomes
apparent by 1 year of age and results from the 200-­to 300-­fold normal
content of GM2 ganglioside deposited in the brain. Few children live
beyond 3-­4 years of age, and death is usually associated with aspiration
or bronchopneumonia.
To diagnose TSD or any of the GM2 gangliosidoses, a deficiency of
the isoenzyme β-­hexosaminidase is found in blood, serum, or fibroblasts. In addition, molecular genetic testing may be done to evaluate
for variants in the HEXA or HEXB gene to confirm the diagnosis.
Sandhoff disease occurs secondary to a variant HEXB gene located
on chromosome 5q13. Affected infants present very similar to TSD,
including progressive loss of motor and language milestones beginning
at 6 months of age. Unlike children with TSD, children with Sandhoff
disease may also have visceromegaly. The visual evoked potentials
(VEPs) are normal early in the course of Sandhoff disease and TSD
but become abnormal or absent as the disease progresses. The auditory
brainstem responses show prolonged latencies. The diagnosis of Sandhoff disease is established by finding deficient levels of hexosaminidases
A and B in serum and leukocytes. Children usually die by 3 years of age.
Juvenile GM2 gangliosidosis develops in mid-­childhood, initially
with clumsiness followed by ataxia. Signs of spasticity, athetosis, loss
of language, and seizures gradually develop. Progressive visual loss
is associated with optic atrophy, but cherry-­red spots rarely occur in
juvenile GM2 gangliosidosis. A deficiency of hexosaminidase is variable (total deficiency to near normal) in these patients. Death occurs
around 15 years of age.
Although the genetic etiologies of the gangliosidoses are well-­
established, there is currently no known treatment for these disorders
other than supportive management and palliative care. An adeno-­
associated virus-­
HEXA/HEXB–directed gene therapy proof-­
of-­
concept trial has been performed in two children with TSD.

KRABBE DISEASE (GLOBOID CELL
LEUKODYSTROPHY)

Krabbe disease (KD) is a rare autosomal recessive neurodegenerative
disorder characterized by severe myelin loss and the presence of globoid bodies in the white matter. The gene for KD (GALC) is located
on chromosome 14q24.3-­q32.1. The disease results from a marked
deficiency of the lysosomal enzyme galactocerebroside β-­galactosidase

(GALC). KD is a disorder of myelin destruction rather than abnormal
myelin formation. Normally, myelination begins in the third trimester,
corresponding with a rapid increase of GALC activity in the brain. In
patients with KD, galactocerebroside cannot be metabolized during the
normal turnover of myelin because of deficiency of GALC. Nonmetabolized galactocerebroside stimulates the formation of globoid cells,
which can be cytotoxic to oligodendrocytes. Because oligodendroglial
cells are responsible for the elaboration of myelin, their loss results in
myelin breakdown, thus producing additional galactocerebroside and
causing a vicious circle of myelin destruction.
Myelin exists in both the central and peripheral nervous system
and allows for rapid conduction along axons. With GALC deficiency
and associated rapid and severe demyelination, the symptoms of KD
become evident in the first few months of life and include excessive
irritability and crying, poor head control, episodes of hyperpyrexia,
vomiting, and difficulty feeding. In the initial stage of KD, children are
often treated for colic or milk allergy with frequent formula changes.
Generalized seizures may appear early in the course of the disease.
Alterations in body tone with rigidity and opisthotonos as well as visual
inattentiveness caused by optic atrophy become apparent as the disease
progresses. In the later stages of the illness, blindness, deafness, absent
deep tendon reflexes, autonomic instability, and decerebrate rigidity
constitute the major physical findings. Most patients die by 2 years of
age. MRI and magnetic resonance spectroscopy are useful for evaluating the extent of demyelination in KD. Umbilical cord blood (stem
cell) transplantation from unrelated donors in asymptomatic babies
may favorably alter the natural history but will not help patients who
already have neurologic symptoms. Recombinant GALC triggers an
immune reaction, and the large protein does not efficiently cross the
blood-­brain barrier.
Late-­onset KD has been described beginning in childhood or adolescence. Patients present with pes cavus, sensorimotor demyelinating neuropathy, optic atrophy, and cortical blindness; their condition
may be confused with adrenoleukodystrophy. Slowly progressive gait
disturbances, including spasticity and ataxia, are prominent. Globoid
cells are abundant in the white matter, and leukocytes are deficient in
GALC. MRI may reveal white matter lesions. An examination of the
cerebrospinal fluid shows an elevated protein content, and the nerve
conduction velocities are markedly delayed as a result of segmental
demyelination of the peripheral nerves.

METACHROMATIC LEUKODYSTROPHY

This disorder of myelin metabolism is inherited as an autosomal
recessive trait and is characterized by a deficiency of arylsulfatase
A activity. The ARSA gene is located on chromosome 22q13.33. The
absence or deficiency of arylsulfatase A leads to accumulation of
cerebroside sulfate within the myelin in both the central and peripheral nervous systems, and the excessive cerebroside sulfate is thought
to cause myelin breakdown. Prenatal diagnosis of metachromatic
leukodystrophy (MLD) is made by assaying arylsulfatase A activity
in chorionic villi or cultured amniotic fluid cells. Those affected with
MLD are generally classified according to age of onset: late infantile,
juvenile, and adult.
Late infantile MLD begins with insidious onset of gait disturbances
between 1 and 2 years of age. The child initially appears awkward and
frequently falls, but locomotion is gradually impaired significantly and
support is required to walk. The extremities are hypotonic, and the
deep tendon reflexes are absent or diminished. Within the next several
months, the child can no longer stand, and deterioration in intellectual
function becomes apparent. The speech is slurred and dysarthric, and
the child appears dull and apathetic. Visual fixation is diminished, nystagmus is present, and examination of the retina shows optic atrophy.
Within 1 year from the onset of the disease, the child is unable to sit
unsupported, and progressive decorticate postures develop. Feeding
and swallowing are impaired because of pseudobulbar palsies. Affected
children develop seizures and painful muscle spasms and generalized
irritability. Patients ultimately become stuporous and die of aspiration
or bronchopneumonia by age 5-­6 years. Neurophysiologic evaluation
shows slowing of peripheral nerve conduction velocities caused by

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 639 u Neurodegenerative Disorders of Childhood
peripheral myelin damage and progressive changes in the VEPs, auditory brainstem responses, and somatosensory evoked potentials. CT
and MRI images of the brain indicate diffuse symmetric attenuation of
the cerebellar and cerebral white matter, and examination of the cerebrospinal fluid shows an elevated protein content.
Late infantile MLD is characterized by little to no functional arylsulfatase A, resulting in rapid accumulation of sulfatides and disease
progression. Bone marrow transplant or lentiviral autologous hematopoietic stem cell gene (ARSA-­cDNA) therapy is a promising experimental therapy for the management of late infantile MLD patients
identified very early in the course of their disease.
Juvenile MLD has many features in common with late infantile
MLD, but the onset of symptoms is delayed to 5-­10 years of age. Deterioration in school performance and alterations in personality may herald the onset of the disease. This is followed by incoordination of gait,
urinary incontinence, and dysarthria. Muscle tone becomes increased,
and ataxia, dystonia, tremor, or diminished deep tendon reflexes may
be present. In the terminal stages, generalized tonic-­clonic convulsions
are prominent and are difficult to control. Patients rarely live beyond
mid-­adolescence. Patients with juvenile MLD usually have one functional copy of ARSA with some residual enzyme activity.

3715

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

639.2 Neuronal Ceroid Lipofuscinoses
Kristin A. Seaborg and Jennifer M. Kwon
The neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCLs) are a group of inherited,
neurodegenerative, lysosomal storage disorders characterized by
visual loss, progressive dementia, seizures, motor deterioration, and
early death. The NCLs are named because of the intracellular accumulation of fluorescent lipopigments ceroid and lipofuscin. They
comprise a genetically and phenotypically heterogeneous group of disorders (currently there are at least 14 NCL types) that have traditionally
been subclassified by age of onset, among other clinical features. With
the exception of CLN4 (Parry disease), which is transmitted as an autosomal dominant trait, all other types of NCL are autosomal recessive.
They differ from one another in the associated ultrastructural patterns
of the inclusions as seen by electron microscopy. With the advent of
enzymatic and molecular testing methods, clinicians can make specific
NCL diagnoses using genetic and biochemical testing (Table 639.2).

Table 639.2  NCL of Childhood Onset: Clinical Classification and Major Diagnostic Procedure
CLINICAL FORM

AGE OF ONSET

DISEASE

GENE

DIAGNOSIS

MAJOR SYMPTOMS AT ONSET

Congenital

Birth

CLN10

CLN10/CTSD

NGS
Enzymatic assay

Microcephaly, dysmorphic features,
seizures, hyperkinetic movements

Infantile

6-­18 mo

CLN1

CLN1/PPT1

NGS
enzymatic assay

Decreased head growth,
neurodevelopmental regression,
seizures

CLN10

CLN10/CTSD

NGS
enzymatic assay

Decreased head growth,
neurodevelopmental regression

CLN14

CLN14/KCDT7

NGS

Decreased head growth, seizures
(myoclonus)

LATE INFANTILE
Classical

2-­4 yr

CLN2

TPP1

NGS
enzymatic assay

Seizures, ataxia, visual loss, delayed
language development

Variant

2-­5 yr

CLN1

CLN1/PPT1

NGS
enzymatic assay

Seizures, neurodevelopmental
regression, behavioral
disturbances

CLN5

CLN5

NGS

Impaired learning and cognition

CLN6

CLN6

NGS

Seizures, ataxia, delayed language
development

CLN7

CLN7/MFSD8

NGS

Seizures, visual loss, motor and
cognitive regression

CLN8

CLN8

NGS

Seizures, visual loss, motor and
cognitive regression

3-­5 yr

CLN3

CLN3

NGS

Visual loss, behavioral problems,
cognitive decline

5-­7 yr

CLN5

CLN5

NGS

Motor and cognitive regression,
behavioral problems

5-­7 yr

CLN1

CLN1/PPT1

NGS
enzymatic assay

Visual loss, cognitive decline

8-­12 yr

CLN6
CLN10

CLN6
CLN10/CTSD

NGS
NGS
enzymatic assay

Myoclonic seizures, cognitive
decline; ataxia, cognitive decline,
visual loss

13-­16 yr

CLN12

ATP13A2

NGS

Rigidity, hypokinesia

JUVENILE
Classical

Late

NSG, Next-­generation sequencing.
From Simonati A, Williams RE. Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis: the multifaceted approach to the clinical issues, an overview. Frontiers Neurol. 2022;13:Article 811686, Table 1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3716 Part XXV u The Nervous System

A

B

C

D

Fig. 639.3 A, T2-­weighted (axial) image showing leukoencephalopathy in a child with late infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCL). B, T1-­
weighted (axial) sequence revealing diffuse atrophy in a child with late infantile NCL. C, A child with late infantile NCL with cerebellar atrophy in
T2-­weighted axial section of the brain. D, Fundus photograph showing atypical retinitis pigmentosa with optic atrophy in a child with juvenile NCL.
(Modified from Jadav RH, Sinha S, Yasha TC, et al. Clinical, electrophysiological, imaging, and ultrastructural description in 68 patients with neuronal
ceroid lipofuscinoses and its subtypes. Pediatr Neurol. 2014;50:85–95, Fig. 1, p. 88.)

Infantile-­type neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (ICLN, Santavuori
disease) begins in the first year of life with developmental delay, myoclonic seizures, intellectual deterioration, and blindness. Optic atrophy
and brownish discoloration of the macula are evident on examination
of the retina, and cerebellar ataxia is prominent. The infantile form is
caused by recessive pathogenic variants of the gene for the lysosomal
enzyme palmitoyl-­protein thioesterase-­1 (PPT1) on chromosome 1p32.
A number of cell types in INCL patients show characteristic intracellular
fine granular osmiophilic deposits discernible by electron microscopy.
Although death typically occurs during early childhood, a subset of children with PPT1 enzyme deficiency has a much less severe
course with clinical features resembling those of the juvenile-­onset
NCL patients. Clinically, these variant INCL patients have a course that
is often quite distinct from the typical, classic, rapidly degenerating
infantile form, yet they have PPT1 deficiency and granular osmiophilic
deposits on pathology. There is no clear CLN1 genotype that predicts
severity of phenotype.
Late infantile-­type neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (LINCL, Jansky-­
Bielschowsky) is the second most common type of NCL and generally
presents with myoclonic seizures beginning between 2 and 4 years of age
in a previously normal child. Dementia and ataxia are combined with a
progressive loss of visual acuity and microcephaly. Examination of the
retina shows marked attenuation of vessels, optic atrophy, and a subtle
brown pigment in the macular region, with associated visual changes
early in the course of disease (Fig. 639.3). The autofluorescent material is
deposited in neurons, fibroblasts, and secretory cells.
LINCL can be caused by autosomal recessive variants of several
different genes: CLN2 gene, which codes for a tripeptidyl peptidase­1 (TPP1) that is essential for the degradation of cholecystokinin-­8,
as well as the CLN5, CLN6, CLN8, and CLN14 genes, which code for
membrane proteins that have not been completely characterized. CLN8
is also known as locus of northern epilepsy syndrome, which is often
called progressive epilepsy with cognitive impairment.
At this time, there is only one clinically approved treatment for all
types of NCL. CLN2 can be treated with intraventricular cerliponase
alfa, a recombinant human proenzyme of TPP1. Treatment with cerliponase alfa can attenuate motor and language decline but does not alter
visual symptoms. Stem cell therapy, gene therapy, and immunomodulatory therapy to repair genetic variants or alter adaptive immunoresponses are all in preclinical studies for adjunctive treatment of NCL.
Juvenile-­type neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (JNCL, Spielmeyer-­
Vogt or Batten disease) is the most common form of NCL disease and
is generally caused by autosomal recessive variants in CLN3. Children
affected with JNCL tend to develop normally for the first 5 years of life.
Their initial symptom is usually progressive visual loss, and their retinal pigmentary changes often result in an initial diagnosis of retinitis
pigmentosa. The funduscopic changes are similar to those for LINCL.
After disease onset, there may be a rapid decline with changes in cognition and personality, motor incoordination, and seizures. Myoclonic
seizures are not as prominent as in LINCL, but parkinsonism can

develop and impair ambulation. Patients die in their late 20s to early
30s. In JNCL caused by CLN3, the electron microscopy of tissues shows
deposits called fingerprint profiles, and routine light microscopy of a
peripheral blood smear may show lymphocyte vacuoles.
A possible mimic of JNCL is Lafora disease (LD) caused by pathogenic variants in EPM2A and EPM2B. LD also has skin (eccrine) inclusion bodies in addition to seizures, myoclonus, ataxia, dysarthria,
progressive loss of milestones, and death within 10 years of onset. The
diseases can be distinguished by specific gene sequencing.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

639.3 Adrenoleukodystrophy
See Chapter 106.2.

639.4 Sialidosis
Kristin A. Seaborg and Jennifer M. Kwon
Sialidosis is the result of lysosomal sialidase deficiency secondary to an autosomal recessive pathogenic variant in the sialidase
(α-­neuraminidase, NEU1) gene on chromosome 6p21.3. Up to 40
pathologic variants of NEU1 have been identified. The accumulation of
sialic acid–oligosaccharides with markedly increased urinary excretion
of sialic acid–containing oligosaccharides is associated with clinical
presentations that range from the milder sialidosis type I to the more
severe sialidosis type II.
Sialidosis type I, cherry-­red spot myoclonus syndrome, usually
presents in the second decade of life, when a patient complains of visual
deterioration. Inspection of the retina shows a cherry-­red spot, but,
unlike patients with TSD, visual acuity declines slowly in individuals
with cherry-­red spot myoclonus syndrome. Myoclonus of the extremities is gradually progressive and eventually renders patients nonambulatory. The myoclonus is triggered by voluntary movement, touch, and
sound and is not controlled with anticonvulsants. Generalized convulsions responsive to antiseizure medications occur in most patients.
Sialidosis type II patients present at a younger age and have cherry-­
red spots and myoclonus, as well as somatic involvement, including
coarse facial features, hepatosplenomegaly, corneal clouding (rarely),
and dysostosis multiplex, producing anterior beaking of the lumbar vertebrae. Type II patients may be further subclassified into congenital and
infantile (childhood) and juvenile forms, depending on the age of onset
and severity. Examination of lymphocytes shows vacuoles in the cytoplasm, biopsy of the liver demonstrates cytoplasmic vacuoles in Kupffer
cells, and membrane-­bound vacuoles are found in Schwann cell cytoplasm, all attesting to the multiorgan nature of sialidosis type II. Identification of genetic variants in the NEU1 gene can confirm the diagnosis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 639 u Neurodegenerative Disorders of Childhood

3717

Some cases of what appears to be sialidosis type II are the result of combined deficiencies of β-­galactosidase and α-­neuraminidase resulting from
deficiency of protective protein/cathepsin A that prevents premature intracellular degradation of these two enzymes. These patients have galactosialidosis, and they are clinically indistinguishable from those with sialidosis
type II. Consequently, patients who have features of sialidosis type II with
marked urinary excretion of oligosaccharides should be tested for protective protein/cathepsin A deficiency as well as sialidase deficiency.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

639.5 Miscellaneous Neurodegenerative
Disorders
Kristin A. Seaborg and Jennifer M. Kwon

PELIZAEUS-­MERZBACHER DISEASE

Pelizaeus-­Merzbacher disease (PMD) is an X-­linked recessive disorder characterized by nystagmus and abnormalities of myelin. PMD is
caused by gene variants in the PLP1 gene on chromosome Xq22, which is
essential for CNS myelin formation and oligodendrocyte differentiation.
Different variants in the same gene can cause a spectrum of disorders,
ranging from the milder familial spastic paraparesis (progressive spastic paraparesis type 2, SPG2) to the more severe connatal form associated
with rapid neurologic decline from an early age and death in the first
decade of life. PLP1 variants causing disease include point changes, deletions, gene duplications, and other gene dosage variants.
Classic PMD is the most common type, clinically recognized by nystagmus and roving eye movements along with head nodding during
infancy. Developmental milestones are delayed; ataxia, choreoathetosis, and spasticity ultimately develop. Optic atrophy and dysarthria are
associated findings, and death occurs in the second or third decade.
The major pathologic finding is a loss of myelin with intact axons, suggesting a defect in the function of oligodendroglia. An MRI scan shows
a symmetric pattern of delayed myelination. The final diagnosis can be
made through genetic testing for variants in the PLP1 gene.
Other PMD-­
like, hypomyelinating leukodystrophies continue to
be identified and should be considered in the differential diagnosis
of PMD. These include Allan-­Herndon-­Dudley syndrome, TUBB4A-­
related disorders, and hypomyelinating leukodystrophy 7 or 8.

A

B

Fig. 639.4 Alexander disease. MRI of the index patient at the age of
15 mo. A, Axial T2-­weighted sequences (TR/TE: 4000/99) at the basal
ganglia and thalamus level demonstrating diffuse bilateral, symmetric
increased signal predominantly of the frontal periventricular but also
of the subcortical, white matter and the basal ganglia. B, Significant
periventricular rim after intravenous gadolinium infusion (T1-­weighted
sequences; TR/TE: 400/88). (From Zafeiriou DI, Dragoumi P, Vargiami E.
Alexander disease. J Pediatr. 2013;162:648.)

A

B

C

D

ALEXANDER DISEASE

This is a rare disorder that causes progressive macrocephaly and leukodystrophy. Alexander disease is caused by dominant pathogenic variants
in the GFAP gene on chromosome 17q21; cases are usually sporadic.
Pathologic examination of the brain discloses deposition of eosinophilic
hyaline bodies called Rosenthal fibers in astrocyte processes. In the classic
infantile form of Alexander disease (type I), degeneration of white matter is most prominent frontally. The diagnosis may be suggested by MRI
(Fig. 639.4) and MR spectroscopy demonstrating abnormal metabolic
substrates. Affected children develop progressive loss of intellect, spasticity, and treatment-­resistant seizures causing death by 5 years of age.
Patients with type II Alexander disease present later in life and may not
have the characteristic frontal predominance or megalencephaly. Most
patients with type II Alexander disease develop ataxia, and approximately 50% develop difficulty with speech or swallowing.

CANAVAN SPONGY DEGENERATION
See Chapter 105.15.

OTHER LEUKODYSTROPHIES

Metabolic and degenerative disorders can present with significant cerebral white matter changes, such as some mitochondrial disorders (see
Chapters 106.1 and 108) and glutaric aciduria type 1. In addition, the
broader use of brain MRI has brought to light new leukodystrophies.
One example is vanishing white matter disease or childhood ataxia
with central nervous system (CNS) hypomyelination characterized
by ataxia and spasticity (Fig. 639.5). Some patients also have optic

Fig. 639.5 T1-­weighted and FLAIR images of a patient with vanishing

white matter disease. Axial FLAIR (A, C) and sagittal T1-­weighted (B,
D) images of a patient at ages 1½ and 2½ yr. The first MRI (A, B) was
obtained soon after the onset of symptoms. The initial FLAIR image
(A) shows diffuse abnormality and partial cystic degeneration of the
cerebral white matter, whereas the follow-­up FLAIR image (C) shows
that all of the cerebral white matter has been replaced by fluid. The
initial T1-­weighted sagittal image (B) shows the typical stripelike pattern within the abnormal white matter, whereas the follow-­up image
(D) shows that all of the cerebral white matter has disappeared and
that only the cerebral cortex and ependymal lining are preserved. The
cerebellum has become highly atrophic. (A, C from Van der Knaap MS,
Valk J. Magnetic Resonance of Myelination and Myelin Disorders, 3rd
ed. Heidelberg: Springer; 2005, Fig 65.3; B, D from van der Knaap MS,
Pronk JC, Scheper GC. Vanishing white matter disease. Lancet Neurol.
2006;5:413-423. Fig. 3.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3718 Part XXV u The Nervous System
atrophy, seizures, and cognitive deterioration. Symptoms worsen rapidly after episodes of fever, head trauma, or external stressors. The age
of presentation and the rapidity of decline in leukodystrophies can be
quite variable. In the early-­onset forms, decline is usually rapid and
followed quickly by death; in the later-­onset forms, mental decline is
usually slower and milder. Interestingly, acute demyelination in these
disorders can be triggered by fever or fright. The diagnosis of vanishing
white matter disease or childhood ataxia with CNS hypomyelination is

Prominent T2-hyperintensity and prominent T1hypointensity relative to gray matter structures =
other pathologies than hypomyelination
(demyelination and others)

Mild T2-hyperintensity in combination with T1hyperintensity (= normal signal), T1-isointensity or mild
T1-hypointensity relative to gray matter structures
Improving =
DELAYED
MYELINATION

based on clinical findings, characteristic abnormalities on cranial MRI,
and autosomal recessive gene variants in one of five causative genes
(EIF2B1, EIF2B2, EIF2B3, EIF2B4, and EIF2B5) encoding the five
subunits of the eukaryotic translation initiation factor, eIF2B, which
regulates cellular protein synthesis. An approach to leukodystrophies
based on MRI findings is noted in Figure 639.6 and associated clinical features in Figure 639.7, and the diagnostic evaluation is noted in
Table 639.3.

Permanent =
HYPOMYELINATION

May be CONFLUENT, or

Prominent cerebral atrophy and slowly
progressing myelination = FALSE
HYPOMYELINATION

May be MULTIFOCAL

DELAYED MYELINATION OR HYPOMYELINATION
+
MULTIFOCAL LESIONS

A

B

Fig. 639.6 MRI pattern recognition in the leukodystrophies and genetic leukoencephalopathies (gLEs). Three major MRI characteristics help to

discriminate between the different types of leukodystrophy and gLE. The first discriminator is the presence or absence of hypomyelination (A).
Within this subset, the presence of improvement of myelination or atrophy directs the clinician toward a series of gLEs. Within the true hypomyelinating leukodystrophies, the presence of basal ganglia and cerebellar involvement further helps refine the diagnosis. If the pattern is not one of
hypomyelination, then the second discriminator is whether the white matter abnormalities are confluent or isolated and multifocal (B). If the white
matter abnormalities are confluent, then the third discriminator is the predominant localization of the abnormalities (B). 4H, Hypomyelination, hypodontia, and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism; HACB, hypomyelination with atrophy of the basal ganglia and cerebellum; HEMS, hypomyelination
of early myelinating structures; ODDD, oculodentodigital dysplasia; HCC, hypomyelination with congenital cataract; PMD, Pelizaeus-­Merzbacher
disease; PMLD, Pelizaeus-­Merzbacher–like disease; NCL, neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis; APBD, adult polyglucosan body disease; ADLD, autosomal
dominant leukodystrophy with autonomic symptoms; CRMCC, cerebroretinal microangiopathy with calcifications and cysts; CTX, cerebrotendinous
xanthomatosis; DRPLA, dentatorubral pallidoluysian atrophy); HDLS, hereditary diffuse leukoencephalopathy with spheroids/neuroaxonal leukodystrophy with spheroids; HBSL, hypomyelination with brainstem and spinal cord and leg involvement; LTBL, leukoencephalopathy with thalamic
and brainstem involvement and high lactate; LBSL, leukoencephalopathy with brainstem and spinal cord involvement and lactate elevation; MLC,
megalencephalic leukodystrophy with subcortical cysts; X-­ALD, X-­linked adrenoleukodystrophy. (Pattern recognition reprinted with permission from
GeneReviews; from Parikh S, Bernard G, Leventer RJ, et al. A clinical approach to the diagnosis of patients with leukodystrophies and genetic leukoencephalopathies. Mol Gen Metab. 2018;114:501–515, Fig. 2, pp. 508–509.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 639 u Neurodegenerative Disorders of Childhood

3719

Leukodystrophies: “special” clinical features
Peripheral
neuropathy
MLD
Krabbe
PMDL
PMD (mutations
leading to loss of
both PLP1 and
DM20)
HCC
LCC
SOX10-related
disorder
APBD
CTX
ALD and variants
MNGIE

Ophthalmologic

Hearing loss

Endocrine

Skin

Dental

Skeletal

Other

Early-onset VWM
(cataracts)
HCC (cataracts)
4H leukodystrophy
(severe myopia)
Aicardi-Goutières
(glaucoma)
Cockayne (retinitis
pigmentosa)
HSMD (retinitis
pigmentosa)
CTX (cataracts)
SLS (macular
degeneration,
retinitis
pigmentosa,
white glistening
spots)
Coats plus (retinal
telangiectasia
and exudates)
SOX10-related
disorder (iris
heterochromia)
AMACR deficiency
(retinitis
pigmentosa)
Early-onset
peroxisomal
disorders (retinitis
pigmentosa)
Mitochondrial LDs
(cataracts,
retinitis
pigmentosa)
Late stage of many
LDs (optic
atrophy)

SOX10-related
disorder
Cockayne
18q minus
Early-onset
peroxisomal
disorders
Fabry
Mitochondrial
LDs

VWM (premature
ovarian failure)
AARS2-related LD
(premature
ovarian failure)
ALD and variants
(adrenal failure,
testicular failure)
4H leukodystrophy
(delayed puberty,
growth hormone
deficiency)
Cockayne
(hypothyreosis)
18q minus (growth
hormone
deficiency)
KSS (growth
hormone
deficiency,
diabetes,
hypoparathyroidism)

Generalized
pigmentation
(ALD and
variants)
Aicardi-Goutières
(chilblains)
Cockayne (photosensitivity)
Trichothiodystrophy
(photosensitivity)
CTX (tendon
xanthomas)
SLS (ichthyosis)
Fabry
(angiokeratoma)
Fucosidosis
(angiokeratoma)
Hyperpigmentation
(Addison in ALD
and variants)
Linear pigment
alterations
(chromosomal
mosaicism)

4H leukodystrophy
(delayed
dentition,
hypodontia,
abnormal tooth
shape, caries)
ODDD
(hypodontia,
abnormal tooth
shape, caries)
Cockayne (caries)
Early-onset
peroxisomal
disorders
(enamel
hypoplasia)
Periodontal Ehlers
Danlos
(premature
loss of teeth)

HSMD
(spondylometaphyseal
dysplasia)
4H leukodystrophy
(osteosclerosis)
Fucosidosis
(dysostosis
multiplex)
ODDD (syndactyly
of 4th and 5th
fingers)
Coats plus
(osteopenia with
poor bone
healing)
Early-onset
peroxisomal
disorders
(skeletal
dysplasia)

MLD (gallbladder)
Early-onset VWM
(liver, pancreas,
kidneys)
Salla
(hepatosplenomegaly)
Fucosidosis
(hepatosplenomegaly)
Early-onset
peroxisomal
disorders (liver,
kidney)
CTX (neonatal
cholestasis,
diarrhea)
Congenital
muscular
dystrophies
18q minus
(congenital heart
defects)
Coats plus
(gastrointestinal
bleeding and
portal
hypertension)
SOX10-related
disorder
(Hirschsprung
disease; white
lock of hair)
MNGIE (intestinal
pseudoobstruction)
NRF2-related LD
(immune
deficiency)
PUS3-related LD
(nephropathy)

Fig. 639.7 Leukodystrophies: “Special” clinical features. MLD, Metachromatic leukodystrophy; PMDL, Pelizaeus-­Merzbacher–like disease; PMD,

Pelizaeus-­Merzbacher disease; HCC, hypomyelination with congenital cataracts; LCC, leukodystrophy with calcifications and cysts; APBD, adult
polyglucosan body disease; CTX, cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis; ALD, adrenoleukodystrophy; MNGIE, myoneurogastrointestinal encephalopathy; VWM, vanishing white matter; HSMD, X-­linked hypomyelination with spondylometaphyseal dysplasia; SLS, Sjögren-­Larsson syndrome; AMACR,
alpha-­methylacyl-­CoA racemase; KSS, Kearns-­Sayre syndrome; ODDD, oculodentodigital dysplasia; LD, leukodystrophy. (From van der Knaap MS,
Schiffmann R, Mochel F, Wolf NI. Diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment of leukodystrophies. Lancet Neurol. 2019;18:962–972, Appendix Fig. 2.)

MENKES DISEASE

Menkes disease (kinky hair disease) is a progressive neurodegenerative
condition inherited as an X-­linked recessive trait. The Menkes gene,
ATP7A, on Xq21.1, codes for a copper-­transporting, P-­type adenosine triphosphatase, and mutations in the protein are associated with
low serum copper and ceruloplasmin levels, as well as a defect in
intestinal copper absorption and transport. The clinical symptoms of
Menkes disease depend on the activity of different enzymes that use
copper as a cofactor, such as superoxide dismutase, cytochrome c oxidase, and dopamine β hydroxylase, among others. Symptoms begin in
the first few months of life and include hypothermia, hypotonia, and
generalized myoclonic seizures. The facies are distinctive, with chubby,
sagging, rosy cheeks and kinky, colorless, friable hair. Microscopic
examination of the hair shows several abnormalities, including trichorrhexis nodosa (fractures along the hair shaft) and pili torti (twisted

hair). Feeding difficulties are prominent and lead to failure to thrive.
Severe cognitive impairment, vascular tortuosity, and optic atrophy are
constant features of the disease. Neuropathologic changes include tortuous degeneration of the gray matter and marked changes in the cerebellum with loss of the internal granule cell layer and necrosis of the
Purkinje cells. Death can occur by 3 years of age in untreated patients.
Very rarely does Menkes disease manifest in females, and when it does,
symptoms are milder.
Copper histidine therapy may be effective in preventing neurologic
deterioration in some patients with Menkes disease, particularly when
treatment is begun in the neonatal period or, preferably, with the fetus.
These presymptomatic children are identified because of a family history of an affected brother and confirmed by target analysis for variants in the ATP7A gene. Infants diagnosed presymptomatically in the
first 10 days of life can be started on an experimental protocol of daily

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3720 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 639.3  Clinical and Laboratory Tests that Aid in the
Diagnosis of Leukodystrophies and Genetic
Leukoencephalopathies
CLINICAL/LABORATORY
TEST*

DIAGNOSTIC TARGET

Brain and spinal MRI (±
gadolinium, ± MRS)

Establish white matter disease;
± evidence of leaky blood-­
brain barrier and metabolite
accumulation (mitochondrial
disorders, Canavan disease,
Sjögren-­Larson syndrome,
peroxisomal biogenesis
disorders)

Ophthalmologic exam

Document ophthalmologic signs
in several leukodystrophies

Head CT

Assess for calcifications

Plasma very long-­chain fatty
acids

X-­linked adrenoleukodystrophy
and adrenomyeloneuropathy
and peroxisomal biogenesis
disorders

Lysosomal enzymes (leukocytes)

Metachromatic leukodystrophy,
Krabbe disease, multiple
sulfatase deficiency,
galactosialidosis, sialidosis

Blood lactate, pyruvate, amino
acids

Mitochondrial disorders

Lumbar puncture (cell count,
protein, ± CSF neopterin, ±
interferon-­alpha)

Nonspecific marker of
demyelination; ± pleocytosis
and markers for Aicardi-­
Goutières syndrome

Urine sulfatides

Metachromatic leukodystrophy,
multiple sulfatase deficiency

Urine organic acids

L-­2-­hydroxyglutarate; N-­
acetyl aspartic acid for
Canavan disease; Krebs cycle
intermediates (mitochondrial
disorders)

Neurophysiologic studies (BAER
EMG/NCV, VEP, SSEP)

Characterize involvement of
cranial and peripheral nerves,
optic tracts, and spinal tracts

Genetic analyses

As indicated for each
leukodystrophy or genetic
leukoencephalopathy

*Additional tests may be indicated for patients with certain distinctive clinical
presentations or extraneurologic features suggestive of one or more specific
leukodystrophies.
BAER, Brainstem auditory evoked response test; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; CT,
computed tomography; EMG, electromyogram; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging;
MRS, magnetic resonance spectroscopy; NCV, nerve conduction velocity test; SSEP,
somatosensory evoked potential test; VEP, visual evoked potential test.
From Parikh S, Bernard G, Leventer RJ, et al. A clinical approach to the diagnosis of
patients with leukodystrophies and genetic leukoencephalopathies. Mol Gen Metab.
2018;114:501–515, Table 6.

copper-­histidine subcutaneous injections. Optimal response to treatment appears to occur only in patients who are identified in the newborn
period and whose mutations permit residual copper transport activity.

RETT SYNDROME

This syndrome is characterized as a disorder of early brain development
marked by a period of developmental regression and deceleration of

brain growth after a relatively normal neonatal course. It is an X-­linked
disease that occurs predominantly in females and is one of the most
common causes of cognitive disability in females. The frequency is
approximately 1 in 10,000-­15,000 live births. Rett syndrome is caused by
pathogenic variants in MeCP2 on Xq28, which codes for a transcription
factor that binds to methylated CpG islands and silences transcription.
Clinically, development may proceed normally until 1 year of age,
when regression of language and motor milestones and acquired
microcephaly become apparent. Some atypical forms of Rett syndrome are congenital and can be associated with early-­onset seizures and developmental impairment within the first months of life.
An ataxic gait or fine tremor of hand movements is an early neurologic finding. Most children develop peculiar sighing respirations
with intermittent periods of apnea that may be associated with cyanosis. The hallmark of Rett syndrome is repetitive hand-­wringing
movements and a loss of purposeful and spontaneous use of the
hands; these features may not appear until 2-­3 years of age. Autistic
behavior is a typical finding in all patients. Generalized tonic-­clonic
convulsions occur in the majority but may be well controlled by
anticonvulsants. Feeding disorders and poor weight gain are common. After the initial period of neurologic regression, the disease
process appears to plateau, with persistence of the autistic behavior.
Cardiac arrhythmias may result in sudden, unexpected death at a
rate that is higher than the general population. Females usually survive into adulthood.
Although very few males survive with the classic Rett syndrome
phenotype, genotyping of males without the classic Rett syndrome
phenotype but with intellectual disability and other atypical neurologic
features has detected patients with variants in MeCP2. Gene variants
in MeCP2 have been demonstrated in normal female carriers, females
with Angelman syndrome, and males with fatal encephalopathy, Klinefelter (47,XXY) syndrome, and familial X-­linked cognitive impairment. Males may present with a Rett-­like syndrome if they have an
MECP2 duplication.
Classic Rett syndrome has been treated with trofinetide, an analog
of the amino-­terminal tripeptide of insulin-­like growth factor 1. Its
potential antiinflammatory and trophic properties may be the mechanisms that produce a positive clinical effect. It is approved for patients
≥2 years of age.
Some females have an atypical Rett phenotype associated with severe
myoclonic seizures in infancy, slowing of head growth, and developmental arrest and have variants in another X-­linked gene encoding
for cyclin-­dependent kinase–like 5 (CDKL5), which may interact with
MeCP2 and other proteins regulating gene expression.

NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON
ACCUMULATION

Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation represents multiple age-­of-­onset–dependent disorders characterized by extrapyramidal symptoms and intellectual deterioration and regression, with
iron deposition in the basal ganglia. There is significant phenotypic
variability of these disorders; however, a characteristic finding on
MRI demonstrates symmetric T2-­signal homogeneous hypointensity.
Common neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation disorders
are distinguished in Table 639.4, and an approach to their diagnosis
is noted in Figure 639.8. Clinical features, which are highly variable,
may include dystonia, parkinsonism, ataxia, spasticity, psychiatric
symptoms, and intellectual impairment. Treatment should focus on
the specific disorder and is usually symptomatic relief rather than
curative. Iron chelation has been attempted without major long-­term
benefit.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 639.4  Overview of Neurodegeneration with Brain Iron Accumulation Conditions and Genes (If Known)
CHILDHOOD-­ONSET VARIANT
SYNONYM

PKAN

CLINICAL
PRESENTATION

LATE-­ONSET VARIANT

GENE

CHROMOSOMAL
POSITION

LB PATHOLOGY

AGE OF ONSET

NBIA1

PANK2

20p13

No

Early childhood,
around age 3

Typical PKAN

Teens or early
adulthood

Atypical PKAN

PLAN

NBIA2, PARK14

PLA2G6

22q12

√

Infancy

Infantile
neuroaxonal
dystrophy

Teens or early
adulthood

Dystonia
parkinsonism

FAHN

SPG35

FA2H

16q23

Not known

Childhood

Leukodystrophy,
hereditary spastic
paraplegia

Adulthood (age
range up to 30 yr)

May resemble
idiopathic
Parkinson
disease

MPAN

—

C19orf12

19q12

√

—

Pyramidal
extrapyramidal
syndrome

Kufor-­Rakeb disease

PARK9

ATP13A2

1p36

√

Childhood-­ teens

Parkinsonism,
pyramidal
tract signs,
eye movement
disorder

BPAN

SENDA
syndrome

WDR45

Xp11.23

Not known

Childhood

Encephalopathy
with
psychomotor
regression, then
static

Then: 20s to 30s

Sudden-­onset
progressive
dystonia
parkinsonism

Aceruloplasminemia

—

CP

3q23

No

—

—

50s (range: 16-­70)

Extrapyramidal,
diabetes,
dementia

Neuroferritinopathy

—

FTL

19q13

No

—

—

40s

Chorea, dystonia,
dementia

Idiopathic late-­onset
cases

—

Probably
heterogeneous

Probably
heterogeneous

Heterogeneous

—

—

Heterogeneous

Parkinsonism; it
may resemble
idiopathic
Parkinson
disease

AGE OF ONSET

CLINICAL
PRESENTATION

√, Present; BPAN, beta-­propeller–associated neurodegeneration; CP, ceruloplasmin; FA2H, fatty acid 2-­hydroxylase; FAHN, fatty acid 2-­hydroxylase–associated neurodegeneration; FTL, ferritin light chain; LB, Lewy body; MPAN,
mitochondrial membrane–associated neurodegeneration; NBIA, neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation; PANK2, pantothenate kinase 2; PKAN, pantothenate kinase–associated neurodegeneration; PLA2G6, phospholipase A2;
PLAN, PLA2G6-­associated neurodegeneration; SENDA, static encephalopathy of childhood with neurodegeneration in adulthood; SPG, spastic paraplegia.
From Schneider SA, Zorzi G, Nardocci N. Pathophysiology and treatment of neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation in the pediatric population. Curr Treat Option Neurol. 2013;15:652–667, Table 1.

Chapter 639 u Neurodegenerative Disorders of Childhood

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

CONDITION
(ACRONYM)

3721

3722 Part XXV u The Nervous System

Fig. 639.8 Algorithm showing the clinical and radiographic approach to neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation. NBIA, neurodegenera-

tion with brain iron accumulation; SENDA, static encephalopathy of childhood with neurodegeneration in adulthood. (From Kruer MC, Boddaert N.
Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation: a diagnostic algorithm. Semin Pediatr Neurol. 2012;19:67–74, Fig. 1.)

Chapter 640

Demyelinating Disorders
of the Central Nervous
System
Michael Perry and Cheryl Hemingway
Acquired demyelinating syndromes (ADSs) of the central nervous
system (CNS) are rare disorders, occurring with an approximate annual
incidence of 9.8 per million children per year. They present with neurologic dysfunction caused by immune-­mediated injury to the myelin
sheath of the brain, optic nerves, and spinal cord. In contrast to genetically determined leukodystrophies (sometimes called dysmyelinating
disorders) that produce disrupted white matter, acquired demyelinating
disorders target normally formed white matter. They can be monophasic or relapsing.
The pathogenesis often involves demyelination together with B
cells and CNS antibodies. Two immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibodies
recognized as playing an important part in demyelination are aquaporin 4-­antibody (AQP4-­Ab) and myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibody (MOG-­Ab). The aquaporins are plasma membrane
water-­transporting proteins expressed in astrocytes and are primarily involved in water movement, cell migration, and neuroexcitation.
Myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) is exclusively expressed
in the CNS. Although MOG comprises only a minor component
of the myelin sheath, its location on the outermost lamellae and on
the cell surface of oligodendrocytes makes it available for antibody
binding. Increasing knowledge of the importance of these antibodies in disease, together with available disease-­modifying treatments
(DMTs) has made accurate diagnosis in demyelinating disorders

crucial. Pediatric demyelinating syndromes may be clinically characterized by:
1.	Localization of neurologic deficits: monofocal vs polyfocal
2.	Presence or absence of encephalopathy
3.	Disease course: monophasic vs polyphasic
4.	Presence or absence of specific antibodies
MRI of the brain and spine is essential to characterize both symptomatic and clinically silent demyelinating lesions, aid in the diagnosis
of the specific demyelinating syndrome, predict likelihood of recurrence, and rule out other etiologies. Serial MRIs may be needed to
confirm the diagnosis and can also be used to monitor the treatment
response and guide DMT use. The presence of oligoclonal bands
(OCBs) in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis is useful to help confirm
the diagnosis of multiple sclerosis (MS) (Table 640.1); their absence
may suggest an alternative diagnosis. OCBs, matched or unmatched
(to blood OCB), may also be seen in other CNS inflammatory diseases. Additional laboratory studies, including an autoimmune profile,
antibody testing, metabolic testing, genetic testing, catheter angiography, and less often, brain biopsy, may be required to evaluate for mimics of demyelination. These mimics may include conditions such as
migraine, systemic rheumatologic disorders, mitochondrial disorders,
primary CNS angiitis, infection, neoplasm, and genetic conditions
such as the inherited white matter disorders (e.g., leukodystrophies)
and primary CNS hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH)
(Tables 640.2 and 640.3).
Most children presenting with a first episode of demyelination will
experience a monophasic course and do not relapse. Monophasic
demyelinating disorders of childhood may include acute disseminated
encephalomyelitis (ADEM), optic neuritis (ON), and transverse myelitis (TM); relapsing forms of demyelination include MS, MOG, multiphasic disseminated encephalomyelitis (MDEM), relapsing ON, and
AQP4-­Ab–associated demyelination and neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (NMOSD). Relapsing disease is often characterized by
gradual accrual of physical disability and cognitive impairment.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 640 u Demyelinating Disorders of the Central Nervous System

3723

Table 640.1  Acute Demyelinating Disorders of the Central Nervous System
DISORDER

DEFINITION

Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM)

A first polyfocal CNS event with presumed inflammatory cause
Encephalopathy present that cannot be explained by fever
MRI often showing bilateral diffuse, poorly demarcated T2 lesions
No new symptoms, signs, or MRI findings after initial 3 mo

Multiphasic ADEM

New event of ADEM 3 mo or more after the initial event that can be associated with new or
reemerging clinical and MRI findings
Frequently associated with the presence of MOG-­Ab

Clinically isolated syndrome (CIS)

A first monofocal or multifocal CNS demyelinating event
Encephalopathy is absent, unless caused by fever

Multiple sclerosis (MS)

MS can be diagnosed in those for whom there is no better explanation if both
dissemination in time (DIT) and dissemination in space (DIS) can be demonstrated.
DIS
Demonstrated by one or more T2 lesions affecting at least two of the following CNS sites:
• Periventricular
• Juxtacortical or cortical
• Infratentorial
• Spinal cord
DIT
Demonstrated by one of the following:
• Simultaneous presence on MRI of one or more gadolinium-­enhancing lesions AND
one or more nonenhancing lesions
• CSF oligoclonal bands
• Follow-­up MRI (>30 days from previous scan) with one or more new enhanced OR
nonenhanced lesions
• Two or more acute episodes typical of MS each lasting >24 hr and at least 30 days
apart

Primary progressive MS (PPMS)

PPMS is exceedingly rare in childhood, and therefore in cases of suspected PPMS, or
diagnostic uncertainty, specialist advice should be obtained. Biopsy and/or further
genetic investigation may be appropriate to rule out mimics.

MOG-­Ab–associated demyelination

MDEM: recurrent ADEM (see earlier)
ADEM-­ON: ADEM or MDEM followed by optic neuritis (ON)
NMOSD: ON and acute transverse myelitis (ATM), either sequentially or simultaneously
Relapsing inflammatory ON (RION)
Brainstem demyelination: recurrent episodes of demyelination often involving the
posterior fossa and brainstem

Neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (NMOSD)

If AQP4–positive, one of the following core criteria is required:
• Optic neuritis
• Acute myelitis
• Area postrema syndrome (nausea, vomiting, hiccups)
• Acute brainstem syndrome
• Narcolepsy, acute diencephalic syndrome with MRI lesions
• Symptomatic cerebral syndrome with MRI lesions
If AQP4-­negative or unavailable, two core criteria and all the following:
1.	At least one core criteria must be optic neuritis, longitudinally extensive TM, or area
postrema syndrome
2.	Dissemination in space (≥2 different core criteria)
3.	Exclusion of alternative diagnoses
If Mog-­Ab–positive with both ON and TM, then MOG + NMOSD may be diagnosed

640.1 Acute Disseminated
Encephalomyelitis
Michael Perry and Cheryl Hemingway
Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis is an inflammatory, demyelinating event of early childhood presenting with acute-­onset polyfocal
neurologic deficits, accompanied by encephalopathy and MRI changes
consistent with demyelination (see Table 640.1).

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Although ADEM can occur at any age, most studies report a mean age
between 5 and 8 years with a slight male predominance and an incidence
of 0.1-­0.6 per 100,000 children per year. ADEM is usually monophasic,
but recurrence can occur; this is termed multiphasic disseminated

encephalomyelitis (MDEM) if the recurrence is 3 months or longer
after the incident episode. Approximately 50% of ADEM cases are
associated with serum MOG-­Ab positivity (MOGAD) (see Chapter
640.5). MDEM patients are almost exclusively MOG-­Ab positive. An
episode of ADEM can also be followed by non-­ADEM demyelination
in a new location. If ADEM is followed by a relapse in a specific location, such as the optic nerve, then ADEM-­ON is diagnosed. If the optic
nerve and spinal cord are involved, then NMOSD (see Table 640.1) is
diagnosed. Both ADEM-­ON and NMOSD are associated with MOG­Ab positivity.

PATHOGENESIS

Molecular mimicry induced by infectious exposure has long been
thought to trigger the production of CNS autoantigens, though causality has never been proven. Many patients experience a transient febrile

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3724 Part XXV u The Nervous System
illness in the month before ADEM onset. Preceding infections associated with ADEM include influenza, Epstein-­Barr virus (EBV), cytomegalovirus, varicella, enterovirus, measles, mumps, rubella, herpes
simplex, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, and COVID-­19.

Table 640.2  Differential Diagnosis of Demyelinating
Disorders
Multifocal white matter
lesions

Bilateral or diffuse white
matter lesions

Deep gray, thalamic,
and striatal lesions

Demyelination (e.g., ADEM, MS, CIS,
NMOSD, AHL)
Autoantibody (e.g., NMDAR-­Ab,
Hashimoto encephalopathy)
Migraine
Prior insult and residual gliosis (e.g.,
congenital infections or hypoxic
damage)
Primary and secondary vasculitides
(e.g., primary angiitis of the CNS,
neurosarcoidosis, SLE, Behçet
syndrome, scleroderma)
Mitochondrial (e.g., Leber hereditary
optic neuropathy [LHON], POLG)
Leukoencephalopathy (e.g., DARS)
X-­linked Charcot-­Marie-­Tooth disease

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Initial symptoms of ADEM may include lethargy, fever, headache,
vomiting, meningeal signs, and seizures, including status epilepticus. Encephalopathy is the hallmark of ADEM. It can range
from behavioral change and persistent irritability to coma. Common neurologic signs include visual loss, ataxia, motor and sensory deficits, and cranial neuropathies. In cases with concurrent
spinal cord involvement, bladder/bowel dysfunction may be seen.
Focal neurologic deficits, however, can be difficult to ascertain in
the obtunded or very young child. The clinical course is usually
rapidly progressive over days, and intensive care may be required,
particularly for patients with brainstem dysfunction or raised
intracranial pressure.

NEUROIMAGING

Brain MRI typically shows large (sometimes confluent), bilateral,
multifocal, edematous, masslike T2 lesions of the cerebral hemispheres, cerebellum, and brainstem. Deep gray matter structures
(e.g., thalami, basal ganglia) are often involved (Figs. 640.1 and
640.2). Contrast enhancement is variable. The spinal cord may
have an abnormal T2 signal or enhancement, with or without clinical signs of myelitis. ADEM lesions will typically appear to be of
similar age on MRI, but their evolution often lags the clinical presentation. Serial MRI imaging 3-­12 months after ADEM frequently
demonstrates near-­complete resolution of T2 abnormalities, though
residual gliosis may remain.
Severe involvement may progress to an acute hemorrhagic leukoencephalopathy (Weston-­
Hurst disease). This leukodystrophy-­
like
picture is characterized by large lesions, edema with mass affect, and a
polymorphonucleated cell pleocytosis; this contrasts with the CSF lymphocytic pleocytosis typically noted in ADEM.

Leukodystrophy (e.g., X-­linked
adrenoleukodystrophy, Alexander
disease, metachromatic LD, Krabbe
disease)
Leukoencephalopathy (e.g., Aicardi-­
Goutières syndrome)
Mitochondrial (e.g., LHON, Leigh
disease, MELAS, MERFF)
Infection
Tumor (e.g., gliomatosis cerebri,
astrocytoma, lymphoma)
Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis
(HLH)

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Infection (e.g., mycoplasma, Epstein-­
Barr virus, West Nile virus, Japanese B
encephalitis, enterovirus)
Biotin-­responsive basal ganglia disease
(e.g., SLC19A3)
Acute necrotizing encephalopathy (ANE)
and RANBP2 pathogenic variant

There is no biologic marker for ADEM, and laboratory findings can
vary widely. CSF studies are often normal or can exhibit pleocytosis
with lymphocytic or monocytic predominance. CSF protein can be
elevated, especially on repeat studies. Elevated CSF immunoglobulin
production can be present, but true OCB positivity is rare. Electroencephalograms often show generalized slowing, consistent with encephalopathy. Polyregional demyelination of ADEM can also cause focal
slowing or epileptiform discharges.

Table 640.3  MR Imaging Red Flags for the Diagnosis of Children with Acquired Demyelinating Syndromes
LEPTOMENINGEAL
ENHANCEMENT

SVcPACNS
Infection
Tumor
HLH

Leptomeningeal enhancement is not a feature of MS in adults; it has
emerged as a red flag for vasculitic or malignant processes in the pediatric
cohort.

LESION EXPANSION

Tumor
Lymphoma
PML
Sarcoidosis

Increased size of T2 lesions on serial imaging is well recognized in MS,
although this should always prompt consideration of malignancy. Increasing
size of a white matter–predominant lesion without lesion enhancement in a
patient treated with immunosuppressant therapy (or a patient with known
HIV) should prompt consideration of PML. PML is a risk for MS patients
exposed to more intense immunosuppressive therapies.

HEMORRHAGE

ANE
Stroke
Cerebellitis
AHLE
Large-­vessel CNS vasculitis
SVcPACNS

Although susceptibility-­weighted imaging reveals tiny microfoci of
hemosiderin in MS patients, hemorrhage large enough to be visible on
conventional MRI sequences is not a feature of ADS or MS and should
prompt consideration of disorders in which the cerebral vasculature is
specifically involved.

ADS, Acquired demyelinating syndrome; AHLE, acute hemorrhagic leukoencephalitis; CNS, central nervous system; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; HLH, hemophagocytic
lymphohistiocytosis; MS, multiple sclerosis; PML, progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy; SVcPACNS, small-­vessel childhood primary angiitis of the central nervous system.
From O’Mahony J, Shroff M, Banwell B. Mimics and rare presentations of pediatric demyelination. Neuroimaging Clin North Am. 2013;23:321–336, Table 2.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 640 u Demyelinating Disorders of the Central Nervous System
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

ADEM is a clinical diagnosis supported by MRI, CSF, and serum findings.
The differential diagnoses for ADEM are broad; empirical antibiotic and
antiviral treatment should be considered while infectious evaluations are
pending. Follow-­up MRI examinations 3-­12 months after typical ADEM
should show improvement; new or enlarging T2 lesions should prompt
reevaluation for other etiologies such as MS, antibody-­associated disorders, leukodystrophies, tumor, vasculitis, mitochondrial, metabolic, or
rheumatologic disorders (Table 640.4 and see Tables 640.1-­640.3).

TREATMENT

High-­dose intravenous steroids are often prescribed (most commonly
methylprednisolone 20-­30 mg/kg/day for 5 days with a maximum
dose of 1,000 mg/day) followed by an oral prednisolone taper of 1-­2
mg/kg/day (maximum 40-­60 mg/day) over 4-­6 weeks. In refractory
or severe cases, additional treatment options include intravenous

3725

immunoglobulin (2 g/kg administered over 2-­5 days) or plasmapheresis (5-­7 exchanges administered every other day). There is no consensus about the timing of these treatments for ADEM.

PROGNOSIS

Most children experience full motor recovery after ADEM, but residual
deficits can be seen. Cognitive impairment or behavioral changes are
not uncommon. Recovery starts within days to weeks, but symptoms
can fluctuate throughout the course.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

640.2 Optic Neuritis
Michael Perry and Cheryl Hemingway
Optic neuritis (ON) is inflammation of one or both optic nerves. It
presents with visual dysfunction. ON can occur in three phenotypes:
(1) as a clinically isolated monophasic syndrome; (2) recurrently in
isolation; or (3) as part of other multifocal systemic or CNS-­specific
inflammatory conditions such as ADEM, MS, or antibody-­associated
demyelination (e.g., AQP-­4-­Ab NMOSD or MOGAD).

EPIDEMIOLOGY AND CLINICAL PRESENTATION

Fig. 640.1 6-­year-­old patient diagnosed with ADEM presenting with
encephalopathy, ataxia, and motor deficits after mild viral infection. Axial T2-­weighted MRI shows bilateral, diffuse, poorly demarcated lesions.
Gray matter involvement, including the thalamus and basal ganglia, is
commonly seen.

A

B

ON is one of the most common of the acquired demyelinating syndromes, accounting for ∼25% of all demyelinating presentations in
childhood. The typical presentation is unilateral or bilateral visual loss
over hours to days with abnormal color vision (typically red-­green
desaturation), visual field loss, and sometimes a relative afferent pupillary defect. The visual loss is often severe, with most children at 20/200
visual acuity (VA) or worse. Periocular pain and painful eye movements (often reported as headache in young children) are common.
Bilateral ON is more common in younger children and frequently
associated with MOG-­Ab disease. Unilateral ON is more common in
older children and more likely to be associated with MS. Funduscopic
examination in over half of children reveals acute optic nerve head
swelling (papillitis). However, when the inflammation occurs in the
retrobulbar optic nerve portion, the appearance of the optic nerve may
be normal. Optic nerve pallor is more often noted in the chronic stage
after an initial episode or in those with relapsing ON. Bilateral ON,
longitudinally extensive (>50% of the optic nerve), perineural optic
sheath enhancement (perineuritis), and optic disc edema are features
suggestive of ON caused by MOG-­Ab disease. ON without papillitis
and that involves the optic chiasm or tract is more typical of AQP4-­Ab
(NMOSD) disease.

C

D

Fig. 640.2 Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM). A and B, T2-­weighted FLAIR images show numerous asymmetric, rounded, hyperin-

tense, predominantly subcortical white matter lesions. Some lesions involve the cortex. A right pulvinar lesion is also seen. C and D, Postcontrast
T1-­weighted image demonstrates incomplete ring enhancement associated with these lesions. All the lesions show similar imaging features. Marked
improvement was seen after steroid therapy. (From Lerner A, Rajamohan A, Shiroishi MS, et al. Cerebral infections and inflammation. In: Haaga JR,
Boll DT, eds. CT and MRI of the Whole Body, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017: Fig. 10-­15, p. 280.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3726 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 640.4  Features that May Distinguish ADEM from a First Attack of MS
ADEM WITH OR WITHOUT MOG-­AB

MS

Age and sex

<10 yr
Males and females equal

>10 yr
Female preponderance

Seizures

+

−

Encephalopathy

+ /+/− for MOG-­Ab

−

Fever/vomiting

+

−

Family history

No

20%

Optic neuritis

Bilateral

Unilateral

Manifestations

Polysymptomatic

Monosymptomatic

CSF

Pleocytosis (lymphocytosis)
OCBs negative

Acellular
OCBs positive

MRI

Large, fluffy, poorly demarcated T2 lesions
involving white and gray matter

Ovoid T2 lesions involving juxtacortical,
periventricular, or infratentorial areas or
spinal lesions; T1 hypointense lesions

MRI follow-­up after 30 days

No new lesions

New lesions seen

+, More likely to be present; −, less likely to be present; ADEM, acute disseminated encephalomyelitis; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; MS, multiple sclerosis; MOG-­Ab, myelin
oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibody; OCBs, oligoclonal bands.

C

A

B

H
F

E

G

I

D

Fig. 640.3 MRI images highlighting the spectrum of possible phenotypes in relapsing myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) antibody–as-

sociated disorders. A, Axial T2-­weighted FLAIR MRI of brain from a 6-­yr-­old female with bilateral ON, ataxia, and lethargy, initially diagnosed with
ADEM until her relapse (B) with further multiple brainstem lesions associated with MOG-­Ab positivity. C, Coronal T2-­weighted MRI with longitudinally extensive ON with both pre-­and post-­chiasm involvement and (D) sagittal MRI of spine with longitudinally extensive TM from a 9-­yr-­old female
diagnosed with MOG-­Ab–associated NMOSD after simultaneous presentation of bilateral visual impairment and paraparesis requiring ventilatory
support. E, T2-­weighted FLAIR MRI of brain demonstrating asymmetric, bilateral, poorly defined lesion involving the brainstem and extending into
the middle cerebellar peduncle. F and G, Orbital MRI shows a thickened left optic nerve in a 13-­yr-­old female with recurrent left ON associated
with positive MOG-­Ab. H, Axial T2-­weighted image shows diffuse, bilateral, asymmetric leukodystrophy-­like phenotype associated with MOG-­Ab. I,
Coronal T2-­weighted FLAIR MRI of brain similarly showing the leukodystrophy-­like appearance seen over time in those with young-­onset relapsing
MOG-­Ab–associated demyelination.

DIAGNOSTIC EVALUATION

MRI, optical coherence tomography (OCT), and visual evoked potentials (VEPs) are useful for evaluating and quantifying the functional
and structural integrity of the optic nerve of a child with suspected ON.
Orbital MRI is useful but not required for a diagnosis of ON.
Though sometimes normal, it will usually show optic nerve thickening on T1-­weighted images with T2 hyperintensities and contrast enhancement. (Fig. 640.3F, G). Longitudinally extensive ON

involving the chiasm is thought to be more commonly associated
with antibody-­mediated demyelination (see Fig. 640.3C). Optical
coherence tomography can detect structural neuronal and retinal
change, such as retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) thinning and may
be helpful in monitoring the young child experiencing recurrent
disease. In acute ON, VEPs may detect prolonged latency. VEPs
in children may also detect clinically silent episodes of ON in the
seemingly unaffected contralateral eye.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 640 u Demyelinating Disorders of the Central Nervous System
CSF OCB analysis is not always indicated; however, in the context
of a normal MRI brain scan, negative OCBs predict a very low risk of
subsequent MS development.
Many conditions can both mimic and be associated with ON.
Therefore although a detailed ophthalmologic review is essential,
other investigations must be carefully considered to exclude systemic
rheumatologic disorders (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus [SLE],
sarcoidosis, celiac disease, Behçet disease), infectious diseases (viral
disease, Lyme disease, syphilis, tuberculosis), mitochondrial disorders
(e.g., Leber hereditary optic neuropathy), vascular events, toxic (methanol, ethylene, glycol, chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine), nutritional
(folate, vitamin B12, copper deficiencies), or metabolic disorders, and
optic nerve sheath meningioma or optic nerve glioma. Antibody testing in serum with live cell-­based assays (CBAs) for both AQP4-­Ab and
MOG-­Ab is recommended to ensure that prophylactic treatment can
be provided if indicated (e.g., AQP4-­Ab positive) or to provide counseling on the risk of recurrence (MOG-­Ab positivity).

TREATMENT

The standard of care is based on expert clinical opinion and adult trials and typically includes high-­dose intravenous steroids (e.g., methylprednisolone 20-­30 mg/kg/day for 3-­5 days, maximum 1000 mg/day).
In adults, steroid administration leads to faster recovery, but with no
difference in long-­term visual outcome. As with other severe episodes of
demyelination, further treatment options include intravenous immunoglobulin (usually 2 g/kg administered over 2-­5 days) or plasmapheresis
(typically 5-­7 exchanges administered every other day); there is neither
definitive trial evidence of their benefit nor consensus about when to use
them in isolated ON. Trials in adults have concentrated on neuroprotection; phenytoin has a beneficial effect on RNFL thinning in acute ON.
The initiation of chronic immunotherapy is dependent on etiology,
the presence or absence of glial antibodies (e.g., MOG-­Ab), and risk
of relapse (i.e., ON caused by AQP4 +NMOSD) and is best considered
by a multidisciplinary team experienced in the treatment of pediatric
neuroinflammatory disorders.

PROGNOSIS

Although it is reassuring that full recovery of high-­contrast visual acuity (HCVA) does usually occur in children, irreversible damage is often
detected in the structural integrity of affected optic nerves. This may
be evidenced by RNFL thinning on OCT, defective color vision, and
impairments in low-­contrast visual acuity (LCVA). Pediatric patients
with AQP4-­antibody–associated optic nerve demyelination are more
commonly left with long-­term visual disability than patients with other
causes of ON.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

640.3 Transverse Myelitis
Michael Perry and Cheryl Hemingway
Transverse myelitis (TM) is a condition characterized by the rapid
development of both motor and sensory deficits of the spinal cord.
It presents acutely as either partial or complete cord involvement at
any level with bilateral neurologic signs; in adults and older children,
there will usually be a clear sensory level. TM has multiple causes
(Tables 640.5 and 640.6). It can be secondary to an immune-­mediated
condition (postinfectious or antibody-­driven), a result of direct infection (e.g., infectious myelitis), or idiopathic. In TM, evidence of spinal cord inflammation can be demonstrated by an enhancing lesion
on MRI, CSF pleocytosis (>10 cells), or an increased IgG index. The
progression is rapid. Time to maximal disability typically occurs 5-­6
days after symptom onset.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

TM is more common in adults but is estimated to affect ∼2 children/
million per year. A bimodal age distribution is observed in those

3727

Table 640.5  Reported Cases of Transverse Myelitis
1.	Acquired demyelinating disorders
a.	Multiple sclerosis
b.	NMO
c.	ADEM
d.	MOGAD
2.	Systemic inflammatory autoimmune disorders
a.	SLE
b.	SS
c.	Antiphospholipid syndrome
d.	Behçet disease
e.	Vogt-­Koyanagi-­Harada disease
f.	Ankylosing spondylitis
g.	Mixed connective tissue disease
h.	Others: systemic sclerosis, anti-­Jo-­1 antibody, urticarial vasculitis,
psoriatic arthritis, perinuclear ANCA systemic vasculitis, graft-­versus-­
host disease, common variable immunodeficiency, celiac disease
3.	Neurosarcoidosis
4.	Parainfectious TM
a.	Viral: hepatitis A, hepatitis B, hepatitis C, hepatitis E, measles,
mumps, rubella, varicella zoster, Epstein-­Barr, cytomegalovirus,
herpes simplex, influenza A/B, lymphocytic choriomeningitis
virus, chikungunya, hantavirus, HIV, human T-­cell lymphotropic
virus, human herpes virus 6, Japanese encephalitis, Murray
Valley encephalitis, St. Louis encephalitis, tickborne
encephalitis, vaccinia, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, dengue
virus, enterovirus 71, coxsackievirus A and B, West Nile virus,
parvovirus B19, human corona virus, and echovirus
b.	Bacterial: Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Campylobacter jejuni,
Borrelia burgdorferi, Acinetobacter baumannii, Coxiella
burnetii, Bartonella henselae, Chlamydia psittaci, Leptospira,
Chlamydia pneumoniae, Legionella pneumonia, Orientia
tsutsugamushi (scrub typhus), Salmonella paratyphi B,
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Treponema pallidum, Brucellosis
melitensis, and groups A and B streptococci
c.	Fungal: Actinomyces, Blastomyces, Coccidioides, Aspergillus,
Cryptococcus, and Cladophialophora bantiana
d.	Parasitic: Toxocara species, Schistosoma species,
Gnathostoma spinigerum, Echinococcus granulosus,
Taenia solium, Toxoplasma gondii, Acanthamoeba species,
Paragonimus westermani, and Trypanosoma brucei
5.	Paraneoplastic syndromes
a.	Anti-­Ri (ANNA-­2) antibody
b.	CRMP-­5-­IgG antibody
c.	Anti-­amphiphysin IgG antibody
d.	Anti-­GAD65 antibody
e.	NMDAR antibody
6.	Atopic myelitis
7.	Drugs and toxins
a.	Tumor necrosis factor-­alpha inhibitors
b.	Sulfasalazine
c.	Epidural anesthesia
d.	Chemotherapeutic agents: gemcitabine, cytarabine, cisplatin
e.	Heroin
f.	Benzene
g.	Brown recluse spider toxin
8.	Idiopathic TM
MOGAD, MOG antibody disease.
From Beh SC, Greenberg BM, Frohman T, et al. Transverse myelitis. Neurol Clin.
2013;31:79–138, Box 5, p. 88–89.

younger than 5 years and older than 10 years. Children less than 5 years
of age develop spinal cord dysfunction over hours to a few days. They
often have a history of an infectious disease (e.g., viral or mycoplasma)
in the weeks preceding development of neurologic symptoms. The
motor dysfunction is often severe, approaching a complete loss of function. Recovery is slow (weeks to months) and usually incomplete, most
commonly with residual bowel and bladder dysfunction (15–50%).
Pathologic findings of perivascular infiltration with mononuclear cells
suggest an infectious or inflammatory basis. Overt necrosis of the spinal cord may occur.
The syndrome may differ in older children, and outcomes vary by
etiology. Although the onset is also rapid, recovery is faster and more

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3728 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 640.6  Mimics of Transverse Myelitis
ETIOLOGY

DESCRIPTION

Vitamin B12 deficiency

May present as an isolated myelopathy or in combination with neuropathy, encephalopathy, and/or
behavioral changes.
Dorsal column impairment is the most common manifestation, followed by pyramidal dysfunction
(the classic subacute combined degeneration of the cord).
Hematologic manifestations may be absent in up to 30% of patients with neurologic manifestations.
MRI reveals T2-­hyperintense signal in the posterior columns (the “inverted V” or “inverted rabbit
ear” sign on axial views).
In severe cases, MRI shows the “anchor” sign (because of involvement of the posterior, anterior, and
pyramidal tracts).

Vitamin E deficiency

May cause a predominantly dorsal column syndrome associated with a peripheral neuropathy
because of axonal degeneration.
Preferentially affects the cervical cord.
Clinically and radiologically similar to B12 deficiency.

Copper deficiency

May cause both myelopathy and optic neuropathy.
Causes of acquired copper deficiency include malnutrition, zinc toxicity, Menke disease, bariatric
surgery, gastrectomy, malabsorption syndromes, and use of copper chelating agents.
Clinically and radiologically indistinguishable from B12 deficiency.

Nitrous oxide (N2O) toxicity

Analgesic gas commonly abused because of euphoric effects.
N2O inactivates vitamin B12 by irreversible oxidation of the cobalt center of methylcobalamin,
thereby inhibiting the methionine synthesis pathway. In healthy subjects, this does not cause clinical
manifestations. In subclinically B12-­deficient individuals, N2O exhausts residual stocks of vitamin B12,
leading to neurologic manifestations.

Neurolathyrism and neurocassivism

Neurolathyrism is caused by consumption of grass pea.
Neurocassivism (konzo) is caused by bitter cassava root consumption.
Both are found in malnourished populations and are characterized by subacute paraparesis with
prominent UMN features.

Intramedullary primary spinal cord tumors

May be ependymomas, astrocytomas, or hemangioblastomas.
Typically cause an insidious, progressive myelopathy.
Hemorrhage or infarction of the tumor may result in an acute presentation and radiologic
appearance mimicking TM.

Primary CNS lymphoma

May give rise to a clinical and radiologic picture mimicking TM compounded by its corticosteroid
responsiveness.
Congenital or acquired immunodeficiency is the only established risk factor.
More common in middle-­age and older men.
Insidious onset of myelopathy with back pain and constitutional symptoms.
Serum lactate dehydrogenase may be elevated.
CSF: lymphocytic pleocytosis, markedly elevated protein, and hypoglycorrhachia. OCBs and
IgG index are absent. Cytologic analysis may demonstrate malignant cells (large-­volume CSF
examination can increase the diagnostic yield).
MRI: T2 hyperintensity, gadolinium enhancement, cord swelling, conus medullaris involvement, and
concomitant brain lesions.

Intravascular lymphoma

Predominantly affects vessels in the skin and neurologic system.
May mimic TM and even LETM.
CSF: lymphocytic pleocytosis and increased protein, but no malignant cells.
MRI: affects the conus medullaris (unlike TM).

Radiation myelitis

Early radiation myelopathy: begins 10-­16 wk after starting radiotherapy with predominantly sensory
phenomena (including Lhermitte sign) and typically resolves spontaneously.
Delayed radiation myelopathy: begins months or years after radiation exposure and manifests as a
subacute or insidious myelopathy.
Concurrent use of chemotherapeutic agents may cause widespread white matter necrosis owing to
synergistic toxicity.
Preexisting myelopathy from any cause may be risk factors for radiation myelitis.
MRI: cord swelling on T1-­weighted images, intramedullary T2 hyperintensity, ringlike gadolinium
enhancement.

CNS, Central nervous system; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; Ig, immunoglobulin; LETM, longitudinally extensive transverse myelitis; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; OCB, oligoclonal
bands; TM, transverse myelitis; UMN, upper motor neuron.
Modified from Beh SC, Greenberg BM, Frohman T, et al. Transverse myelitis. Neurol Clin. 2013;31:79–138, Table 10, p. 102–103.

likely to be complete. Necrosis and irreversible injury may occur in a
small but important number of cases. Potentially associated underlying etiologies include systemic vasculitic entities (e.g., SLE), antibody-­
mediated CNS disorders (e.g., AQP4-­Ab– or MOG-­Ab–associated
NMOSD), infectious etiologies (e.g., mycoplasma, enterovirus), or
idiopathic disease. Pathology and imaging studies show acute inflammation with demyelination in some cases.

Acute Flaccid Myelitis

Acute flaccid myelitis (AFM) is an idiopathic neurologic disorder presenting with acute weakness and/or paralysis in previously healthy
children. It is predominantly of infectious etiology. Although many
viruses have been implicated, the recent biennial outbreaks since 2014
are likely to have been caused by enterovirus-­D68. Abnormalities are
often seen in the lower motor neurons of the anterior horn gray matter

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 640 u Demyelinating Disorders of the Central Nervous System

3729

B

B

C
C

D

A

D

E

Fig. 640.4 Typical MRI findings in the acute phase of AFM. Spinal MRIs are shown of an 8-­yr-­old child with AFM, acquired 24 hr after onset of
neurologic symptoms. A, Sagittal T2-­weighted image showing an ill-­defined, longitudinally extensive central/anterior spinal cord lesion. B, Axial
T2-­weighted image from C5–C6 shows hyperintensity of the entire gray matter of the spinal cord, with associated edema and some surrounding
white matter hyperintensity. C, Axial T2-­weighted image from T7 shows asymmetric hyperintensity of the gray matter (right more than left). D, Axial
T2-­weighted image from T10 shows hyperintensity of the entire gray matter. E, Axial FLAIR image at the level of the middle cerebellar peduncle
demonstrates hyperintensity of the dorsal pons (arrow). AFM, acute flaccid myelitis. (From Murphy OC, Messacar K, Benson L, et al. Acute flaccid
myelitis: cause, diagnosis, and management. Lancet. 2021;397:334–344, Fig. 1, p. 338.)

(Fig. 640.4). Symptoms can progress rapidly; paralysis is often asymmetric and is not usually accompanied by a sensory deficit; cranial
nerve involvement may include facial weakness, dysarthria, and dysphagia (Table 640.7).
In the United States, AFP is considered a generalized “umbrella”
term for multiple clinical entities, including paralytic poliomyelitis,
transverse myelitis, AFM, Guillain-­Barré syndrome, toxic neuropathy,
and muscle disorders. Essentially, this grouping helps with case ascertainment of AFM, but the individual diagnoses still remain important
because each has its own differential diagnoses to consider.
A pragmatic case definition of AFP is “a clinical syndrome with rapid
onset of weakness that frequently involves the respiratory and bulbar
muscles.” Whenever these criteria are met and poliomyelitis is a possibility, thorough investigation and reporting of potential poliomyelitis
is required. Two diagnostic stool samples more than 24 hours apart
should be collected within 14 days of onset of paralysis and then processed in a World Health Organization–approved laboratory. If poliomyelitis is confirmed, it may be caused by wild poliovirus (serotypes
1-­3) or vaccine-­associated paralytic poliomyelitis, and it will need full
epidemiologic investigation. In the individual patient, disease progression with paralysis (with sensory preservation) is rapid, asymmetrical,
and involves proximal more than distal muscles.
Other potential viral causes of AFP include coxsackie and echoviruses, Japanese B encephalitis, Murray Valley encephalitis, St. Louis
encephalitis, and Russian spring encephalitis, tickborne viruses, and
herpes virus. These causes vary by geography with, for example, EV-­
A71 being the cause in parts of Southeast Asia and West Nile virus
being a cause in the United States. Therefore consider the following
investigations for possible viral causes of AFP, as well as other conditions in the differential diagnosis:
• Imaging with MRI of the spine (and possibly brain)
• CSF sampling for differential cell counts, glucose, and protein;

microbiology and diagnostic polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing
for enteroviruses and other infectious diseases; and for autoantibodies such as anti–myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (anti-­MOG, see
later)
• Respiratory/nasopharyngeal secretion samples for viral PCR testing
(e.g., enterovirus)
• Peripheral neurophysiology with nerve conduction studies (NCS) if
differentiation from GBS is needed or botulism is suspected
• Studies for identification of possible metabolic disease (e.g., acute
hypokalemic periodic paralysis, thyrotoxic periodic paralysis, acute
intermittent porphyria) and/or toxin exposures (e.g., sporadic hypokalemic paralysis secondary to licorice, barium, or cottonseed oil
exposure)
• Investigations to exclude paralytic syndromes that mimic or are
misdiagnosed as AFP, such as vitamin B12 deficiency, which may be
exacerbated by chronic cycad poisoning from evergreens, cyanide
toxicity from cassava ingestion, and lathyrism.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS OF TM

TM is often preceded within the previous 1-­3 weeks by a mild nonspecific illness or minimal trauma. Discomfort or overt pain in the neck or
back is common. Depending on its severity, the condition progresses
to numbness, anesthesia, ataxia, areflexia, and motor weakness in the
truncal and appendicular musculature at or distal to the lesion. Paralysis begins as flaccidity (paraparesis, tetraparesis). Spasticity then develops over weeks, accompanied by hyperreflexia and clonus. Weakness
may rarely be unilateral, but usually such a finding suggests a hemicord
lesion, which is most often associated with MS (particularly in adolescence). Urinary retention is a common early symptom; incontinence
occurs later in the course. Early sensory findings may be isolated to
the posterior column, necessitating evaluation of vibratory sensation.
Progressive sensory loss may manifest as anesthesia, paresthesia, or

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3730 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 640.7  Diagnostic Criteria for AFM
Definite

Probable

Possible

Uncertain

H1: Acute onset of limb(s) weakness (period from onset to
nadir: hours to 10 days)

P

P

P*

P

H2: Prodromal fever or illness†

P/A

P/A

P/A

P

E1: Weakness involving one or more limbs, neck, face,
or cranial nerves

P

P

P*

P

E2: Decreased muscle tone in at least one weak limb

P

P

P/A

P

E3: Decreased or absent deep tendon reflexes in at least
one weak limb‡

P

P

P/A

P

MRI: Spinal cord lesion with predominant gray matter
involvement, with or without nerve root enhancement§

P

P

P

ND

CSF: Pleocytosis (white cell count >5 cells/L)¶

P

A or ND

P/A or ND

P/A or ND

Diagnostic items

Factors that might suggest an alternative diagnosis
1. Encephalopathy that cannot be explained by fever, illness, respiratory distress, metabolic abnormalities,
or medications
2. Presence of sensory deficits on examination||
3. Presence of lesions in supratentorial white matter or cortex, which should prompt consideration of ADEM,
MOG-antibody associated disease, neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder, encephalomyelitis, and others
4. Absence of CSF pleocytosis, which should prompt consideration of Guillain-Barré syndrome, botulism, ischemic
cord lesions, and others
5. Positive serum aquaporin-4 (AQP-4) antibody, which would exclude AFM
6. Positive serum MOG antibody, which would suggest MOG-antibody associated disease||
From Murphy OC, Messacar K, Benson L, et al. Acute flaccid myelitis: cause, diagnosis, and management. Lancet. 2021;397:334–344, Fig. 2, p. 339.

allodynia. Other potential findings include priapism, respiratory compromise, and spinal shock with subsequent autonomic dysreflexia.
Rarely an overlap syndrome of TM with features of Guillain-­Barré syndrome may occur.

DIAGNOSTIC EVALUATION

TM is a diagnosis of exclusion, and a thorough evaluation should
be completed in all cases. The differential diagnoses include, among
others, Guillain-­Barré syndrome, demyelinating disorders, systemic
rheumatologic conditions, meningitis, infectious myelitis, spinal cord
infarction, arteriovenous malformations, trauma, mass lesions, bony
and intervertebral disk distortion, abscess, and tumors of the spine and
spinal cord (see Tables 640.5 and 640.6).
MRI with and without contrast enhancement is essential to rule out
a mass lesion. T1-­weighted images of the spine at the anatomic level of
involvement may be normal or show spinal cord distension. In the infantile form, T2-­weighted images show high signal intensity over multiple
spinal segments. In the adolescent form, the high signal is often centrally
located and involves both gray and white matter. It may be limited to one
or two segments but is frequently more extensive. A limited degree of
gadolinium contrast enhancement is expected (especially in the infantile form) and is indicative of an inflammatory condition. Cervical and
cervicothoracic lesions represent most acute TM lesions. Axial cuts of
the spinal cord are invaluable and can help to establish potential etiologies. Hemicord involvement may indicate MS. Holocord involvement
with typical brain and optic nerve involvement suggests NMOSD. If

gray matter involvement predominates, consider a vasculitic or infectious process (e.g., SLE or enterovirus). Nerve root enhancement is occasionally seen and should raise suspicion for a mixed picture (central and
peripheral demyelination) or anterior horn cell involvement (Fig. 640.5).
Up to 6% of cases do not show spinal cord lesions on MRI. Repeat imaging at 7 days may reveal atrophy in these cases. MRI of the brain is also
indicated. Evidence of other foci of demyelination is seen in at least 40%
of patients; lesion localization should guide further consideration for
MS, ADEM, NMOSD, SLE, and enterovirus-­associated acute flaccid
myelitis. In any child with encephalopathy, ADEM must be considered.
Lumbar puncture is indicated after exclusion of a mass on MRI and
should be analyzed for cells, protein, immunoglobulin index, OCBs,
and infectious pathogens. Mononuclear cells are usually elevated in
TM. Protein may be elevated or normal. The presence of CSF inflammatory cells is essential for the diagnosis of TM.
Because one of the most important possibilities for this condition is
NMOSD, the serum and CSF of all patients should be analyzed for both
AQP-­4 and MOG antibodies. Older children should also have serum
studies sent for other autoimmune disorders, particularly SLE.

TREATMENT

Treatment of childhood TM has not been standardized. Available
evidence suggests immune response modulation may be effective in
reducing the severity and duration of disease. High-­dose steroids (i.e.,
methylprednisolone) are used acutely in TM. In cases of poor response
to high-­dose steroids, other acute therapeutic approaches include

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 640 u Demyelinating Disorders of the Central Nervous System

3731

C

Fig. 640.5 Transverse myelitis. A, Sag-

ittal T2-­
weighted image demonstrates a
longitudinal hyperintense spinal cord lesion in a 12-­yr-­old female with first presentation of AQP4-­Ab–positive NMOSD (arrow). B, Sagittal T1-­weighted image shows
a short segment at T1-­weighted (arrow) in
a 14-­yr-­old female with ON and MS. Axial
T2-­weighted images of the spine with different etiologies showing typical hemicord
appearance in MS (C), anterior horn cell
involvement in polio (D), and holocord involvement in NMOSD (E). (C-­E courtesy
Dr. Felice D’Arco, Great Ormond Street
Hospital, London.)

D

A

B

E

intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) and plasma exchange (PLEX).
Rituximab may be considered if an antibody-­driven TM is suspected.
Long-­term prophylactic therapy is recommended for children with
either relapsing disease or biomarkers indicating a risk for recurrence.

PROGNOSIS

Older children with acute TM have a better outcome than adults,
with nearly 50% making a good recovery by 2 years. This may
reflect the higher likelihood of MOG-­
Ab–associated disorders
in the older child. The most common sequelae in the remaining
50% are sensory problems and bladder dysfunction. Outcomes in
younger children with TM are comparatively poor. Recovery is slow
and usually incomplete; the likelihood of independent ambulation
is approximately 40%.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

640.4 Multiple Sclerosis
Michael Perry and Cheryl Hemingway
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic demyelinating autoimmune disorder of the brain, spinal cord, and optic nerves. It exhibits a relapsing-­
remitting course of neurologic events without encephalopathy separated
in time (i.e., more than one episode of at least 24 hours at least 30 days
apart) and space (i.e., in more than one CNS region). When occurring
in those under 18 years, it is known as pediatric-­onset MS (POMS).
Recurrent events lead to a characteristic accumulation of physical disability, cognitive impairment, and brain atrophy.

EPIDEMIOLOGY AND RISK FACTORS

MS is rare in childhood. In northern countries such as the United
Kingdom and Canada, the annual incidence is estimated at 2 children
per million. Interestingly, 5% of adult MS patients report in retrospect
that they first experienced symptoms before age 18. POMS affects prepubescent males and females equally, but after puberty there is a 2:1
female predominance. Childhood MS is almost invariably relapsing-­
remitting in nature; features suggestive of primary progressive MS
should prompt careful specialist evaluation for alternative conditions
(Table 640.8).
In adults, a complex interplay of environmental (e.g., low sunlight exposure, low vitamin D, obesity, toxins), infectious (e.g., EBV

exposure), and genetic/epigenetic factors (e.g., HLADRB1*15:01
homozygosity) are thought to synergistically influence MS susceptibility. Studies in pediatric MS have so far confirmed the role of some of
the earlier factors; however, the rarity of MS, the modest effects of a
multitude of candidate risk factors, and the near ubiquity of EBV in
the general population have made identification of causality and quantification of risk challenging. A landmark study of U.S. military service
members, however, has provided the best evidence yet that EBV infection, long postulated as a putative cause of MS, precedes the onset of
disease and confers a 32-­fold increase in the risk of disease development. B cells, then, a reservoir of latent EBV infection, may help to
explain the effectiveness of anti-­CD20 DMTs in MS and provide a target for future therapeutics or vaccines.

PATHOGENESIS

Dysregulation of both the innate and adaptive immune systems is at
the heart of MS pathogenesis. The precise sequence of events leading
to aberrant production of autoreactive immune cells is not well understood. Restriction of inflammation to the CNS suggests the presence of
a CNS autoantigen. How and where an immune response (i.e., B-­and
T-­cell activation) to a purported autoantigen is initiated is unclear; it
is possible that CNS antigens migrate into the peripheral lymph nodes
(via antigen-­presenting cells) where autoreactive T and B cells become
activated or that the triggering antigen is derived from the periphery
itself (e.g., systemic infection). Clonal cells targeting the brain and
spinal cord initiate a self-­perpetuating deleterious cycle of inflammation, axonal demyelination, and astrocytic gliosis, and eventual axonal
degeneration occurs in both white and gray matter. It is this axonal
degeneration that directly contributes to permanent disability. DMTs
target inflammatory infiltrates within actively demyelinating lesions
of relapsing-­remitting MS in an attempt to attenuate this cycle before
axonal loss.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Presenting symptoms are polyregional in more than half of patients.
These include focal sensory loss or other paresthesia (39–63%); cerebellar symptoms such as ataxia or dysarthria (50%); unilateral (and
sometimes bilateral) painful eye movement and reduced visual acuity
(ON) (37%); brainstem symptoms in 30%; and motor deficits in up to
50%. Such motor dysfunction can manifest as focal deficits, hemiparesis, paraparesis, and bowel/bladder dysfunction (from TM or other
spinal lesions). Except in cases of significant brainstem involvement,
encephalopathy is not a feature.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3732 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 640.8  Differential Diagnosis of Multiple Sclerosis: Selected Disorders with a Progressive Course
CLINICAL FEATURES

MRI FINDINGS

CSF FINDINGS

OTHER INVESTIGATIONS

HTLV1-­associated
myelopathy

Progressive myelopathy;
residence or travel to an
endemic area (especially
West Indies or Japan)

Spinal cord atrophy (thoracic
more than cervical);
T2-­hyperintense brain lesions
in some patients

OCBs sometimes
present

CSF HTLV1 antibody testing

Tumor

Progressive, variable
features; headache,
nonlocalizing
symptoms of raised
intracranial pressure;
encephalopathy,
vomiting, seizures,
motor and/or sensory
disturbances

Progressive enhancing and
nonenhancing T2 lesions on
serial imaging

OCBs absent

MRI; biopsy ± genetic
investigations

Nutritional myelopathy
(vitamin B12 or copper
deficiency)

Subacute progressive
myelopathy or
myeloneuropathy; optic
atrophy (severe vitamin
B12 deficiency); anemia or
pancytopenia

T2 hyperintensity of upper
cervical cord classically
affecting posterior columns;
brain MRI normal

OCBs absent

Serum B12, methylmalonic
acid; serum copper levels,
ceruloplasmin

Leukodystrophies:
adrenomyeloneuropathy;
Krabbe disease;
Alexander disease;
hereditary diffuse
leukoencephalopathy
with axonal spheroids

Progressive myelopathy
(adrenomyeloneuropathy,
Krabbe disease); bulbar
symptoms, ataxia
(Alexander disease); early
cognitive impairment
(hereditary diffuse
leukoencephalopathy
with axonal spheroids)

Highly variable; diffuse,
symmetric T2 hyperintensity
sparing subcortical U-­
fibers; with posterior
hemispheric predominance
(adrenomyeloneuropathy);
spinal cord MRI normal or
showing atrophy

OCBs absent

Very long-­chain fatty acids
(adrenomyeloneuropathy);
genetic testing available
for some leukodystrophies

Hereditary spastic
paraplegia (especially
SPG5)

Slowly progressive
myelopathy (spasticity
greater than weakness)
with or without other
neurologic symptoms
and family history

Spinal cord atrophy;
supratentorial and
infratentorial white matter
lesions (SPG5); atrophy of
corpus callosum

OCBs absent

Genetic testing

Spinocerebellar ataxias

Progressive cerebellar
ataxia, with or without
other neurologic
symptoms and family
history

Early, prominent cerebellar
findings, with or without spinal
cord atrophy

OCBs absent

Genetic testing

CSF, Cerebrospinal fluid; HTLV1, human T-­lymphotropic virus type 1; OCB, oligoclonal band.
From Brownlee WJ, Hardy TA, Fazekas F, et al. Multiple sclerosis 1: diagnosis of multiple sclerosis: progress and challenges. Lancet. 2017;389:1336–1346, Table 2, p. 1341.

Fig. 640.6 5-­year-­old patient diagnosed

A

B

IMAGING AND LABORATORY FINDINGS

Brain MRI exhibits typically discrete, ovoid, asymmetric T2 lesions in
cerebral white matter, particularly periventricular, juxtacortical, cortical, brainstem and cerebellar. Less commonly, lesions are noted in
the deep gray matter (Fig. 640.6). When involved, spine MRI typically

C

on imaging with MS after presentation with
left-­sided weakness. A, Axial T2-­weighted
MRI of brain shows multiple discrete,
ovoid white matter lesions in the periventricular region and cortical, juxtacortical,
and infratentorial lesions (B). C, Axial T1-­
weighted area of hypointensity and two
contrast-­enhancing lesions (arrows).

reveals partial-­width cord lesions restricted to one to two spinal segments. Longitudinally extensive lesions are more likely to occur in
NMOSD (associated with MOG-­Ab and AQP4-­Ab) than in MS. CSF
may be normal or exhibit mild lymphocytosis. OCBs are positive in
CSF but not in serum (type 2 pattern) in more than 90% of pediatric

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 640 u Demyelinating Disorders of the Central Nervous System
MS patients. In NMOSD, OCBs are usually either negative (type 1
pattern) or present in both CSF and serum (type 4 pattern). Evoked
potential studies can localize disruptions in visual, auditory, or somatosensory pathways.

DIAGNOSIS AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Pediatric MS can usually be diagnosed after two demyelinating episodes
without encephalopathy. Episodes must localize to one of four distinct
CNS regions, last longer than 24 hours, and be separated by more than
30 days. Importantly in pediatric MS, there must exist no other plausible explanation for the symptoms. MRI may serve as a surrogate for
recurrent demyelination, thereby enabling MS diagnosis after the first
clinical event so long as it demonstrates dissemination in space (at least
two T2 lesions involving juxtacortical, periventricular, infratentorial,
or spine regions) and time (presence of gadolinium-­enhancing lesion
and nonenhancing T2 lesion in the same scan). A 10-­year longitudinal
study demonstrated that 96% of children diagnosed with POMS met
2017 McDonald criteria at presentation. Alternatively, MS can be diagnosed with a follow-­up MRI at any time interval that exhibits accumulation of T2 or gadolinium-­enhancing lesions in the brain or spine. The
2017 McDonald diagnostic criteria allow the presence of intrathecal
OCBs to substitute for dissemination in time (see Table 640.1). Challenges may arise in distinguishing a first attack of pediatric MS from
other acquired demyelinating syndromes, particularly those associated
with antibodies (e.g., AQP4-­Ab, MOG-­Ab) or ADEM (Table 640.9
and see Table 640.4). Although irritability and lethargy may be present
(particularly with brainstem lesions), encephalopathy is a highly atypical feature of MS, and one should be extremely cautious in making this
diagnosis in a child with such symptoms. Indeed, the 2017 McDonald criteria’s positive predictive value (PPV) was shown to be reduced
because of the relative predominance of ADEM compared with MS in
the under-­12-­years cohort. The absence of encephalopathy is therefore
required to make a diagnosis of MS in this age-­group.

3733

PROGNOSIS

Reliable prognostication in POMS remains a challenge for several reasons. The first is the long time over which the disease progresses. The
second is the disconnect between inflammatory activity (e.g., lesion
accumulation, relapse rate) and neuronal/axonal degeneration, which
more directly corresponds to disability. Pediatric MS studies before
widespread DMT use suggested a higher relapse rate but slower rate
of disability accumulation compared with adults. Despite this longer
interval to irreversible disability (20-­30 years), pediatric MS patients
acquire disability at a younger age than adults owing to the earlier age
of onset of disease. Indeed, emerging evidence suggests the plasticity of
the young brain likely accounts for the relative delays in disability accumulation and cognitive impairment. Nonetheless, like adults with MS,
pediatric MS patients can acquire fixed neurologic deficits affecting the
visual and other cranial nerves, motor and sensory function, balance,
and bowel/bladder function. Children with MS have also been shown
to have an overall smaller head size and brain volume that can be
attributed to gray matter degeneration. Despite the marked reduction
in annualized relapse rate (ARR), lesion load, and overall inflammatory burden compared with interferon-­beta-­1α, children treated with
fingolimod still lost brain volume and failed to achieve age-­expected
brain volume increase. This underscores the difficulty in addressing
cognitive impairment, which is increasingly recognized and present in
up to 50% of young people with POMS, more than that seen in adult-­
onset MS.
Fatigue is also a major symptom in pediatric MS that can lead to a
poor quality of life. It is important to address this in a multidisciplinary
setting together with other factors, such as mood, sleep quality, and
sleep hygiene. Pharmacologic management of fatigue is challenging,
but psychology-­based therapy with cognitive-­behavioral therapy and
pacing has been shown to be effective.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

TREATMENT

Relapses causing functional disability may be treated with intravenous
methylprednisolone 20-­30 mg/kg/day (maximum 1000 mg/day) for
3-­5 days, with or without prednisolone taper. It should be noted that
a study in adults demonstrated noninferiority of oral vs intravenous
methylprednisolone in acute relapses in MS.
DMTs reduce both relapse frequency and T2 lesion load by targeting elements of the inflammatory response that predominates during
the relapsing-­remitting phase of MS. There is an increasing number
of immunomodulatory and immunosuppressive treatment options
available. They include injectables, oral medications, and infusions.
The choice and sequencing of medications are becoming increasingly
highly specialized (Table 640.10). Nearly all DMT use in pediatrics is
currently off-­label, though several randomized controlled trials are in
progress. The only medication with FDA approval at the present time
is fingolimod. One trial comparing oral fingolimod with intramuscular
interferon-­beta-­1α demonstrated that fingolimod reduced the annualized relapse rate by 82% when compared with interferon-­beta-­1α in
children between 10 and 18 years of age. This efficacy is greater than
that seen in adults, possibly because of the greater inflammatory burden in POMS. This is but one of the reasons that prompt initiation of
treatment is recommended for all those diagnosed with POMS.
An ongoing debate about DMT use concerns escalation vs induction—that is, whether to start with safer, less efficacious first-­line agents
and only escalate if treatment fails or whether remission should first
be induced with the more aggressive and effective treatments before
then maintaining on safer medications. Adult trials to answer this
question are underway, and currently, the more efficacious treatments
are generally reserved only for those with highly active MS. However,
the increased inflammatory activity, higher relapse rate, and young age
at which disability occurs in POMS have inspired research to investigate the theorized benefits of high-­efficacy early treatment (HEET).
One effectiveness study of DMTs in pediatric MS provided evidence
in favor of HEET, having demonstrated marked superiority of high-­
efficacy medications in preventing both relapses and new brain lesions.

640.5 Myelin Oligodendrocyte
Glycoprotein–Associated Disorders
Michael Perry and Cheryl Hemingway
Myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibody–associated disease
(MOGAD) encompasses a group of demyelinating disorders characterized by IgG autoantibodies to the MOG glycoprotein expressed in
the outer layer of the myelin sheath. MOG antibodies are present in
about 40% of all children with acquired demyelinating syndromes at
first presentation. This increases to half of children with ADEM and
nearly all those with relapsing ADEM (MDEM).
There is considerable phenotypic overlap between MOGAD, MS, and
AQP4-­
Ab–positive NMOSD. Children with MOG-­
Ab seropositivity
have often been classified as early MS or NMOSD; emerging evidence
is drawing lines of demarcation between these entities. This paradigm
is owed primarily to improved MOG-­Ab assay techniques and specific
clinical phenotypic description; differences in symptomatology, epidemiology, disease course, treatment response, prognosis, and histopathology between MOGAD, MS, and AQP4-­Ab–positive NMOSD have been
described. MOGAD may be either monophasic or relapsing; both MS
and AQP4-­NMOSD are characterized by a relapsing course. MOGAD
has also demonstrated age-­dependent variation of phenotype not seen in
either MS or AQP4-­NMOSD. Indeed, a minority of children with MOG
antibodies may fit strict clinical and imaging criteria for a diagnosis of
NMOSD with MOG (see Chapter 640.6). Most MOG-­positive children
(∼60%) previously classified as NMOSD would no longer fit this criterion and thus represent a cohort distinct from NMOSD.

CLINICAL PRESENTATION

There are four main clinical phenotypes of MOGAD: (1) ADEM, (2) ON, (3)
TM (NMOSD: ON and TM sequentially or simultaneously), and (4) cortical
encephalitis. These may be monophasic or relapsing in nature, such as is seen
with relapsing inflammatory optic neuritis (RION) or ADEM followed by

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3734 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 640.9  Differential Diagnosis of Multiple Sclerosis: Clinical, MRI, and Serologic Findings of the Main Disorders that Can
Resemble Relapsing-­Remitting Disease
NEUROLOGIC FEATURES

MRI FEATURES

BLOOD TEST AND CSF FINDINGS

Acute disseminated
encephalomyelitis (most
typically found in in
pediatric cohorts)

Similar to MS symptoms but
encephalopathy is typical;
frequently multifocal
symptoms

Large spectrum from small punctate
lesions to tumefactive lesions with
mass effect, in the supratentorial or
infratentorial white matter, bilateral,
and asymmetric; involvement
of cerebral cortex, deep gray
matter, brainstem, and spinal cord;
enhancement

CSF pleocytosis; serum antibody to
MOG

Antibody-­associated disease
(e.g., AQP-­4 NMOSD,
MOG-­Ab ON)

ON or TM (often concomitant
and/or severe in NMOSD);
nausea and vomiting

Variable depending on etiology;
longitudinally extensive spinal cord
lesion (>3 vertebral segments)
(NMOSD); longitudinally extensive
optic nerve lesions (MOG); posterior
optic nerve or chiasmal involvement
(NMOSD); spinal lesions with
prominent gray matter involvement
(H-­sign) (MOG); pencil-­thin ependymal
enhancement and cloudlike
enhancement

Serum antibody to AQP4 or MOG;
possible mild pleocytosis; CSF
OCBs infrequent

Neurosarcoidosis

Cranial nerve involvement
(primarily facial and optic
nerve); headache; raised
intracranial pressure;
meningitis; seizures;
myelopathy

Meningeal enhancement with pituitary,
hypothalamic, and cranial nerve
involvement; brain white matter
lesions; simultaneous enhancement of
all lesions

Raised serum and CSF ACE
(not sensitive or specific for
sarcoidosis); CSF OCBs sometimes
present

CNS vasculitis

Confusion, headache,
personality change; seizures;
strokelike symptoms

Ischemic, multiple lesions;
predominance of lesions at cortico-­
subcortical junction; intracranial
hemorrhage; meningeal enhancement;
simultaneous enhancement of all
lesions; microbleeds

Serum antineutrophil cytoplasmic
antibodies; CSF OCBs sometimes
present

Susac syndrome

Visual loss; sensorineural
hearing loss;
encephalopathy; headache;
memory loss; behavioral
disturbances

Focal and small lesions in supratentorial
and infratentorial regions (both white
matter and gray matter); involvement
of corpus callosum (snowball lesions);
leptomeningeal enhancement

CSF OCBs usually absent

Hypoxic-­ischemic
vasculopathies (particularly
small-­vessel disorder)

Stroke events; cognitive
decline; focal neurologic
signs; gait disturbance

Punctate and peripheral white matter
lesions, sparing U-­fibers; symmetric
and confluent periventricular lesions;
lacunar infarcts; involvement of central
transverse fibers in pons; microbleeds

Serum testing for vascular
risk factors (diabetes,
hypercholesterolemia); CSF OCBs
absent

Cerebral autosomal
dominant arteriopathy
with subcortical infarcts
and leukoencephalopathy
(CADASIL)

Migraine; stroke events;
psychiatric problems and
dementia

Temporal pole lesions; external capsule
and U-­fiber lesions; microbleeds

CSF OCBs absent; testing for
NOTCH3 gene variant

Connective tissue disorders
(SLE, Sjögren syndrome,
antiphospholipid antibodies
syndrome)

Optic nerve, brain, and
spinal cord involvement;
neuropsychiatric symptoms;
seizures; ischemic episodes

Brain infarcts and hemorrhage; basal
ganglia lesions; punctate (subcortical)
lesions; spinal cord lesions; cerebral
venous sinus thrombosis; parotid gland
involvement in Sjögren syndrome

Serum antinuclear antibody;
extractable nuclear antigens
(in particular, anti SS-­A(Ro) and
SS-­B(La) antibodies for Sjögren
syndrome, and anti-­Sm for SLE);
CSF OCBs usually absent

Neuro-­Behçet disease

Brainstem syndrome;
myelopathy;
meningoencephalitis

Large brainstem lesions; basal
ganglia, subcortical white matter,
and spinal cord lesions; gadolinium
enhancement; cerebral venous sinus
thrombosis

HLA-­B5; CSF pleocytosis; CSF OCBs
usually absent

Chronic lymphocytic
inflammation with pontine
perivascular enhancement
responsive to steroids
(CLIPPERS)

Cranial nerve dysfunction and
long-­tract signs; symptoms
referable to brainstem or
cerebellar dysfunction; spinal
cord syndrome; cognitive
dysfunction

Multiple punctate, patchy, and linear
regions of gadolinium enhancement
relatively confined to pons; lesions also
involving cerebellum, basal ganglia,
supratentorial white matter, brainstem,
and spinal cord

CSF OCBs sometimes present;
consider testing for primary
CNS hemophagocytic
lymphohistiocytosis even if
meeting criteria for CLIPPERS (see
later)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 640 u Demyelinating Disorders of the Central Nervous System

3735

Table 640.9  Differential Diagnosis of Multiple Sclerosis: Clinical, MRI, and Serologic Findings of the Main Disorders that Can
Resemble Relapsing-­Remitting Disease—cont’d
MRI FEATURES

BLOOD TEST AND CSF FINDINGS

Primary CNS hemophagocytic Mimic of CLIPPERS, MDEM,
lymphohistiocytosis (HLH)
and small vessel CNS
vasculitis with a treatment-­
resistant and steroid-­
dependent disease pattern;
symptoms include seizures,
encephalopathy, weakness,
ataxia, nystagmus, vomiting

NEUROLOGIC FEATURES

Multifocal cerebral and cerebellar
matter lesions with variable T2
hyperintensities; homogeneous
enhancing nodules and curvilinear and
punctate lesions of pons like that seen
in CLIPPERS; diffuse cerebellar cortical
edema

Genetic testing (e.g., PRF1,
UNC13D); natural killer (NK)–cell
function; CSF proteinosis or
pleocytosis; neopterin may be a
useful biomarker of disease activity

Fabry disease

Stroke events; vertigo

Posterior infarcts; multiple white matter
lesions with pulvinar involvement (T1
hypointense lesions)

Reduced activity of GLA enzyme;
analysis of GLA gene

Leber hereditary optic
neuropathy

Bilateral sequential optic
neuropathies with poor
visual recovery; more
common in men than
women

Normal or might show white matter
lesions (Harding disease)

OCBs absent; mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA) genetic testing for three
most common (∼90%) variants in
first instance: MTND1m.3460G>A,
MTND4m.11778G>A,
MTND6m.14484T>C); full mtDNA
sequencing indicated if targeted
sequencing negative and clinical
suspicion remains high

Infectious diseases are not included in this table but should be considered, especially in cases of atypical demyelinating lesions.
CSF, Cerebrospinal fluid; ACE, angiotensin-­converting enzyme; GLA, α galactosidase A; OCB, oligoclonal band.
Modified from Thompson AJ, Baranzini SE, Geurts J, et al. Multiple sclerosis. Lancet. 2018;391:1622–1636, Table 3, pp. 1628–1629.

Table 640.10  Overview of Available and Emerging Therapies Used in Pediatric Multiple Sclerosis and Other Relapsing
Demyelinating Disorders
MEDICATION AND
ROUTE OF
ADMINISTRATION

MEDICATION CLASS

MECHANISM IN MS

FIRST-­LINE THERAPIES APPROVED FOR MS IN ADULTS
Interferon-­β-­1a and β-­1b Immunomodulator
Modulates T cells and
(subcutaneous or
cytokine production
intramuscular injection
on alternate days, 3
times weekly, weekly or
bimonthly depending
on preparation)

COMMONLY REPORTED
OR SERIOUS SIDE
EFFECTS

EFFICACY

Injection site reaction;
flulike symptoms;
headache, muscle aches,
transaminitis; leukopenia;
tissue necrosis at injection
site (rare)

∼33% decrease in ARR and
slows progression of disability

Glatiramer acetate
(daily or 3 times
weekly, subcutaneous
injection)

Immunomodulator

Stimulation of Th-­2
regulatory T-­cells

Injection site reactions;
transient flushing, chest
tightness and shortness of
breath. Lipodystrophy at
injection sites

∼33% decrease in ARR and
slows progression of disability

Dimethyl fumarate
(DMF)
(oral medication 12
hourly with food, i.e.,
twice a day)

Immunomodulator

Unclear mechanism;
likely antiinflammatory
promotion via
modulation of nuclear
factor κB; modulates
cytokine production
and reduces
lymphocyte count.
neuroprotectant;
antioxidant

Flushing; viral URTI;
dysmenorrhea; GI upset;
headache; proteinuria,
leukopenia. Rare reports of
PML in those with severe
prolonged lymphopenia

Reduces number of relapses
by ∼ 50% compared with
placebo in adults; this has
recently been shown to
remain stable over 10 yr of
treatment (ENDORSE). Small
single-­arm pediatric phase 2
+ extension study (FOCUS +
CONNECTED) demonstrates
favorable safety and efficacy
profile. Phase 3 pediatric RCT
(CONNECT) ongoing

Infections (respiratory tract);
pancreatitis; headaches;
diarrhea; liver inflammation
or injury; alopecia; nail
and skin disorders;
teratogenicity

43% reduction in combined
risk of clinical relapse or high
MRI activity vs placebo; 55%
reduction in new or enlarged
T2 lesions vs placebo
(TERIKIDS trial)

SECOND-­LINE THERAPIES APPROVED FOR MS IN ADULTS
Teriflunomide
Immunomodulator
Pyrimidine synthesis
impairment via
dihydroorotate
dehydrogenase
inhibition;
reduction of T and B
cells proliferation

Continued
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3736 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 640.10  Overview of Available and Emerging Therapies Used in Pediatric Multiple Sclerosis and Other Relapsing
Demyelinating Disorders—cont’d
MEDICATION AND
ROUTE OF
ADMINISTRATION

COMMONLY REPORTED
OR SERIOUS SIDE
EFFECTS

MEDICATION CLASS

MECHANISM IN MS

Natalizumab
(infusion over 2-­3 hr
every 4 wk; alternatively
subcutaneous injection
every 4 wk)

Monoclonal antibody

Targets α4-­integrin on
vascular endothelium,
preventing T-­and B-­
cell migration into CNS

Infusion reactions with
headache, dizziness, rash;
rare anaphylaxis. May
affect liver function. Risk of
PML able to be stratified
by JC virus status, length
of treatment, and previous
treatments. Immune
reconstitution syndrome
after discontinuation;
melanoma

Reduces number of relapses by
∼70% in adults

Fingolimod
(daily oral medication:
first dose, cardiac
monitoring required
and need to ensure
good compliance
because of risks of
first-­dose bradycardia
and heart block)*

Immunomodulator

Modulates sphingosine-­
1-­phosphate
receptors; causes
T-­cell sequestration
in lymphoid
compartments

First-­dose bradycardia;
cardiac arrhythmia; systemic
viral infection; persistent
lymphopenia with risk
of severe herpetic and
varicella infection; macular
edema; transaminitis; basal
cell carcinoma. Rare cases
of PML

FDA approved for pediatrics
May 2018 after first
prospective RCT in children
with POMS (PARADIGMS)
showing 82% decrease in ARR
compared with interferon β

Alemtuzumab
(infusions 2 courses: first
for 5 consecutive days;
second 12 mo later for
3 consecutive days)†

Monoclonal antibody

Anti-­CD52 antibody
target; depletes
mature B and T cells

Vascular disorders (see
footnotes re: FDA black
box warning: ischemic
stroke, arterial dissection);
Infusion reactions within
first 2-­3 hr; opportunistic
infection, secondary
autoimmune disorders,
including thyroiditis (50%
risk), hemophagocytic
lymphohistiocytosis
(HLH), autoimmune
hepatitis, immune
thrombocytopenia (1%);
glomerular nephropathies
including anti–glomerular
basement membrane
disease (Goodpasture
syndrome). Monthly blood
tests required for 4 yr after
last course

Highly effective in adults; ∼ 55%
decrease in ARR compared
with interferons. Pediatric
single-­arm, before and
after switch study (LemKids)
ongoing.

Cladribine
(oral tablets two courses:
first for 4-­5 consecutive
days during mo 1 and
2; second as before
12 mo later)

Immunomodulator

Selective activity against
CD4 and CD8 T cells
and CD19 B cells via
adenosine deaminase
activity

Neutropenia, lymphopenia,
infection, oral herpes, GI
disorders, and rash

Reduced relapses by ∼58% vs
placebo in adults and delay in
disability progression.
No pediatric trials conducted
to date

Rituximab
(infusions given 2 wk
apart ∼every 6 mo)

Monoclonal antibody

Targets CD20, a marker
of immature B cells;
depletes B-­cell
populations

Infusion-­related side effects;
hepatitis, PML (rate
undefined)

Used off-­label for adult MS; no
efficacy assessments available
in pediatric MS

Ocrelizumab
(infusions given 2 wk
apart ∼every 6 mo)

Monoclonal antibody

Targets CD20, a marker
of immature B cells;
depletes B-­cell
populations

Headache; infusion-­related
side effects; theoretic risk
of PML (undefined) and,
possibly, malignancy

In adult MS showed 50%
reduction in ARR compared
with interferons; a phase 3
pediatric trial (OPERETTA 2) is
ongoing

GI side effects, alopecia,
bone marrow suppression,
and blood dyscrasias,
transaminitis, infections,
secondary malignancy,
alopecia. Increased side
effects with low TPMT
enzyme activity

No efficacy assessments
available in pediatric MS;
small retrospective studies for
NMOSD

OTHER MEDICATIONS USED FOR DEMYELINATING DISORDERS
Azathioprine
Chemotherapeutic
Disrupts purine
(intravenous infusion or
metabolism; effects
oral tablets daily)
include cytotoxic
immune cell depletion

EFFICACY

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 640 u Demyelinating Disorders of the Central Nervous System

3737

Table 640.10  Overview of Available and Emerging Therapies Used in Pediatric Multiple Sclerosis and Other Relapsing
Demyelinating Disorders—cont’d
MEDICATION AND
ROUTE OF
ADMINISTRATION

COMMONLY REPORTED
OR SERIOUS SIDE
EFFECTS

MEDICATION CLASS

MECHANISM IN MS

EFFICACY

Intravenous
immunoglobulin (IVIG)

Immunotherapy

Inhibits complement
binding; promotes
antiinflammatory
interleukin secretion;
promotes regulatory
T cells

Generally better tolerated
than PLEX; headache; rash;
allergic reaction

Mycophenolate mofetil
(MMF)
(intravenous infusion or
oral tablets twice daily)

Immunosuppressant

Disrupts purine
synthesis and impairs
B-­ and T-­lymphocyte
proliferation

GI side effects, alopecia,
bone marrow suppression
and blood dyscrasias,
transaminitis, infections,
secondary malignancy,
alopecia. Teratogenic.

Plasma exchange (PLEX)

Extracorporeal
immunotherapy

Removal of pathogenic
autoantibodies and
proinflammatory
macromolecules

Electrolyte abnormalities
(particularly hypocalcemia);
infection; hypotension;
allergic reaction; anemia

Limited pediatric case series
and adult studies available
support use as rescue and/or
second-­line therapy

Vitamin D

Vitamin/hormone

Modulates immune cell
expression

Hypercalcemia and kidney
stones at serum 25(OH)
vitamin D level > 100 ng/mL

Prospective trials in pediatric
and adult MS are currently
underway

Limited class C evidence (small
pediatric case series) suggests
improved outcomes in severe
and/or relapsing cases of ADS

*Additional S1P inhibitors with more specific receptor selectivities (i.e., less cardiac cross reactivity) are coming to market; pediatric trials are currently ongoing.
†U.S. FDA black box warning regarding rare but serious vascular side effects including ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke and cervicocephalic dissection. To be used with caution only

in specialist centers.
CNS, Central nervous system; ARR, annualized relapse rate; MS, multiple sclerosis; JC virus, John Cunningham virus; PML, progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy; TPMT,
thiopurine methyltransferase; GI, gastrointestinal.

optic neuritis (ADEM-­ON) (see Table 640.1). Tumefactive lesions, cerebellar
demyelination, cranial neuropathies, monofocal or polyfocal cerebral motor
deficits, and occasionally a widespread progressive leukodystrophy-­like pattern may also be seen. Children with cortical encephalitis may present with
seizures, headache, fever, and cortical symptoms with cortical hyperintensities on T2-­weighted MRI sequences. Symptoms may be preceded by a viral
prodrome, but no pathogens have been causally linked.
The diagnostic guideline of the International MOGAD Panel requires
fulfillment of three criteria (Table 640.11):
1.	Presence of one of six core clinical demyelinating events: optic
neuritis, myelitis, ADEM, cerebral monodical or polyfocal deficits,
brainstem or cerebellar deficits, or cerebral cortical encephalitis
2.	Serum MOG-Ab positivity
3.	Exclusion of MS and other demyelinating syndromes

globally, high positivity is reliably predictive of true MOG-­Ab positivity. Low-­positive or borderline results less reliably differentiate
MOG-­Ab disease from other entities and should prompt reconsideration of other diagnoses, particularly MS. Fixed CBAs may be
used with some caution if live CBA is not available, but enzyme-­
linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) should be avoided. Although
useful for diagnostic purposes, MOG-­Ab titer levels are unhelpful
in predicting risk of relapse.
Intrathecal OCBs are not normally present. However, OCB positivity should not preclude a diagnosis of MOG in the presence of
supportive clinical features (particularly TM) and high MOG-­IgG
antibodies. Elevated CSF white blood cells with pleocytosis is often
present.

IMAGING AND LABORATORY FINDINGS

Treatment of acute attacks is similar to other demyelinating disorders:
high-­dose methylprednisolone, PLEX, and IVIG. Most children with
MOGAD will experience a monophasic course and thus should not be
offered DMT after a first event.
There is currently no clarity about DMTs that may be helpful over
the long term and in relapsing disease. A complicating factor is the
potential for long intervals between relapses. This makes it exceedingly
difficult to determine the true efficacy of DMTs and guide early decisions about initiating treatment. Some studies have even demonstrated
an exacerbation of MOG-­Ab disorders treated with traditional MS
medications, highlighting again the importance of an accurate clinical
diagnosis.
The decision to use long-­term immunosuppressive agents after
induction therapy can be difficult. Unlike MS and AQP4-­NMOSD,
MOGAD may be monophasic or relapsing. At present, reliable
predictors for risk of relapse do not exist. Therefore children with
MOGAD are assessed holistically to determine the appropriateness
of chronic therapy based on the risk:benefit ratio of each individual
patient. This may include the severity of initial presentation, response
to acute treatment, recovery from index attack, and likelihood of
relapse. In children assessed as likely to benefit from DMTs, medications such as mycophenolate mofetil and azathioprine are frequently

MRI findings are atypical for MS (Fig. 640.7 and see Fig. 640.3).
Brain MRI may show widespread involvement of the supratentorial
and infratentorial white matter that can over time develop into a
leukodystrophy-­like pattern. This may extend into the pons, middle
cerebellar peduncle, medulla, or deep gray matter. Spinal imaging
suspicious for MOG-­Ab disease may show longitudinally extensive myelitis, a characteristic H-­sign of the central cord, or a lesion
of the conus medullaris. Accrual of MRI lesions in the absence of
relapse (i.e., clinically silent), a hallmark of MS, is not a typical feature of MOGAD. MRI of the optic nerves can be particularly useful
in discrimination of phenotype and may show specific findings that
together may indicate MOG-­Ab disease. These include perineural
sheath enhancement, papilledema, bilateral ON, and longitudinal
nerve involvement. Previously attributed to those with POMS, these
findings are now recognized as hallmarks of MOG-­Ab–associated
disease.
Suspected cases should have serum tested for MOG antibodies
via live CBA for the IgG Fc or IgG1 secondary antibodies; importantly, laboratories should ideally report both quantitative (i.e.,
titers) and qualitative results (i.e., low-­positive or high-­positive)
(Fig. 640.8). Despite variation in assay protocols across laboratories

TREATMENT

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3738 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 640.11  Proposed Diagnostic Criteria for MOGAD*
(A) Core clinical demyelinating
event

• Optic neuritis
• Myelitis
• ADEM
• Cerebral monofocal or polyfocal deficits
• Brainstem or cerebellar deficits
• Cerebral cortical encephalitis often with seizures

(B) Positive MOG-­IgG test

Cell-­based assay: serum

Supporting clinical or MRI
features

Clear positive

No additional supporting features
required

Low positive
Positive without reported titer
Negative but CSF positive

AQP4-­IgG seronegative AND
≥1 supporting clinical or MRI
feature

Optic neuritis

• Bilateral simultaneous clinical involvement
• Longitudinal optic nerve involvement (> 50% length of the optic nerve)
• Perineural optic sheath enhancement
• Optic disc edema

Myelitis

• Longitudinally extensive myelitis
• Central cord lesion or H-­sign
• Conus lesion

Brain, brainstem, or
cerebral syndrome

• Multiple ill-­defined T2 hyperintense lesions in supratentorial and often
infratentorial white matter
• Deep gray matter involvement
• Ill-­defined T2-­hyperintensity involving pons, middle cerebellar peduncle, or
medulla
• Cortical lesion with or without lesional and overlying meningeal enhancement

(C) Exclusion of better diagnoses including multiple sclerosis
*Requires fulfillment of A, B, and C.
Modified from Banwell B, Bennett JL, Marignier R et al. Diagnosis of myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibody-­associated disease: International MOGAD Panel proposed
criteria. Lancet Neurol. 2023;22(3):268-­282.

offered. This can be done with or without steroids. Rituximab has
been used with some reports of benefit. However, there have also
been concerning cases of severe exacerbations despite B-­cell depletion, particularly in those with relapsing brainstem demyelination. It
is important to remember that although both AQP4 and MOG disorders are antibody-­driven, the former is an astrocytopathy, whereas
the latter is an oligodendrocytopathy. Therefore extrapolation of
treatment effects from one condition to the other is not necessarily
possible. Monthly IVIG is the only treatment to date to consistently
have shown benefit in high-­risk individuals. However, there is great
promise in new treatments such as satralizumab, an anti-­IL-­6 antibody, and anti-­neonatal Fc receptor antibodies, which aim to reduce
levels of pathogenic autoantibody by blocking IgG recycling.

PROGNOSIS

MOGAD is generally associated with a more benign course and
favorable recovery compared with AQP4-­Ab demyelination. Dramatic resolution is often seen in as little as 30 days on follow-­up
MRIs. MOGAD is particularly heterogenous, however, and certain phenotypes such as brainstem demyelination can have a very
high relapse rate. Progression of disability is directly related with
relapse rate, and therefore predictors of relapse rate is a focus of
intense research. Approximately one third of MOG-­p ositive children will relapse within 8 years of the first presentation. This
risk is slightly higher in MOG-­related ON and lower in isolated
TM. Relapses can also occur many years after the first event, with
intervals of more than 10 years having been reported. Cognitive
deficits are seen frequently in those with young onset and frequent
relapses.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

640.6 Neuromyelitis Optica Spectrum
Disorders
Michael Perry and Cheryl Hemingway
The neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders (NMOSDs) are severe
autoimmune inflammatory diseases classically characterized by episodes
of ON and/or longitudinally extensive TM. The discovery of pathogenic
antibodies to the astrocyte water channel protein aquaporin-­4 (AQP4)
and the incorporation of these antibodies into the 2015 revised diagnostic criteria for NMOSDs have helped to distinguish AQP4-­Ab–related
disorders from other demyelinating conditions; it has also widened the
spectrum of the group of disorders to include brainstem syndromes
(e.g., area postrema syndrome) and recurrent forms of ON and TM (see
Table 640.1). MOG-­Ab has also been identified in many cases that were
initially thought to have been AQP4-­antibody–negative presentations.
Reports of both antibodies being simultaneously present in a single individual are exceedingly rare; in these circumstances, a diagnosis of AQP4­Ab–positive NMOSD should take precedence and guide management.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

AQP4-­Ab–positive NMOSD typically presents in older adults, whereas
MOG-­Ab NMOSD is much more common in children and young people. Both, however, can occur across a wide age spectrum. Population
studies vary significantly but suggest a pediatric incidence for NMOSDs
of 0.5–4.5% of all ADS presentations. AQP4-­Ab–driven NMOSD is significantly more common in females than in males. NMOSD appears to
have a higher mortality rate in Black people. Most cases of NMOSD are
idiopathic; only occasionally have familial cases have been reported.
Several genetic risk factors have been described, including the HLA-­
DRB1*0301 allele and a single-­nucleotide polymorphism in CD58.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 640 u Demyelinating Disorders of the Central Nervous System

3739

A

F

B

G

H

C

D

I

E

J

Fig. 640.7 Spectrum of anti-­MOG–associated diseases. A, Coronal T1-­weighted MRI of brain post-­gadolinium contrast showing contrast enhance-

ment of bilateral optic nerves and right optic nerve sheath consistent with perioptic neuritis. B, Sagittal STIR MRI of spine showing longitudinal
extensive patchy lesion spanning from cervical to thoracic cord. C, Sagittal T2-­weighted MRI of spine showing hyperintense, longitudinally extensive
“pseudo-­dilation” of central canal. D, Sagittal T1-­weighted MRI of spine post-­gadolinium contrast showing patchy enhancement of the conus medullaris. E, Axial FLAIR MRI of brain showing large subcortical and septal white matter lesions in a pediatric patient presenting with ADEM. F, Axial
T2-­weighted MRI of brain with hyperintense “H” sign outlining the central gray matter of the upper cervical cord in a teenager with myelitis. G, Axial
T2-­weighted MRI of brain with “fluffy” hyperintense lesion of gray and white matter of the left caudate and left occipital parietal regions in a pediatric
patient who presented with ADEM. H, Axial T2-­weighted MRI of brain showing unilateral FLAIR hyperintensity and edema of the right mesial frontal
cortex in a patient with FLAMES syndrome. I, Axial T1-­weighted MRI of brain post-­gadolinium contrast showing leptomeningeal enhancement of
the midbrain and right mesial temporal lobe. J, Axial T1-­weighted MRI of brain post-­gadolinium contrast showing a lesion adjacent to the cerebellar
vermis and dorsal medulla in a patient with brainstem syndrome and no other lesions. (From Parrotta E, Kister I. The expanding clinical spectrum of
myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein [MOG] antibody associated diseases in children and adults. Front Neurol. 2020;11:Article 960, Fig. 1.)

PATHOGENESIS

The water channels against which the AQP4-­IgG antibody is directed
are most abundant on the astrocyte foot processes within the periventricular regions, brainstem, optic nerves, and spinal cord; thus strictly
speaking, NMOSD can be characterized as an autoimmune astrocytopathy with secondary demyelination. Antibody (primarily IgG1 subtype) binding occurs at the extracellular loops of the AQP4 protein.
This activates the classical complement pathway with C5b-­C9 component, stimulating leukocyte migration and degranulation, ultimately
resulting in astrocytic death. Chemokine secretion from the dying
astrocytes and activated leukocytes further attract additional macrophages, leading to oligodendrocyte and neuronal death. Subsequent
necrosis or cavitation may occur.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

AQP4-­positive NMOSD presents most commonly with ON, TM, or
area postrema syndrome (i.e., hiccups, nausea, and/or intractable vomiting); vomiting is highly unusual in MOG-­Ab NMOSD. The symptoms and signs of TM depend on the spinal level and completeness of
the inflammatory changes. ON or TM may occur simultaneously or
may be separated in time by weeks or even years. Some patients, particularly in MOG-­Ab NMOSD, present with seizures and encephalopathy mimicking ADEM. Others exhibit endocrinopathies such as the
syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH),

diabetes insipidus (DI), hyperinsulinemia, disrupted puberty, or obesity. NMOSD may also be associated with other autoimmune conditions, such as SLE, Sjögren syndrome, diabetes mellitus (DM), and
thyroiditis.

IMAGING AND LABORATORY FINDINGS

Neuroimaging studies must include the entire spine, optic nerves if
visual symptoms are present, and brain. Although often manifesting
with large, hazy, ill-­defined white matter lesions and/or gray matter
involvement, such as thalamic lesions, brain imaging may have only
subtle white matter changes, or even be normal. Brain lesions most
frequently localize to areas of high AQP4-­Ab expression such as the
periaqueductal gray matter, dorsal brainstem, and diencephalon (Fig.
640.9). Spinal imaging may reveal short or longitudinally extensive TM;
longitudinally extensive ON involving the chiasm is more common in
MOG-­Ab disease. Imaging does not reliably differentiate AQP4-­Ab
and MOG-­Ab. Both, however, are readily distinguished from MS by
the absence of discrete, well-­defined oval lesions in the periventricular
white matter.
Although AQP4-­Ab and MOG-­Ab can be found in both the serum and
CSF, their relative increased prevalence in the serum suggests extrathecal
production of antibody. There are several different methods of varying
sensitivity for antibody testing; the gold standard is the live CBA. Repeat
testing is advised in cases of high clinical suspicion of an antibody-­driven

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3740 Part XXV u The Nervous System
First (or subsequent) episode of central nervous
system demyelination

MRI brain and spinal cord

Typical of “adult”
multiple sclerosis

Diagnose multiple sclerosis if McDonald
criteria are met
Yes

No
Yes

Features of
NMOSD

Check AQP4
antibody

Diagnose AQP4
Ab-associated disease
(NMOSD with AQP4-Abs)

+ve

–ve

No
Yes

Features of
ADEM
No

Check MOG
antibody

Diagnose MOG
Ab-associated disease

+ve

–ve

Monitor

Antibody-negative relapsing demyelinating
syndrome:
Consider alternative diagnoses

Relapse

Fig. 640.8 Diagnostic algorithm that can be applied to any episode of CNS demyelination in children. The first recommended diagnostic test is

brain and spinal cord MRI. If MRI findings are considered to be typical or suggestive of adult MS, then the McDonald diagnostic criteria should be
applied. In children whose MRI is not typical or suggestive of MS but who have clinical and radiologic features suggestive of NMOSD, AQP4-­Ab
testing is recommended. In particular, this test is advised in children presenting with an area postrema syndrome, MRI abnormalities localized to the
brainstem and hypothalamus, and destructive lesions. If AQP4-­Ab is negative, then MOG-­Ab should be tested. In children whose MRI is not typical
of MS or NMOSD but the clinical and radiologic presentation has features of ADEM, MOG-­Ab testing is recommended. Supporting features for
MOG-­Ab–associated disease include lesions in the cerebellar peduncle and leukodystrophy-­like MRI pattern in the very young. Alternative diagnoses should be considered in the remaining Ab-­negative patients. (From Hacohen Y, Mankad K, Chong WK, et al. Diagnostic algorithm for relapsing
acquired demyelinating syndromes in children. Neurology. 2017;89:269–287, Fig. 2.)

B
G
A

I

C

D

J

E

F

H

K

Fig. 640.9 Spinal cord and optic nerve MRI patterns in NMOSD. Spinal cord imaging in the context of acute myelitis in NMOSDs usually reveals
a longitudinally extensive transverse myelitis (LETM) lesion extending over three or more vertebral segments. A, Sagittal T2-­weighted MRI of the
thoracic spinal cord demonstrates a typical LETM lesion involving most of the thoracic spinal cord (arrows). LETM lesions have a predilection for the
central cord, as shown by axial T2-­weighted (B; arrowhead) and T1-­weighted MRIs with gadolinium (C; arrowhead). Cervical LETM may extend into
the medulla, a characteristic NMOSD pattern demonstrated in D (arrows; sagittal T2-­weighted MRI) and E (arrows; sagittal T1-­weighted MRI with
gadolinium). Acute LETM lesions can be associated with intralesional hypointensity, as shown by sagittal T1-­weighted MRI (F; arrow); in this example,
a rim of gadolinium enhancement surrounds the hypointense region. Chronic sequelae of LETM may include longitudinally extensive segments of
spinal cord atrophy, as shown by T2-­weighted MRI using the sagittal plane (G; the two arrowheads indicate the atrophic segment, and the top arrow indicates the normal diameter of unaffected cervical spinal cord) and axial plane (H; arrowhead shows an atrophic spinal cord). Fast spin echo
fat-­suppressed T2-­weighted MRI in the axial (I) and coronal (J) planes shows increased signal throughout most of the length of the left optic nerve,
especially its posterior portion (arrows). K, Axial T1-­weighted MRI with gadolinium shows enhancement of the optic chiasm (arrows). These images
are from two different patients experiencing acute ON in the setting of NMOSD. (From Wingerchuk DM, Banwell B, Bennett JL, et al. International
consensus diagnostic criteria for neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders. Neurology. 2015;85:177–189, Fig. 1.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 640 u Demyelinating Disorders of the Central Nervous System
disorder despite a negative test. CSF typically reveals elevated white blood
cells (WBCs) and, unlike in MS, is usually negative for OCBs.

DIAGNOSIS AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The International Panel for NMO Diagnosis (IPND) published new
criteria for NMOSD in 2015. Emphasis is now placed on the presence or absence of AQP4 antibody (see Table 640.1). In seropositive
patients (after exclusion of alternative diagnoses), only one core clinical
criterion is required from the following six: (1) ON, (2) TM, (3) area
postrema syndrome, (4) acute brainstem syndrome, (5) narcolepsy or
diencephalic syndrome with compatible MRI lesions, and (6) symptomatic cerebral syndrome with typical brain lesions. If AQP4-­Ab
negative, the diagnosis is more stringent and two core clinical criteria
are required, one of which must be ON, longitudinally extensive transverse myelitis (LETM), or area postrema syndrome. The heterogenous
nature of this seronegative cohort suggests that further antibodies are
yet to be discovered and likely represent multiple subgroups.
The differential diagnoses include other demyelinating disorders,
such as MS or ADEM; vasculitis and rheumatologic disorders, including SLE, Behçet disease, and neurosarcoidosis (usually accompanied by
other nonneurologic manifestations); idiopathic TM, tropical spastic
paraparesis, and viral encephalomyelitis (none of which have NMO
antibodies in the serum or CSF); genetic disorders such as familial
HLH or pathogenic variants in DARS; metabolic causes such as biotinidase deficiency and riboflavin-­responsive conditions; idiopathic
causes of isolated ON; or other acute forms of monocular or binocular
visual loss (Table 640.12; see also Chapter 671). Additional considerations include lymphoma, Langerhans cell histiocytosis, tuberculosis,
and vitamins B12 and E deficiencies.

TREATMENT

In principle, treatment of NMOSD involves acute treatment with early
aggressive antiinflammatory therapy (e.g., steroids) and removal of the
antibody (PLEX or monoclonal) and longer-­term relapse prevention
with DMTs.
Initial episodes and relapses may be treated acutely with methylprednisolone 20-­30 mg/kg/day (maximum 1,000 mg/day) usually for
5 days; this can be extended for severe attacks. An oral taper (though
there is no consensus regarding length) is recommended, particularly if antibody results are not available at the time of discharge. In
certain circumstances, treatment escalation in the acute phase may
be indicated: for example, when minimal or no improvement is seen
with steroids, or even initially in patients deemed to be high-­risk (i.e.,
brainstem symptoms or ON in a child with preexisting deficit in the
contralateral eye). In these cases, PLEX either before or after IVIG (2
g/kg over 2-­5 days) with a repeat course of steroids may be considered.
Rituximab can be used both acutely and to prevent further relapses.
In adults, AQP4-­Ab–positive NMOSD has historically been treated
with a range of DMTs, including azathioprine, mycophenolate mofetil
(MMF), and rituximab. A study of satralizumab (interleukin [IL]-­6
reuptake inhibitor of T-­and B-­cell activation, Th17 differentiation, and
plasmablast survival) in NMOSD demonstrated clear benefit in pediatric patients, particularly those who were AQP4-­Ab–positive, and it is
licensed for use in children in the United States and Canada. Preliminary evidence in adults suggests that eculizumab, a monoclonal antibody against the C5 complement protein, reduces recurrence and may
improve disability in patients with severe NMOSD. A pilot study of
tocilizumab, an anti–IL-­6 monoclonal antibody, demonstrated efficacy
in AQP4-­NMOSD in adults. Inebilizumab, an anti-­CD19 antibody,
has been shown to effectively ameliorate multiple NMOSD endpoints
(time to relapse, disability scores, new MRI lesions) in adults and is
now in pediatric clinical trials. Importantly, medications used for the
treatment of MS are ineffective and can even exacerbate relapses, again
highlighting the criticality of accurate diagnosis.

PROGNOSIS

The relapsing and aggressive nature of AQP4-­positive NMOSD in pediatric patients very often results in poor recovery and a progressive accrual
of disability. MOG-­Ab–positive NMOSD is more likely to be monophasic. In relapsing phenotypes (either AQP4-­Ab or MOG-­Ab), the relapse

3741

Table 640.12  Red Flags: Findings Atypical for NMOSD
and TM*
RED FLAGS (CLINICAL AND LABORATORY)
1.	Clinical features and laboratory findings
Progressive overall clinical course (neurologic deterioration
unrelated to attacks; consider MS)
Atypical time to attack nadir: less than 4 hr (consider cord
ischemia/infarction); continual worsening for more than 4 wk from
attack onset (consider sarcoidosis or neoplasm)
Partial TM, especially when not associated with LETM MRI lesion
(consider MS)
Presence of CSF OCBs (OCBs occur in <20% of NMO cases vs
>80% of MS cases)
2.	Comorbidities associated with neurologic syndromes that mimic
NMOSD
Sarcoidosis, established or suggestive clinical, radiologic, or
laboratory findings thereof (e.g., mediastinal adenopathy, fever
and night sweats, elevated serum angiotensin-­converting enzyme
or interleukin-­2 receptor levels)
Cancer, established or with suggestive clinical, radiologic, or
laboratory findings thereof; consider lymphoma or paraneoplastic
disease (e.g., collapsin response mediator protein-­5–associated
optic neuropathy and myelopathy or anti-­Ma–associated
diencephalic syndrome)
Chronic infection, established or with suggestive clinical,
radiologic, or laboratory findings thereof (e.g., HIV, syphilis)
RED FLAGS AND MIMICS (CONVENTIONAL NEUROIMAGING)
1.	Brain
a.	Imaging features (T2-­weighted MRI) suggestive of MS (MS
typical)
Lesions with orientation perpendicular to a lateral ventricular
surface (Dawson fingers)
Lesions adjacent to lateral ventricle in the inferior temporal lobe
Juxtacortical lesions involving subcortical U-­fibers
Cortical lesions
b.	Imaging characteristics suggestive of diseases other than MS
and NMOSD
Lesions with persistent (>3 mo) gadolinium enhancement
2.	Spinal cord
a.	Spinal nerve root inflammation (e.g., Guillain-­Barré syndrome)
b.	Tumor (e.g., neuroblastoma, Wilms tumor, Ewing sarcoma)
c.	Destructive lesions (e.g., tuberculosis, lymphoma, Langerhans
cell histiocytosis)
d.	Vascular disorders (e.g., arteriovenous infarct, arteriovenous
malformation, cavernomas, Cobb syndrome, spinal cord
infarction)
e.	Vasculitis (e.g., SLE, Behçet disease)
f.	Characteristics more suggestive of MS than TM/NMOSD:
Lesions in <3 complete vertebral segments on sagittal T2-­
weighted sequences
Lesions located predominantly (>70%) in the peripheral cord
on axial T2-­weighted sequences
Diffuse, indistinct signal change on T2-­weighted sequences (as
sometimes seen with long-­standing or progressive MS)
*These are some common or key findings that should prompt a thorough investigation
for competing differential diagnoses before making a diagnosis of NMOSD or
isolated TM.
LETM, Longitudinally extensive transverse myelitis lesions; TM, transverse myelitis;
MS, multiple sclerosis; NMO, neuromyelitis optica; NMOSD, neuromyelitis optica
spectrum disorders.
Modified from Wingerchuk DM, Banwell B, Bennett JL, et al. International consensus
diagnostic criteria for neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders. Neurology.
2015;85:177–189, Table 2, p. 180 and 182; with data from Thomas T, Branson HM.
Childhood transverse myelitis and its mimics. Neuroimaging Clin North Am.
2013;23:267–278, Box 1.

rate is higher in those with AQP4-­Ab, with emerging consensus for a
better recovery and long-­term prognosis for MOG-­Ab–associated disorders. Like adults with NMOSD, pediatric patients are often (>50%)
left with fixed neurologic deficits affecting VA, visual fields, color vision,
motor and sensory function, balance, and bowel/bladder function, and
the best outcomes are achieved with prompt treatment by a multidisciplinary team experienced in pediatric neuroinflammatory care.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3742 Part XXV u The Nervous System

Chapter 641

Pediatric Stroke
Nomazulu Dlamini and Gabrielle A. deVeber
Stroke is an important cause of acquired brain injury in newborns, children, and adolescents. The ischemic varieties of arterial ischemic stroke
(AIS) and cerebral sinovenous thrombosis (CSVT) are, together, more
common than brain malignancy (incidence ∼5 in 100,000 children per
year). Perinatal ischemic stroke is especially common (1 in 2,500-­4,000
live births) and is the leading cause of hemiparetic cerebral palsy. Beyond
ischemic stroke, a similar number of children have hemorrhagic stroke
(HS) and other forms of cerebrovascular disease. Acute stroke is a neurologic emergency; unfortunately, delays in recognition are common, and
delayed treatment worsens outcomes. In comparison with stroke in adults,
there is a more diverse group of disorders producing stroke in neonates
and children.

641.1 Arterial Ischemic Stroke
Nomazulu Dlamini and Gabrielle A. deVeber
Arterial blood reaches the brain via the anterior (internal carotid) and
posterior (vertebrobasilar) circulations, converging at the circle of

Willis. Strokes most often involve the middle cerebral artery territory
but can occur in any cerebral artery of any size. AIS is the focal brain
infarction that results from occlusion of these arteries.
The diagnosis of stroke in children is frequently delayed. This is a
consequence of subtle and nonspecific clinical presentations, poor
awareness by primary care physicians, a complicated differential
diagnosis for hemiparesis (see Chapter 641.5), and a high frequency
(>50%) of negative initial brain CT scans in true AIS. The acute onset
of a focal neurologic deficit in a child is stroke until proven otherwise.
The most common focal presentation is hemiparesis, but acute visual,
speech, sensory, or balance deficits also occur. Importantly, new-­onset
seizures, especially focal motor seizures, frequently herald stroke,
especially in infants and younger children. Children with these presentations require urgent neuroimaging and consultation with a child neurologist because emergency interventions may be indicated. AIS is a
clinical and radiographic diagnosis. Although CT imaging can demonstrate mature AIS and exclude hemorrhage, cerebral MRI is required to
identify early and small infarcts and disorders of the cerebral arteries.
Diffusion-­weighted MRI demonstrates AIS from minutes to 7 days
after the onset; MR angiography can confirm vascular occlusion and
suggest possible arteriopathy (Fig. 641.1). Diffusion-­weighted MRI can
also demonstrate Wallerian degeneration in the descending corticospinal tract, which correlates with chronic hemiparesis.
Many possible risk factors for childhood AIS are recognized (Tables
641.1-­641.3), although their specific pathophysiologic mechanisms
remain poorly understood. Half of children with AIS are healthy
before stroke onset. Three main categories of etiology should be considered: arteriopathy, cardiac disease, and hematologic disease (see
Table 641.1). Hence, in addition to a careful history taking and physician examination, a full investigation (including vascular imaging,

A

B

C

D

E

F

Fig. 641.1 Arterial ischemic stroke. A healthy 3-­yr-­old male had sudden onset of left-­sided weakness. Examination also demonstrated left-­sided

hemisensory loss and neglect. A-­C, Diffusion-­weighted MRI shows focal increased signal in the right temporal-­parietal region in the territory of the
middle cerebral artery (MCA). D, Apparent diffusion coefficient map confirms restricted diffusion consistent with infarction (ischemic stroke). E, MR
angiogram shows decreased flow in the corresponding branch of the MCA. F, Follow-­up MRI at 3 mo shows atrophy and gliosis in the same region.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 641 u Pediatric Stroke

3743

Table 641.1  Risk Factors and Causes of Stroke in Children
ARTERIOPATHIES
Focal or transient cerebral arteriopathy
Craniocervical arterial dissection
Fibromuscular dysplasia
Moyamoya disease or syndrome
Sickle cell arteriopathy
Primary CNS angiitis
HANAC syndrome
Genetic variants (see text and Table 641.2)
CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE
Congenital
Aortic stenosis
Mitral stenosis
Ventricular septal defects
Patent ductus arteriosus
Patent foramen ovale
PHACE syndrome
Cyanotic congenital heart disease
Acquired
Endocarditis
Kawasaki disease
Cardiomyopathy
Atrial myxoma
Arrhythmia
Rheumatic heart disease
Prosthetic heart valve
Catheterization/surgery
ECMO
HEMATOLOGIC ABNORMALITIES
Hemoglobinopathies
Polycythemia
Leukemia/lymphoma
Thrombocytopenia including TTP
Disorders of coagulation
• Protein C deficiency
• Protein S deficiency
• Antithrombin III deficiency
• Factor V (Leiden) resistance to activated protein C
• Lupus anticoagulant
• Oral hormonal contraception
• Pregnancy and the postpartum state
• Disseminated intravascular coagulation
• Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
• Inflammatory bowel disease
• Protein-­losing enteropathy
• Nephrotic syndrome
• L-­Asparaginase
• Prothrombin G20210A variant
• MTHFR deficiency
• Lipoprotein(a) elevation
• Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome
• PNH

SYSTEMIC DISORDERS
Meningitis
• Viral
• Bacterial
• Tuberculous
Systemic infection
• Viremia
• Bacteremia
• Local head and neck infections, including Lemierre syndrome
• Postinfectious (including varicella and other viruses)
Drug-­induced inflammation and vasoconstriction
• Amphetamine
• Cocaine
• Ergot alkaloids
Autoimmune disease
• Systemic lupus erythematosus
• Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
• Takayasu arteritis
• Mixed connective tissue disease
• Polyarteritis nodosa
• Primary CNS vasculitis
Trisomy 21
METABOLIC DISEASES
Hyperhomocysteinemia/homocystinuria/elevated homocysteine
levels
Fabry disease
Pseudoxanthoma elasticum
Sulfite oxidase deficiency (see Table 641.2)
MITOCHONDRIAL DISORDERS
MELAS
Leigh syndrome
INTRACEREBRAL VASCULAR PROCESSES
Ruptured aneurysm
Arteriovenous malformation
Migraine headache
Post–subarachnoid hemorrhage vasospasm
Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia
Sturge-­Weber syndrome
Carotid or vertebral artery dissection
Neurofibromatosis type 1
CADASIL
CARASIL
TRAUMA AND OTHER EXTERNAL CAUSES
Nonaccidental trauma
Head and neck trauma
Oral trauma
Placental embolism
Neck hyperextension (carotid dissection)
Lollipop stroke (pharyngeal trauma)

CADASIL, Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy; CARASIL, cerebral autosomal recessive arteriopathy with subcortical
infarcts and leukoencephalopathy; CNS, central nervous system; ECMO, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation; HANAC, hereditary angiopathy with nephropathy aneurysms,
muscle cramps; MELAS, mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis, strokelike episodes; MTHFR, methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase; PHACE, posterior fossa brain
malformations, hemangiomas of the face, neck, and scalp, arterial anomalies, coarctation of the aorta and cardiac anomalies, and eye defects; PNH, paroxysmal nocturnal
hemoglobinuria; TTP, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura.
Modified from Farias-­Moeller R. Stroke. In: Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, et al., eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based Diagnosis, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023: Table 37.15,
p. 652.

echocardiography, and blood tests for inflammatory, infectious, and
prothrombotic disorders) are important because these tests often
reveal multiple predispositions and triggering risk factors.
Arteriopathy, a disorder of the cerebral arteries, is a leading cause
of childhood AIS, present in more than 50% of children. One common arteriopathy that affects healthy school-­age children features
unilateral irregular stenosis of the proximal middle cerebral artery

and neighboring arteries with associated basal ganglia infarction.
Transient cerebral arteriopathy is monophasic, nearly always self-­
limited, and may be the result of focal inflammation. This entity has
been published under multiple names—transient cerebral arteriopathy, post–varicella angiopathy (Fig. 641.2), and nonprogressive childhood primary angiitis of the central nervous system (CNS). The term
focal cerebral arteriopathy (FCA) is now used, reflecting uncertainty

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3744 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 641.2  Genetic Associations with Thrombotic, Hemorrhagic, or Vascular Stroke
LIPID AND OTHER DISORDERS WITH ATHEROSCLEROSIS
Hereditary dyslipoproteinemias
Familial hypercholesterolemia
Familial hypertriglyceridemia
Hyperlipoproteinemia (types III and IV)
Familial hypoalphalipoproteinemia
Tangier disease
Progeria (de Lange, Seckel, Bloom, Cockayne syndromes)
ARTERIOPATHY, ANGIOPATHY, VASCULITIS
Ehlers-­Danlos (type IV) syndrome
Pseudoxanthoma elasticum
Menkes syndrome
Marfan syndrome
Rendu-­Osler-­Weber syndrome (hereditary hemorrhagic
telangiectasia)
Sturge-­Weber syndrome
Neurofibromatosis 1
Tuberous sclerosis complex
Polycystic kidney disease (autosomal dominant type 1, 2)
Fibromuscular dysplasia von Hippel-­Lindau syndrome
Bannayan-­Zonana syndrome
Moyamoya disease (GUCY1A3, RNF213, unknown)
Fabry disease
CARASIL (HTRA1)
CADASIL (NOTCH3)
RVCL (TREX-­1)
DADA2 (CECR1)
COL4A1/A2 angiopathies, including:
• Hereditary angiopathy nephropathy and cramps (HANAC)
• Autosomal dominant porencephaly with infantile hemiplegia
(POREN1)
FOXC1/PITX2: Digenetic inheritance
CARASAL (CTSA)
HCHWA – Dutch type
HCHWA – Icelandic type
FAP
ADA2 deficiency
ACTA2 gene variant
HEMATOLOGIC DISORDERS
Antithrombin deficiency
Protein C and S deficiency
Thrombomodulin deficiency
Activated protein C resistance
Factor V Leiden variant
Prothrombin G20210A variant
Sickle cell disease

Factor V, VII, VIII, IX, X, XI, XII, XIII deficiency
Hemoglobinopathies (hemoglobin C or S disorders)
Prekallikrein deficiency
C2 deficiency
β-­thalassemia
Disorders of fibrinogen
• Afibrinogenemia
• Hypofibrinogenemia
• Dysfibrinogenemia
Elevated thrombin-­activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor
Elevated factor VIII
Elevated factor IX
Elevated factor XI
Disorders of the fibrinolytic system
• Hypoplasminogenemia
• Tissue plasminogen activator defects
MTHFR gene variant
Heparin cofactor II deficiency
Hereditary platelet defects
CARDIAC DISORDERS
Familial atrial myxomas
Rhabdomyomas (tuberous sclerosis)
Mitral valve prolapse
Cardiac papillary fibroelastoma
Hereditary cardiac conduction disorders
Hereditary cardiomyopathies
INBORN ERRORS OF METABOLISM
Mitochondrial abnormalities
• MELAS
• Leigh disease
• MERRF
Organic acidemia
• Methylmalonic acidemia
• Propionic acidemia
• Isovaleric acidemia
Homocystinuria
Glutaric aciduria type II
Sulfite oxidase deficiency
11β-­hydroxylase deficiency, 11β-­ketoreductase deficiency, 17α-­
hydroxylase deficiency
3-­Methylcrotonyl-­CoA carboxylase 3-­hydroxy-­3-­methylglutaryl-­CoA
lyase deficiency
OTHER DISORDERS
CCM1 (KRIT1)
CCM2 (CCM2)
CCM3 (PDCD10)

CADASIL, Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy; CARASAL, cathepsin A–related arteriopathy with strokes and
leukoencephalopathy; CARASIL, cerebral autosomal recessive arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy; CCM, cerebral cavernous malformation; DADA2,
deficiency of adenosine deaminase 2; FAP, familial amyloid polyneuropathy; HCHWA, hereditary cerebral hemorrhage with amyloidosis; MELAS, mitochondrial encephalopathy,
lactic acidosis, and strokelike episodes; MERRF, mitochondrial encephalopathy with ragged red fibers; RVCL, retinal vasculopathy with deficiency of adenosine deaminase 2.
Modified from Farias-­Moeller R. Stroke. In: Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, et al., eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based Diagnosis, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023: Table 37.17,
p. 655.

regarding AIS pathogenesis at the time of presentation because it may
be indistinguishable from intracranial dissection or early moyamoya
disease. FCA can be subclassified as FCA inflammation type, FCA dissection type, and undetermined FCA.
Arterial dissection can be spontaneous or posttraumatic and
involves extracranial (carotid, vertebral) arteries more frequently than
intracranial arteries. Moyamoya demonstrates progressive occlusion
of the distal internal carotid arteries. It may be idiopathic (moyamoya
disease) or associated with other conditions (moyamoya syndrome)
such as sickle cell anemia, neurofibromatosis type 1, trisomy 21, William syndrome, Alagille syndrome, chromosomal microdeletions/
microduplications, and disorders after irradiation (Fig. 641.3). Diffuse,
bilateral, progressive vasculitis is rare and can represent progressive

childhood primary angiitis of the CNS or occur in association with
systemic vasculitides (Table 641.4; see also Chapter 642). Cranial infections (e.g., bacterial or tuberculous meningitis) also produce infectious arteritis and thrombophlebitis of surface vessels. Congenital/
genetic disorders of craniocervical arteries include PHACES (posterior fossa abnormalities, hemangioma, and arterial, cardiac, eye, and
sternal abnormalities) syndrome, fibromuscular dysplasia, or CADASIL (cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy, subcortical infarcts,
and leukoencephalopathy). ACTA2, COL4A1, and ADA2 gene variants
may be associated with AIS, and new genetic arteriopathic conditions
are steadily being added to this list. Hence, targeted genetic testing and
whole exome sequencing are recommended (see Table 641.2). Vasospasm, as occurs in migraine, subarachnoid hemorrhage, or reversible

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 641 u Pediatric Stroke

3745

Table 641.3  Risk Factors for Perinatal Arterial Ischemic
Stroke (AIS)
TYPE OF RISK FACTOR

RISK FACTORS

TERM INFANTS WITH NEONATAL AIS
Maternal
Thrombophilia
Infertility
Prolonged rupture of membranes
Preeclampsia or gestational hypertension
Smoking
Intrauterine growth restriction
Infection
Maternal fever during delivery
Smoking
Fetal

Placental

Thrombophilia (MTHFR variant, FVL,
prothrombin gene variant, protein C/S
deficiency)
Congenital heart disease
Arteriopathy
Twin-­twin transfusion syndrome
Hypoglycemia
Perinatal asphyxia
Infection (sepsis/meningitis)
Need for resuscitation
Apgar score of <7 at 5 min
Chorioamnionitis
Placental infarcts
Distal villous immaturity
Placenta weighing <10th percentile

PRETERM INFANTS WITH NEONATAL AIS
Maternal
Infection
Gestational bleeding
Fetal

Maternal smoking
Maternal drug use
Twin-­twin transfusion syndrome
Twin demise
Abnormal fetal heart rate
Hypoglycemia
Thrombophilia (MTHFR variant, FVL)

PRESUMED PERINATAL AIS
Maternal
Preeclampsia
Infection
Fetal

Gestational bleeding
Gestational diabetes
Thrombophilia
Congenital heart disease

MTHFR, Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase deficiency; FVL, factor V Leiden
deficiency.
Modified from Lehman LL, Rivkin MJ. Perinatal arterial ischemic stroke: presentation,
risk factors, evaluation, and outcome. Pediatr Neurol. 2014;51:760–768.

cerebral vasoconstriction syndrome (sometimes called Call-­Fleming
syndrome), can cause AIS. Metabolic strokes are seen in organic acidemia, methylmalonic acidemia, propionic acidemia, isovaleric acidemia, glutaric aciduria type II, mitochondrial encephalomyopathies,
MELAS (mitochondrial encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, and strokelike episodes), MERRF (mitochondrial encephalopathy with ragged
red fibers), MERRF/MELAS overlap syndrome, and Kearns-­
Sayre
syndrome.
Cardioembolic stroke makes up approximately 25% of childhood
AIS cases, with the maximal embolic risk concurrent with interventional catheterization, surgical repair, or ventricular assist device use.
AIS complicates approximately 0.5% of pediatric cardiac surgeries,
and reoperation increases the risk. Although complex congenital
heart diseases are most frequently associated with AIS, acquired
conditions, including arrhythmia, cardiomyopathy, and infective
endocarditis, should also be considered. A patent foramen ovale

A

B

Fig. 641.2 A, Axial diffusion-­weighted magnetic resonance imaging

demonstrating hyperintense signal in the left middle cerebral artery
distribution consistent with acute infarct. B, Magnetic resonance angiography axial maximum intensity projection images demonstrating
narrowing of the left middle cerebral artery M1 segment (arrow). (From
Vora SB, Amlie-­Lefond C, Perez FA, et al. Varicella-­associated stroke. J
Pediatr. 2018;199:281, p. 281.)

provides a possible conduit for paradoxical venous thromboembolism to the brain. All children with suspected AIS require a thorough
cardiovascular examination, an electrocardiogram, and an echocardiogram. Prothrombotic coagulation disorders and infection identified at the time of the index cardiogenic stroke increase the stroke
recurrence risk.
Hematologic disorders associated with AIS include sickle cell anemia, in which the stroke risk is increased 400-­fold, although effective
screening (using transcranial Doppler) and transfusion therapy have
reduced the incidence. Iron-­deficiency anemia also increases the risk
and is easily treatable. Coagulation disorders are associated with childhood AIS. They include hereditary (e.g., factor V Leiden) and acquired
(e.g., antiphospholipid antibodies, lipoprotein-­a elevation) prothrombotic states and prothrombotic medications, including oral contraceptives and asparaginase chemotherapy. Additional AIS risk factors
include migraine, acute childhood illnesses, chronic systemic illnesses,
illicit drugs and toxins, and rare inborn errors of metabolism.
Treatment of childhood AIS is multifaceted, and multiple consensus-­
based guidelines are available. The safety and efficacy of thrombolysis and/
or thrombectomy in children with AIS has only been reported anecdotally. Nonetheless, some pediatric stroke centers offer thrombolysis with or
without thrombectomy for pediatric patients with AIS. Most candidates are
preteen or adolescent patients with AIS; younger children may also be candidates for thrombolysis but often have mimics of stroke and must be evaluated
carefully for other diagnoses. In adults, treatment with both thrombolysis
(~4.5 hours) and endovascular thrombectomy (~16-24 hours) results in
improved functional outcome. Pending additional data, for younger children (e.g., <5 years age who often have comorbidities, e,g., congential heart
disease), thrombectomy treatment should probably be avoided.
Early initiation of antithrombotic strategies is paramount to prevent
early reinfarction. Depending on the suspected cause, this includes
anticoagulation with heparin or antiplatelet strategies, usually aspirin.
Hyperacute neuroprotective strategies are essential to initiate within
minutes in suspected stroke because they prevent progressive ischemic
brain injury. These include control of blood glucose (avoid hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia) and temperature (avoid hyperthermia,
maintain normal temperature) and maintenance of adequate cerebral
perfusion (avoid hypotension and hypertension) and oxygenation.
Urgent treatment of seizures is an important neuroprotective strategy, including possible monitoring with continuous electroencephalography (EEG). Early malignant infarct edema is life-­threatening,
more common in children, and predictable, and emergency surgical
decompression can be lifesaving. Disease-­specific treatments include
transfusion therapy in sickle cell disease, immunosuppression in
vasculitis, and revascularization surgery in moyamoya. Long-­term

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3746 Part XXV u The Nervous System

Fig. 641.3 Sudden onset of right

A

B

Table 641.4  Classification of Cerebral Vasculitis
INFECTIOUS VASCULITIS
BACTERIAL, FUNGAL, PARASITIC
Spirochetal (syphilis, Lyme disease, leptospirosis)
Viral, rickettsial, mycobacterial, free-­living amebae, cysticercosis,
other helminths
NECROTIZING VASCULITIDES
CLASSIC POLYARTERITIS NODOSA
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis
Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis
Necrotizing systemic vasculitis overlap syndrome
Lymphomatoid granulomatosis
VASCULITIS ASSOCIATED WITH COLLAGEN VASCULAR DISEASE
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Rheumatoid arthritis
Scleroderma
Sjögren syndrome
VASCULITIS ASSOCIATED WITH OTHER SYSTEMIC DISEASES
Behçet disease
Ulcerative colitis
Sarcoidosis
Relapsing polychondritis
Kohlmeier-­Degos disease
Takayasu arteritis
HYPERSENSITIVITY VASCULITIDES
IgA vasculitis
Drug-­induced vasculitides
CHEMICAL VASCULITIDES
MISCELLANEOUS VASCULITIDES
VASCULITIS ASSOCIATED WITH NEOPLASIA
Vasculitis associated with radiation
Cogan syndrome
Dermatomyositis–polymyositis
X-­linked lymphoproliferative syndrome
Kawasaki disease
Primary central nervous system vasculitis
From Biller J, Mathews KD, Love BB. Stroke in Children and Young Adults. Boston:
Butterworth-Heinemann; 1994.

treatment goals include secondary stroke prevention, for example
with antiplatelet therapy in arteriopathy and anticoagulation in cardiogenic causes. Multimodal, family-­centered rehabilitation programs
are required for most survivors, targeting motor deficits, language

hemiparesis in a 6-­yr-­old male. A, Cerebral angiogram shows the left internal
carotid artery (arrow) leading to a highly
arborized, telangiectatic network of
vessels (arrowheads) characteristic for
moyamoya disease. The typical middle
cerebral artery vascular tree is absent. B,
Cranial coronal MRI scan shows region of
low signal in the middle cerebral artery
territory and denotes infarction (curved
arrows). Flow voids in the basal ganglia
(straight arrows) are radiographic manifestations of the basilar collateral circulation typical of this vascular anomaly.
(From Farias-­Moeller R. Stroke. In Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, Basel D,
eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­
Based
Diagnosis, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2023, Fig. 37.17, p. 653.)

and intellectual impairments, behavioral and social disabilities, and
epilepsy. Long-­term attention to arterial health lifestyle factors is also
important. Outcomes after childhood AIS include recurrent stroke in
10–50%, depending on the cause and preventive treatment, death in
2–6%; neurologic deficits in 60–70% (usually mild); and seizure disorders long-­term in 30%.
Adolescents and young adults with idiopathic (cryptogenic) AIS and
a patent foramen ovale (PFO) may benefit from percutaneous PFO closure to prevent a recurrent stroke.

PERINATAL ARTERIAL ISCHEMIC STROKE

Perinatal stroke is common. It differs from childhood stroke, and it
has two distinct clinical presentations. Acute symptomatic neonatal
AIS presents with focal seizures within 24-­28 hours of birth (Fig.
641.4 and see Table 641.3). Cranial ultrasound frequently misses
the diagnosis of AIS. MRI diffusion abnormalities in an arterial territory confirm recent infarction. Alternatively, some affected neonates are asymptomatic at birth and present in later infancy with
signs of early hand preference and congenital hemiparesis. Hand
dominance within the first year of life is abnormal and may be the
result of perinatal stroke. Imaging reveals focal encephalomalacia in
an arterial territory, typically porencephaly in the middle cerebral
artery territory.
In acute neonatal AIS, seizure control is important, but antithrombotic agents are rarely required because recurrent stroke is
rare; the exceptions are neonates with congenital heart disease and
cardiac embolism, prothrombotic disorders, and, perhaps, those
with congenital arterial anomalies (stenosis, hypoplasia). The
pathophysiology is complex and poorly understood. Most are idiopathic, although established causes include congenital heart disease,
thrombotic placentopathy, and meningitis. The role of prothrombotic conditions in noncardiac neonatal AIS is controversial, but
they likely play an additive role alongside other risk factors. Many
other maternal, prenatal, perinatal, obstetric, and neonatal factors
have been investigated with several strong associations found (e.g.,
chorioamnionitis, infertility, primiparity, monozygotic twins). Outcomes include normal or mild deficit in ∼50% of children; however,
∼25% of children have significant long-­term disabilities. Perinatal
stroke accounts for most cases of hemiparetic cerebral palsy (congenital hemiplegia, see Chapter 638.1). Additional morbidity, seen
in ∼25%, includes disorders of language, learning, cognition, and
behavior and longer-­term epilepsy. Stroke recurrence rates in subsequent pregnancies are extremely low in the absence of a familial
prothrombotic disorder.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 641 u Pediatric Stroke

3747

Acute symptomatic perinatal stroke

A

B

C

Neonatal arterial ischemic
stroke

Neonatal cerebral sinovenous
thrombosis

Neonatal hemorrhagic stroke

D

E

F

Arterial presumed perinatal
ischemic stroke

Periventricular venous infarction

Presumed perinatal hemorrhagic
stroke

Presumed perinatal stroke

Fig. 641.4 Perinatal stroke diseases by MRI. A, Neonatal arterial ischemic stroke features acute restriction on axial diffusion-­weighted MRI in an

arterial territory; diaschisis of the splenium of the corpus callosum is also evident. B, Neonatal cerebral sinovenous thrombosis is evident as a filling
defect on sagittal MR venogram (shown), in this case, in the superior sagittal sinus (arrows). C, Neonatal hemorrhagic stroke detectable on gradient
echo or susceptibility-­weighted MRI (arrow). D, Arterial presumed perinatal ischemic stroke in a child with hemiparesis is diagnosed by focal encephalomalacia on CT or MRI (axial T1-­weighted MRI shown) in an arterial territory (arrow). E, Periventricular venous infarction presents with congenital
hemiparesis with a focal lesion affecting the periventricular white matter with sparing of the cortex and basal ganglia, shown on coronal T1-­weighted
MRI (porencephaly indicated with arrows). F, Presumed perinatal hemorrhagic stroke with a focal area of remote parenchymal injury showing hemorrhage (gradient echo, arrow). (From Dunbar M, Kirton A. Perinatal stroke: mechanisms, management, and outcomes of early cerebrovascular brain
injury. Lancet. 2018;2:666–676, Fig. 2, p. 668.)

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

641.2 Cerebral Sinovenous Thrombosis
Nomazulu Dlamini and Gabrielle A. deVeber
Cerebral venous drainage occurs via the cerebral sinovenous system. The
superficial system (i.e., cortical veins, superior sagittal sinus) and deep system (i.e., internal cerebral veins, straight sinus) converge at the torcula to
exit the cranial vault via the paired transverse and sigmoid sinuses and jugular veins. In cerebral sinovenous thrombosis (CSVT), thrombotic occlusion of these venous structures can create regional or diffuse increased
intracranial pressure, cerebral edema, and, in 50% of cases, venous infarction or hemorrhage (venous stroke). CSVT is more common in children
than in adults, and risk is greatest in the neonatal period (Table 641.5).
Clinical presentations are typically gradual, variable, and nonspecific compared with AIS. Neonates often present with encephalopathy and seizures. Children may present with symptoms mimicking

idiopathic intracranial hypertension, including progressive headache,
papilledema, diplopia secondary to sixth cranial nerve palsy, or acute
focal deficits. Seizures, lethargy, and confusion are common. Diagnosis
requires a high clinical suspicion and specifically requested imaging of
the cerebral venous system. Nonenhanced CT is insensitive in detecting CSVT, and so either contrast CT venography or MR venography is
necessary to demonstrate filling defects in the cerebral venous system
(Fig. 641.5). MRI offers superior parenchymal imaging compared with
CT.
Table 641.5 lists the risk factors for CSVT. Prothrombotic states
associated with childhood CSVT include inherited conditions (e.g.,
prothrombin gene mutation of 20210A) and acquired conditions (e.g.,
antiphospholipid antibodies), prothrombotic medications (e.g., asparaginase, oral contraceptives), and common childhood illnesses (e.g.,
otitis media, iron-­deficiency anemia, and dehydration). Systemic diseases associated with increased risk of CSVT include leukemia, inflammatory bowel disease, and nephrotic syndrome.
Head and neck disorders can directly involve cerebral veins and
sinuses thereby causing CSVT. Common infections, including

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3748 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 641.5  Causes of Cerebral Venous Thrombosis
IDIOPATHIC
PROTHROMBOTIC STATE
Protein C or S deficiency
Antithrombin deficiency
Factor V Leiden variant
Activated protein C resistance
Prothrombin G20210A variant
Variants in thrombomodulin
Platelet glycoprotein IIIa (β3) variant
Heparin cofactor II deficiency
Variants in plasminogen gene
MTHFR C677 variant
Dysfibrinogenemia
Elevated plasminogen activator inhibitor
Tissue plasminogen activator deficiency
Increased factors VIII, IX, X; von Willebrand factor
Variants in tissue factor pathway inhibitor
Sickle cell disease and trait
Reactive thrombocytosis and essential thrombocythemia
Pregnancy and puerperium
POSTOPERATIVE STATE
Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome
Hyperhomocysteinemia
Homocystinuria
Cancer
Inflammatory bowel diseases
Dehydration
Congestive heart failure
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
Marasmus
Iron-­deficiency anemia
Nephrotic syndrome
Thrombocytopenia
Essential thrombocythemia
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
Thrombotic microangiopathies
Polycythemia vera and secondary polycythemia
Hyperlipidemia
Familial histidine-­rich glycoprotein deficiency

INFECTIONS
Herpes zoster virus
Myeloidosis
Mucormycosis
Aspergillosis
Pneumococcal meningitis
Syphilis
HIV
Otitis media
Mastoiditis
Sinusitis
Peritonsillar abscess
Endotoxemia
Trichinosis
Sepsis
VASCULITIDES
Behçet disease
Sarcoidosis
Polyangiitis with granulomatosis
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Polyarteritis nodosa
TRAUMA
Head trauma
Neurosurgical procedures
Strangulation
Intravenous catheters
Cardiac pacemakers
OTHERS
Osteopetrosis
Malignant atrophic papulosis (Kohlmeier-­Degos disease)
Chronic lung disease
Diabetes mellitus
Budd-­Chiari syndrome
Arteriovenous malformation
Sturge-­Weber syndrome
Cerebral arterial occlusions
Neoplasm (meningioma, metastasis, glomus tumors)

DRUGS
Asparaginase
Estrogen and oral contraceptives
Androgen
ε-­Aminocaproic acid
Cisplatin and etoposide
Medroxyprogesterone
Heparin (heparin-­induced thrombocytopenia)
Immunoglobulin G (intravenous immunoglobulin)
From Biller J. Stroke in Children and Young Adults. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2009: Table 12-­3, p. 237.

meningitis, otitis media, and mastoiditis, can cause septic thrombophlebitis of venous channels. CSVT can complicate head trauma especially in veins/venous sinuses adjacent to skull fractures. Neurosurgical
procedures in proximity to cerebral venous structures may also lead to
injury and CSVT. Finally, obstruction of the jugular veins and proximal
stasis may result in CSVT. In neonates, because the cranial sutures are
unfused, mechanical distortion of the underlying venous sinuses may
occur and predispose to CSVT either during labor and delivery or with
supine lying because of occipital bone compression of the posterior
sagittal sinus.
Anticoagulation therapy plays an important role in childhood CSVT
treatment. Substantial indirect evidence has led to a consensus recommendation for anticoagulation with unfractionated or low molecular weight heparins in most children. The presence of hemorrhagic
venous infarcts is not an absolute contraindication. Treatment is usually planned for 6 months, although if reimaging at 3 months confirms
recanalization, treatment is usually discontinued. However, anticoagulation of neonates is more controversial, and guidelines differ. Evidence

suggests that 30% of untreated neonates and children will extend their
thrombosis in the first week after diagnosis, and additional venous
infarction can result. Therefore if anticoagulation is withheld, early
(e.g., 5-­7 days) repeat venous imaging is paramount. Protocols supporting initial anticoagulation recommend shorter treatment durations (i.e., 6 weeks to 3 months) in neonates. Children with persistent
risk factors may require prophylactic long-­term anticoagulation. At
initial diagnosis, supportive interventions include management of
infection, detection and treatment of seizures, and neuroprotective
measures (e.g., normothermia, normotension, normovolemia, normoglycemia). Compressive optic neuropathy secondary to prolonged
increased intracranial pressure after CSVT is an important complication that can lead to permanent visual loss. Regular funduscopic
examination by an ophthalmologist and treatment directed at reducing
intracranial pressure (e.g., acetazolamide, serial lumbar puncture) may
be required. Most neurologic morbidity is suffered by those incurring
venous infarction. Consistent with other forms of childhood stroke, a
comprehensive neurorehabilitation program is required.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 641 u Pediatric Stroke

3749

restriction may be helpful in distinguishing ischemic thromboembolic
abnormalities from inflammatory TM.

Clinical Manifestations

Similar to inflammatory TM, patients present with acute onset of
motor weakness accompanied by sensory abnormalities. The weakness progresses over minutes to hours. Pain or discomfort localized
to the back or neck, depending on lesion localization, is frequent, with
rapid progression of motor weakness and early areflexia reflecting spinal shock. Spasticity, hyperreflexia, and clonus occur in the ensuing
weeks. A sensory level and motor weakness are present distal to the
lesion, with urinary symptoms, including urinary retention, a frequent
occurrence.

A

B

Fig. 641.5 Cerebral sinovenous thrombosis. A 9-­yr-­old female pre-

sented with fever and progressive right-­
sided headache. She complained of double vision and had papilledema on examination. Axial (A)
and coronal (B) CT venography demonstrates a large thrombus in the
right transverse sinus that fails to opacify with contrast (solid arrows).
Note normal filling in superior sagittal sinus and smaller left transverse
sinuses (open arrows, right) and opacification of the mastoid air cells
(hatched arrow, left). The cause was otitis media/mastoiditis with septic
thrombophlebitis of transverse sinus.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

641.3 Spinal Cord Lesions Associated with
Vascular Processes
Nomazulu Dlamini and Gabrielle A. deVeber
Most cases of transverse myelitis (TM) in childhood are postinfectious or, if recurrent, are associated with underlying demyelinating
processes, such as multiple sclerosis (see Chapter 640.4) or neuromyelitis optica (see Chapter 640.2). However, in a small proportion of
children presenting with acute spinal cord symptoms, infarction and
necrosis may occur. This pathology may be associated with disease of
the vessels, such as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)–associated
vasculitis (see Chapter 199) or other vascular events such as embolism
(including nucleus propulsus embolism–fibrocartilaginous embolism).
Rarely, arteriovenous malformations of the spinal cord may exist and
may cause myelopathy and infarction with hemorrhage in the spinal
cord. An acute onset and a peak of symptoms over minutes to hours
suggest a vascular process.

VASCULITIC PROCESSES: SYSTEMIC LUPUS
ERYTHEMATOSUS

Most cases of SLE-­associated myelitis are longitudinally extensive,
and although reports in pediatric populations are rare, the disorder can occur. In 23–60% of cases, myelitis may be the first clinical
manifestation of lupus and in many cases occurs at times of low
systemic SLE disease activity. Poor recovery is frequent in these
cases, with only 14% of patients experiencing complete recovery. In
children, other vasculitic etiologies of cord disease, such as Bechet
disease, exist.

SPINAL CORD EMBOLISM

Other rare etiologies of an acute increased T2 signal on a spinal cord
MRI presenting clinically as TM include cord infarction caused by
thromboembolism, either the result of fibrocartilaginous embolism or
originating from a lower segment vertebral artery dissection or aortic
dissection at the artery of Adamkiewicz. Ischemic myelopathy caused
by a vertebral artery dissection occurs in the cervical spine; however,
fibrocartilaginous embolism may occur anywhere in the spinal cord. A
hyperacute onset and lesion appearance (wedge-­shaped distribution)
together with MRI diffusion-­
weighted imaging showing diffusion

Investigations

MRI of the spinal cord, including T1-­and T2-­weighted axial as well
as sagittal cuts with gadolinium, are necessary to evaluate for the presence of a focal spinal cord lesion. Given the frequency of longitudinally
extensive lesions in myelopathy in pediatric populations, both cervical
and thoracic spine imaging should be included in all patients presenting with acute TM. Inclusion of imaging sequences sensitive for hemorrhage (gradient echo sequences) may help, as will diffusion sequences.
The inclusion of brain MRI scans, including associated vascular imaging of head and neck vessels, are useful to evaluate the possibility of
large-­vessel disease. In the event of a cervical spine lesion combined
with ischemic brain lesions in the distribution of the posterior circulation, vertebral artery dissection should be investigated.
Lumbar puncture can be performed once MRI evaluation has ruled
out a severe cord expansion or mass leading to complete spinal column
block. Although inflammatory TM may be associated with elevations
in the CSF white blood cells (WBCs) and protein, ischemic myelopathy
caused by embolism does not show an acute pleocytosis. However, in a
vasculitic event such as myelopathy associated with SLE, increased CSF
protein and WBCs may be present.
Serum testing for the presence of underlying rheumatologic disorders should be performed in patients presenting with TM. A workup
for hypercoagulable states should also be performed in cases with a
high suspicion for ischemic myelopathy.

TREATMENT

In addition to supportive care, treatment is directed at the suspected
underlying disease process. Given the low likelihood of complete
recovery in ischemic lesions of the spinal cord and the significant disability associated with spinal cord injury, when underlying etiologies
such as SLE are found, prophylactic treatment is recommended. Supportive care, including pain control for neuropathic pain, spasticity
management, and management of urinary symptoms, is frequently
required in this population. When vascular abnormalities are identified or if ischemic myelitis is the suspected cause, low-­dose aspirin (2-­4
mg/kg/day) for prevention of recurrence may be indicated.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

641.4 Hemorrhagic Stroke
Nomazulu Dlamini and Gabrielle A. deVeber
HS includes nontraumatic intracranial hemorrhage and is classified by
the intracranial compartment containing the hemorrhage. Intraparenchymal bleeds may occur in any location within the brain’s substance.
Intraventricular hemorrhage may be isolated within ventricles or an
extension of intraparenchymal hemorrhage. Bleeding outside the brain
may occur in the subarachnoid, subdural, or epidural spaces.
Clinical presentations vary according to location, cause, and rate
of bleeding. Acute hemorrhages may feature instantaneous or thunderclap headache, loss of consciousness, and nuchal rigidity in addition to focal neurologic deficits and seizures. HS can be rapidly fatal.
In bleeds associated with vascular malformations, pulsatile tinnitus,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3750 Part XXV u The Nervous System

A

B

C

D

E

F

Fig. 641.6 Hemorrhagic stroke. A healthy 1-­mo-­old presented with sudden-­onset irritability followed by focal left body seizures. Plain CT scan of
head demonstrates a large hyperdense lesion in the right parietal region with surrounding edema, consistent with acute hemorrhage (A). Axial (B)
and sagittal (C) contrast CT scans suggest an abnormal cluster of vessels in the center of the hemorrhage, consistent with an arteriovenous malformation. T2-­weighted MRI differentiates the acute hemorrhage from surrounding edema (D). Gradient echo MRI, both acutely (E) and at 3 mo (F),
demonstrates the presence of blood product.

cranial bruit, macrocephaly, and high-­output heart failure may be
present. The diagnosis relies on imaging, and CT scanning is highly
sensitive to acute HS. However, lumbar puncture may be required to
exclude subarachnoid hemorrhage. MRI is highly sensitive to even
small amounts of both acute and chronic hemorrhage and offers
improved diagnostic accuracy (Fig. 641.6). Angiography by CT, MR,
or conventional catheterization means is often required to exclude
underlying vascular abnormalities (e.g., vascular malformations,
aneurysms).
Abusive head trauma with intracranial bleeding in children may
present as primary subdural or parenchymal hemorrhage with no
apparent history of trauma. Clinicians should search for the following:
subtle scalp, suborbital, or ear bruising; retinal hemorrhages in multiple layers; and chronic failure to thrive. In infants with subdural bleeds,
x-­rays should be performed to rule out fractures. Epidural hematoma
is nearly always caused by trauma, including middle meningeal artery
injury typically associated with skull fracture. Subdural hematoma can
occur spontaneously or with trivial trauma in children with brain atrophy because of stretching of bridging veins.
Causes of and risk factors for HS (Table 641.6) include vascular
malformations and systemic disorders. Arteriovenous malformations are the most common cause of childhood subarachnoid and
intraparenchymal HS and may occur anywhere. Neonates with vein
of Galen malformations may present with heart failure, progressive
macrocephaly, or, rarely, hemorrhage. In older children with arteriovenous malformations, the risk of bleeding is approximately 2–4%
per year throughout life. Somatic gene variants in KRAS have been
noted in some patients with arteriovenous malformations of the

brain. Other vascular malformations leading to HS include cavernous angiomas (cavernomas), dural arteriovenous fistulas, and vein of
Galen malformations (Fig. 641.7). Cerebral cavernous malformations
may be sporadic or familial (autosomal dominant) and associated
with gene variants in the CCM1, CCM2, or CCM3 genes. Cerebral
aneurysms are a less common cause of subarachnoid hemorrhage
in children and may suggest an underlying disorder (e.g., polycystic
kidney disease, infective endocarditis) (Fig. 641.8 and Table 641.7).
A common cause for HS is bleeding from a preexisting brain tumor.
Arterial diseases that usually cause ischemic stroke, including fibromuscular dysplasia, vasculitis, intracranial dissection, and moyamoya, can also predispose to HS. Additional causes of parenchymal HS
include hypertensive hemorrhage and hematologic disorders such
as thrombocytopenic purpura, hemophilia, acquired coagulopathies
(e.g., disseminated intravascular coagulopathy, liver failure), anticoagulant therapy (e.g., warfarin), or illicit drug use. Ischemic infarcts
may undergo hemorrhagic transformation, particularly in CSVT, and
may be difficult to differentiate from primary HS.
Management of acute childhood HS requires emergency neurosurgical intervention for a large or rapidly expanding hemorrhage. The
same principles of neuroprotection for vulnerable brain suggested in
the AIS sections also apply to HS. Reversal of anticoagulant therapy
(with, for example, vitamin K, fresh-­frozen plasma) may be required.
The recurrence risk for those with structural lesions is significant, and
serial imaging may be required. Definitive repair or removal of the
vascular malformation may require a combined approach with interventional endovascular methods and neurosurgery. Outcomes from
childhood HS are not well studied but likely depend on lesion size,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 641.6  Causes of Spontaneous Intracerebral Hemorrhage in Young Adults

Chapter 641 u Pediatric Stroke

3751

ICELANDIC FORM OF CAA
ARTERITIS/ARTERIOPATHIES
Infectious vasculitides
Multisystem vasculitides
Isolated CNS angiitis
Moyamoya disease
HANAC syndrome

VASCULAR MALFORMATIONS
AVMs
Capillary telangiectasias (HTT)
Cavernous malformations
Developmental venous anomalies
ANEURYSMS
Saccular
Infective
Traumatic
Neoplastic

DRUG RELATED
Amphetamines
Cocaine
Phenylpropanolamine
Pentazocine (Talwin)– tripelennamine (Pyribenzamine)
Phencyclidine
Heroin
Monoamine oxidase inhibitor
Other drugs

ARTERIAL HYPERTENSION
Secondary
Primary
BLEEDING DIATHESES
Leukemia
Thrombocytopenia
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
Polycythemia
Hyperviscosity syndromes
Hemophilia
Hypoprothrombinemia
Afibrinogenemia
Selective factor deficiencies
von Willebrand disease
Sickle cell anemia
Antiplatelet therapy
Anticoagulant therapy
Thrombolytic therapy
Vitamin K deficiency

INTRACRANIAL TUMORS
Primary malignant or benign
Metastatic
CEREBRAL VENOUS OCCLUSIVE DISEASE
MISCELLANEOUS
Post–carotid endarterectomy
Post–selective neurosurgical procedures
Post–spinal anesthesia
Postmyelography
Cold related
Post–painful dental procedures
Protracted migraine
Methanol intoxication

AVM, Arteriovenous malformation; CAA, cerebral amyloid angiopathy; CNS, central nervous system; HANAC, hereditary angiopathy with nephropathy, aneurysms, muscle cramps;
HHT, hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia.
From Farias-­Moeller R. Stroke. In: Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, et al., eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based Diagnosis, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023: Table 37.2, p. 633.

A

E

J

B

F

C

G

K

D

H

L

I

M

Fig. 641.7 Neonatal vein of Galen malformation and intraventricular hemorrhage. A 5-­day-­old female born at 38 weeks was noted to be drowsy

with poor feeding. She had signs of cardiac failure. A CT scan (A) demonstrates vein of Galen aneurysmal malformation, which was partly treated
by transarterial glue embolization without complication but with significant residual arteriovenous shunting (B-­D). After a second embolization
procedure, there was acute clinical deterioration with signs of raised intracranial pressure (E-­I). CT shows acute intraventricular hemorrhage and
hydrocephalus and a left parieto-­occipital lobe low-­density lesion (E-­G) with adjacent subarachnoid and subdural hematoma (H and I). Some linear
hyperdensity was believed to be the result of thrombus within the persistent falcine sinus (H and I). Follow-­up imaging shows maturation of the focal
left parieto-­occipital lesion in keeping with an infarct (J-­M), which is probably venous in origin. (From Gunny RS, Lin D. Imaging of pediatric stroke.
Magn Reson Imaging Clin North Am. 2012;20:1–33, Fig. 18.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3752 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 641.7  Causes of Spontaneous Subarachnoid
Hemorrhage in Young Adults

Ruptured intracranial
aneurysm

A

location, and etiology. Compared with AIS, the HS mortality rate is
higher, but long-­term deficits are less common.
Neonatal HS has unique features. Cranial ultrasound can detect many
neonatal parenchymal bleeds, especially in the preterm infant, where
bleeds are located centrally within the cranium including germinal
matrix bleeding and intraventricular hemorrhage, and in the cerebellum (see Chapter 122.3). Germinal matrix injury or bleeding may also
occur in utero, resulting in periventricular venous infarction that presents in later infancy as chronic hemiparesis. Subarachnoid and subdural
blood are common postpartum in normal-­term newborns and may be
detected by imaging in up to 25%. Term newborn HS is poorly studied
and includes the etiologies listed earlier, although HS may be idiopathic
in more than 50% of cases. Term intraventricular bleeding is often secondary to deep CSVT with specific management implications.

Cerebral aneurysm rupture
Perimesencephalic hemorrhage
Vascular malformation rupture (arteriovenous malformation,
arteriovenous fistula, cavernous malformations)
Other
Congenital disorders
Coarctation of the aorta
Pseudoxanthoma elasticum
Menkes kinky hair syndrome
Sturge-­Weber syndrome
Tuberous sclerosis complex
Neurofibromatosis 1 (von Recklinghausen disease)
Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (Rendu-­Osler disease)
Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome
Klinefelter syndrome
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease
Systemic vascular disease
Hypertension
Cerebral embolism
Moyamoya disease
Cerebral venous occlusive disease
Eclampsia
Hematologic disorders
Hemophilia
Aplastic anemia
Sickle cell anemia
Leukemias
Thrombocytopenic purpura
Anticoagulant therapy
Thrombolytic therapy
Infectious diseases
Infective endocarditis
Tuberculous meningitis
Luetic meningoencephalitis
Fungal central nervous system infections
Infectious mononucleosis
Tickborne relapsing fever
Autoimmune disorders
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Polyarteritis nodosa
Henoch-­Schönlein purpura
Poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis
Kawasaki disease
Other systemic diseases
Heat stroke
Conn syndrome
Thyrotoxicosis
Wolman disease
Spinal endometriosis
Neoplasms
Gliomas
Meningiomas
Acoustic neuromas
Choroid plexus papillomas
Pituitary adenomas
Pineocytomas
Chordomas
Subependymomas
Metastatic carcinoma
Intraspinal neoplasms
Drugs
Amphetamines
Cocaine
Ephedrine
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors
Oral contraceptive pills
Phencyclidine
Alcohol
Miscellaneous
α-­Galactosidase deficiency
α1-­Antitrypsin deficiency
Cystic fibrosis
Klippel-­Trénaunay-­Weber syndrome
Parry-­Romberg syndrome
3-­M syndrome

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

From Biller J. Stroke in Children and Young Adults. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders,
2009. Table 15-­1, p. 290.

Subarachnoid hemorrhage

Transient global ischemia

Early brain injury

• Microcirculatory
constriction
• Endothelial cell apoptosis
• Blood–brain barrier
disruption
• Impaired autoregulation
• Cerebral edema

• Excitotoxicity
• Ion channel dysfunction
• Thrombin activation
• Oxidative stress
• Inﬂammation
• Increased MMPs
• Altered nitric oxide
Midline shift or herniations:
Increased intracranial pressure
Posterior cerebral artery infarction

B

Subdural hematoma
(<5%)

Intraventricular
hemorrhage
(>50%)
Ruptured
aneurysm

Intracerebral
hematoma
(30%)
• Pulmonary edema
• Acute respiratory
distress syndrome
• Arrhythmias
• Contractility
• Systemic
inﬂammatory
response

Subarachnoid
hemorrhage
(>99%)

Duret brainstem
hemorrhage
• Sympathetic
hyperactivity
• Increased
catecholamines
• Increased natriuretic
peptides
• Increased renin/
angiotensin
• Inﬂammatory cytokines

Fig. 641.8 Pathophysiology of subarachnoid hemorrhage. Hemor-

rhage into various compartments (subarachnoid, intraventricular, intracerebral, subdural) can cause brain shift, increased intracranial pressure,
herniation, Duret brainstem hemorrhages, and death. Systemic effects
of subarachnoid hemorrhage include cardiac and pulmonary complications. Brain injury from this condition initially is the result of transient
global ischemia and effects of the hemorrhage. Delayed neurologic
complications can ensue. MMPs, Matrix metalloproteinases. (From
Macdonald RL, Schweizer TA. Spontaneous subarachnoid haemorrhage. Lancet. 2017;389:655–666, Fig. 2.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 641 u Pediatric Stroke

641.5 Differential Diagnosis of Strokelike
Events
Nomazulu Dlamini and Gabrielle A. deVeber
The diagnosis of stroke in childhood requires a high index of suspicion
balanced with awareness of the differential diagnosis for strokelike events
(Table 641.8). An acute onset of a focal neurologic deficit should be considered a stroke until proven otherwise and assessed with urgent neuroimaging. However, pediatric stroke must also be differentiated from other
strokelike disorders that may require their own urgent specific treatment.

MIGRAINE

A careful history and examination can often suggest migraine as the
cause of acute focal deficits (see Chapter 635.1). Neurologic deficits

3753

associated with migraine typically evolve slowly compared with stroke,
with sensory disturbance or weakness marching across body areas over
minutes. Migraine auras should last between 5 and 60 minutes and
resolve completely. Although evolution into a headache is expected
in migraine, headache may also accompany true AIS. Furthermore, a
group of uncommon “acephalic” migraine subtypes can occur without
headache and can more closely mimic stroke in children. These entities
include familial hemiplegic migraine, basilar migraine, and migraine
aura without headache. Migraine can also (rarely) cause a stroke,
referred to as migrainous infarction.
Reversible cerebral vasoconstriction syndrome (RCVS) presents
in patients with a history of migraine, pregnancy, or exposure to drugs
(sympathomimetic agents, SSRIs, migraine abortive agents). There is
both multifocal arterial constriction and dilation producing intense
(thunderclap) headache, migraine-like symptoms, seizures, or focal

Table 641.8  Distinguishing Clinical and Imaging Features of Stroke Mimics
DISORDER

CLINICAL DISTINCTION FROM STROKE

IMAGING DISTINCTION FROM STROKE

Migraine

Evolving or “marching” symptoms, short duration,
complete resolution, headache, personal or family
history of migraine

Typically normal
Migrainous infarction is extremely rare

Seizure*

Positive symptoms, Todd paralysis is postseizure and
time limited

Normal or may identify source of seizures (e.g.,
malformation, old injury)

Infection

Fever, encephalopathy, gradual onset, meningismus

Normal or signs of encephalitis/cerebritis, which
are typically diffuse and bilateral. Arterial ischemic
stroke and cerebral sinovenous thrombosis can
occur in bacterial meningitis.

Demyelination

Gradual onset, multifocal symptoms, encephalopathy
Accompanying optic neuritis or transverse myelitis

Multifocal lesions, characteristic appearance (e.g.,
patchy in acute disseminated encephalomyelitis,
ovoid in multiple sclerosis), typical locations (e.g.,
pericallosal in multiple sclerosis), less likely to
show restricted diffusion

Hypoglycemia

Risk factor (e.g., insulin therapy), related to meals,
additional systemic symptoms

Bilateral, symmetric
May see restricted diffusion
Posterior dominant pattern

Hypertensive encephalopathy
(posterior reversible
leukoencephalopathy
syndrome)

Documented hypertension, bilateral visual symptoms,
encephalopathy

Posterior dominant, bilateral, patchy lesions
involving gray and white matter; usually no
restricted diffusion

Inborn errors of metabolism

Preexisting delays/regression, multisystem disease,
abnormal biochemical profiles

May have restricted diffusion lesions but bilateral,
symmetric, not conforming to established vascular
territories. Magnetic resonance spectroscopy
changes (e.g., high lactate in mitochondrial
myopathy, encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, and
strokelike episodes).

Vestibulopathy

Symptoms limited to vertigo, imbalance (i.e., no
weakness); gradual onset

Normal

Acute cerebellar ataxia

Sudden-­onset bilaterally symmetric ataxia; postviral

Normal

Channelopathy

Syndromic cluster of symptoms not localizing to single
lesion; gradual onset, progressive evolution

Normal

Alternating hemiplegia

History of contralateral events
Choreoathetosis/dystonia

Normal

Functional neurologic disorders

Recent psychosocial stressors
Failure of signs and symptoms to localize to a specific
lesion within the neural axis
Presence of inconsistent examination findings
Positive Hoover sign (when being evaluated for
supposed lower extremity weakness, the patient with
a functional disorder will exert downward pressure at
the heel of the unaffected limb if the examiner holds
the heel while asking the patient to raise the affected
leg off the bed)

Normal

*Seizures, however, can also herald the onset of true stroke.
From Farias-­Moeller R. Stroke. In: Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, et al., eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based Diagnosis, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023: Table 37.5, p. 636.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3754 Part XXV u The Nervous System
neurologic deficits (stroke). MRI is useful in differentiating RCVS
from other disorders, especially primary angiitis of the central nervous
system.

SEIZURE

Prolonged focal motor seizure activity is typified by stiffening or jerking movements, termed positive symptoms frequently followed by a
period of focal neurologic deficit (so-­called Todd paresis), which typically resolves rapidly over hours after the seizure (see Chapter 633).
Very rarely, focal seizures can manifest with only “negative” symptoms
producing only hemiparesis or other acute-­onset focal neurologic deficits. A known history of seizures and epileptiform EEG findings may
be helpful. Urgent brain imaging should be considered in new cases
of prolonged or recurrent focal seizure with persisting Todd paresis
because stroke in children is often associated with seizures at onset.

INFECTION

Life-­threatening and treatable brain infections, including abscess, bacterial meningitis, and herpes encephalitis, can be mistaken for stroke
(see Chapter 643). However, symptom onset in primary CNS infection is typically more gradual and less focal with fever as a consistent
feature. Children with bacterial meningitis are at risk for both venous
and arterial stroke.

DEMYELINATION

Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis, clinically isolated syndrome,
multiple sclerosis, and other demyelinating conditions can present
with acute focal neurologic deficits (see Chapter 640). The symptom
onset and initial progression are, however, more gradual compared
with stroke onset (i.e., typically hours or days versus minutes). Multifocal deficits, or concurrent encephalopathy in the case of acute disseminated encephalomyelitis, decreases the probability of stroke.

HYPOGLYCEMIA

Acute lowering of blood glucose levels can produce focal deficits mimicking stroke. New-­onset hypoglycemia in otherwise healthy children
is rare, but predisposing conditions include insulin-­dependent diabetes, adrenal insufficiency, steroid withdrawal, and ketogenic diet.

GLOBAL HYPOXIC-­ISCHEMIC ENCEPHALOPATHY

Generalized reduction in cerebral perfusion can produce focal areas
of watershed brain infarction, which, when asymmetric, can mimic
vasoocclusive forms of stroke. Watershed ischemic injury should be
accompanied by recognized hypotension or conditions predisposing to
low cerebral perfusion, such as sepsis, dehydration, or cardiac dysfunction. Clinical presentations tend to be generalized and include bilateral
cerebral dysfunction compared with stroke, and the anatomic location
of the infarct on MRI or CT scanning is in typical bilateral watershed
zones rather than conforming to an established arterial territory.

HYPERTENSIVE ENCEPHALOPATHY

Posterior reversible leukoencephalopathy syndrome is seen in children
with hypertension, often in the context of an acute rise in blood pressure. The posterior regions are selectively involved, possibly resulting
in symptoms of bilateral cortical visual dysfunction in addition to
encephalopathy and seizures.

INBORN ERRORS OF METABOLISM

Mitochondrial myopathy, encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, and stroke-­
like episodes (MELAS; see Chapter 638.2) is the classic example of a
metabolic strokelike condition, though other mitochondrial diseases
can mimic stroke. Features favoring MELAS include a history of developmental regression, deafness, posterior (and often bilateral) lesions
not respecting vascular territories on MRI, and elevated serum or CSF
lactate on MR spectroscopy. In contrast to these types of metabolic
infarctions, children with Fabry disease (see Chapter 653.6), hyperhomocysteinemia, and homocystinuria (see Chapter 105.4) are at risk of
true ischemic stroke.

VESTIBULOPATHY AND ATAXIA

Acute-­onset vertigo and/or ataxia can be confused with brainstem or
cerebellar stroke. Simple bedside tests of vestibular function with otherwise intact brainstem functions are reassuring. This differential diagnosis includes acute vestibular neuronopathy, viral labyrinthitis, and
the benign paroxysmal vertigos, as well as acute postviral cerebellar
ataxia and episodic ataxias.

CHANNELOPATHIES

An increasing number of nervous system ion channel mutations are
described that feature sudden focal neurologic deficits, thereby mimicking stroke. These include the migraine syndromes, as well as a growing list of episodic ataxias. A strong family history raises suspicion, but
most require additional investigation.

ALTERNATING HEMIPLEGIA OF CHILDHOOD

Alternating hemiplegia of childhood typically presents in late infancy
with acute intermittent episodes of hemiplegia that alternate from one
side of the body to the other. The hemiplegia persists for minutes to
weeks and then resolves spontaneously. Choreoathetosis and dystonic
movements are commonly observed in the hemiparetic extremity. Signs
spontaneously regress with sleep but recur with awakening. Affected
children may also experience sudden attacks of redness and warmth
(i.e., flushing) or unusual paleness (i.e., pallor) of the skin occurring
during or separately from episodes of hemiplegia. Almost all affected
individuals have some level of developmental delay and intellectual
disability that typically progresses over time. Neuroimaging, including
MRA, should be completed to exclude moyamoya disease. Alternating
hemiplegia of childhood is linked to variants in the ATP1A3 gene.

Chapter 642

Central Nervous System
Vasculitis
Sona Narula
Autoimmune-­mediated inflammatory brain diseases include primary
central nervous system (CNS) vasculitis, secondary CNS vasculitis,
and autoimmune encephalitis (Fig. 642.1; see Chapter 638.4).
Primary vasculitis or angiitis of the CNS (PACNS) is recognized as
an underlying etiology of a broad spectrum of neurologic and psychiatric symptoms in children. Criteria characteristic of primary angiitis of
the CNS in childhood (cPACNS) include (1) newly acquired focal and/
or diffuse neurologic deficits and/or psychiatric symptoms in a child
18 years of age or younger, plus (2) angiographic and/or histologic evidence of vasculitis in the absence of (3) a systemic underlying condition
known to cause or mimic the findings. Two broad categories of cPACNS
are recognized based on the predominant vessel size affected: large/
medium-­
vessel cPACNS and small-­
vessel cPACNS. Large/medium-­
vessel cPACNS is diagnosed by angiography demonstrating features of
vessel wall inflammation, such as wall thickening and resulting luminal
stenosis. Based on the clinical course and the corresponding distribution
of vessel stenosis within the vascular tree of the CNS, children with large/
medium-­vessel cPACNS are classified as having a monophasic, nonprogressive subtype (NPcPACNS) or a progressive subtype (PcPACNS).
The latter is characterized by chronic, progressive vessel wall inflammation affecting both proximal and distal vessel segments in one or both
hemispheres. In contrast, NPcPACNS is a monophasic illness; vessel
inflammation occurs in a characteristic distribution and is limited to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 642 u Central Nervous System Vasculitis

3755

Inflammatory brain disease

Primary CNS
Vasculitis

Angiography
positive

Angiography
negative
Brain biopsy
positive

Secondary CNS
Vasculitis

See Table 642-1

Antibody-mediated
encephalitis

Intracellular
antigen

Receptor/Cell
surface antigen

Fig. 642.1 Classification algorithm
for CNS vasculitis within the spectrum of immune-­mediated inflammatory brain diseases.

Non-progressive

Progressive

the proximal vessel segments of the anterior and/or middle cerebral
artery and/or distal internal carotid artery of one hemisphere. Small-­
vessel cPACNS (SVcPACNS) is considered a progressive illness; the
diagnosis is confirmed by brain biopsy, as angiography is typically
normal.
Secondary childhood CNS vasculitis can affect all cerebral vessel
segments and can occur in the context of infections, or rheumatic or
other inflammatory conditions, or as a result of systemic or local vascular irritation (Table 642.1). The neuropsychiatric manifestations of
secondary CNS vasculitis are the same as those of primary CNS vasculitis. Secondary CNS vasculitis is distinguished from primary CNS
vasculitis largely by the non-­CNS manifestations of the underlying systemic vasculitic disease.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The incidence and prevalence of primary CNS vasculitis are undetermined. Increased physician awareness, improved diagnostic markers,
sensitive neuroimaging techniques, and utilization of brain biopsies
have led to dramatically increased recognition and decreased mortality rates. The disease has many names, including isolated angiitis of
the CNS, transient cerebral angiitis, postvaricella angiopathy, and focal
cerebral arteriopathy. Furthermore, children are frequently diagnosed
with their presenting clinical phenotype, such as stroke, movement
disorder, psychosis, or cognitive decline. Within clinical phenotypes
such as arterial ischemic stroke or status epilepticus in children without preexisting epilepsy, cPACNS should be considered an important
etiology.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Recognition of childhood CNS vasculitis requires a very high level
of suspicion because any neurologic or psychiatric presentation can
be the result of an underlying CNS vasculitis. The clinical phenotype
may provide clues to the size of the primarily affected vessel segments
and resulting cPACNS subtype: the majority of children with large/
medium cPACNS present with arterial ischemic stroke. Focal neurologic deficits, such as hemiparesis, facial droop, aphasia, or any other
distinct gross or fine motor deficits, may be the result of large-­vessel
inflammation causing stenosis and a decreased blood supply to the
specific functional areas of the brain. Initially, these focal deficits
wax and wane; they may even briefly resolve without therapeutic
intervention and can therefore be easily overlooked. Headaches can
be a symptom of vascular disease and are commonly reported in
cPACNS. New-­onset headaches in children without any family history of migraine can serve as a diagnostic clue. Cognitive dysfunction
in cPACNS often includes loss of higher executive function, concentration difficulties, learning and memory problems, atypical behavior
or personality changes, and loss of social and emotional control. Seizures are a hallmark of SVcPACNS, as more than 80% of children with

Table 642.1  Causes of Secondary CNS Vasculitis
VIRAL INFECTIONS
Varicella-­zoster virus, HIV, hepatitis C virus, cytomegalovirus,
parvovirus B19
BACTERIAL INFECTIONS
Treponema pallidum, Borrelia burgdorferi, Mycobacterium
tuberculosis, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Bartonella henselae,
Rickettsia spp.
FUNGAL INFECTIONS
Aspergillosis, mucormycosis, coccidioidomycosis, candidiasis
PARASITIC INFECTIONS
Cysticercosis
SYSTEMIC VASCULITIDES
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis, eosinophilic granulomatosis with
polyangiitis, Behçet disease, polyarteritis nodosa, IgA vasculitis,
Kawasaki disease, giant-­cell arteritis, Takayasu arteritis, Degos
disease, ADA2 deficiency, TREX1-­associated diseases
CONNECTIVE TISSUE DISEASES
Systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, Sjögren
syndrome, dermatomyositis, mixed connective tissue disease
MISCELLANEOUS
Antiphospholipid antibodies syndrome, Hodgkin and non-­Hodgkin
lymphomas, neurosarcoidosis, inflammatory bowel disease,
graft-­versus-­host disease, bacterial endocarditis, acute bacterial
meningitis, drug-­induced CNS vasculitis (cocaine, amphetamine,
ephedrine, phenylpropanolamine, immune checkpoint inhibitors),
hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis, reversible vasoconstriction
syndrome, Fabry disease, migrainous infarction, primary (RNF213) and
secondary moyamoya disease, NOTCH3 and HTRA1 vasculopathies,
genetic structural disorders (COL4A1, ACTA2, MOPD2).
From Salvarani C, Brown RD Jr, Hunder GG. Adult primary central nervous system
vasculitis. Lancet. 2012;380:767–776.

SVcPACNS present with seizures. In many centers, refractory status
epilepticus is increasingly recognized as the presenting phenotype of
SVcPACNS. Optic neuritis and spinal cord disease can also occur in
the setting of SVcPACNS.
Constitutional features of fever or fatigue may point toward an
underlying systemic illness causing a secondary CNS vasculitis. All
children with suspected or confirmed CNS vasculitis require a careful
assessment for a systemic illness.

DIAGNOSIS

The first step is considering vasculitis as a possible underlying etiology of newly acquired neurologic deficits and/or psychiatric symptoms
(Table 642.2). The likelihood of CNS vasculitis in general and a specific

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3756 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 642.2  Proposed Diagnostic Evaluation of
Suspected Childhood Primary CNS Vasculitis
1.	Clinical evaluation: Newly acquired symptom or deficit in a
previously healthy child
• Focal neurologic deficit: hemiparesis, hemisensory loss,
aphasia, ataxia, movement abnormality, paresthesia, facial
droop, ataxia, vision loss, spinal cord symptoms, others
• Seizures or status epilepticus
• Diffuse neurologic deficit, including cognitive decline with loss
of higher executive function, concentration difficulties, learning
or memory problems, behavior or personality changes, loss of
social skills or emotional/impulse control, others
• Headaches
• Meningitis symptoms, abnormal level of consciousness
• Psychiatric symptoms, including hallucinations
Differential diagnosis approach:
• Underlying illness known to cause, be associated or mimic CNS
vasculitis: check all potential clinical features
2.	Laboratory tests
• Blood inflammatory markers: C-­reactive protein, erythrocyte
sedimentation rate and complete blood counts
• Endothelial markers: von Willebrand factor (vWF) antigen
• Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) inflammatory markers: opening
pressure, cell count, protein, oligoclonal bands
Differential diagnosis approach:
• Infections/postinfectious inflammation: cultures, serologies,
Gram stain
• Autoimmune encephalitis: check neuronal antibodies in CSF
and blood
• Systemic inflammation/rheumatic disease: characteristic
laboratory markers such as complement, autoantibodies
• Thromboembolic conditions: procoagulatory profile
3.	Neuroimaging
• Parenchymal imaging on MRI
• Inflammatory lesions: T2/fluid attenuated inversion recovery
sequences plus gadolinium
• Ischemic lesions: diffusion-­weighted images/apparent diffusion
coefficient mapping
• Vessel imaging
4.	Brain biopsy

subtype of CNS vasculitis in particular depends on the demographic
characteristics of the patient, the CNS and non-­CNS features of the
clinical presentation, the preceding symptoms, and the mode of onset
of the disease. SVcPACNS is more commonly seen in females, whereas
large/medium cPACNS has a clear male predominance. Seizures are a
hallmark of SVcPACNS, whereas strokes often reflect large/medium-­
vessel inflammation. Laboratory markers of vasculitis typically include
C-­
reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and complete
blood counts. However, inflammatory markers lack sensitivity and specificity in cPACNS, particularly when the CNS is involved in isolation.
More than 50% of children with large/medium-­vessel cPACNS have
normal inflammatory markers at diagnosis. In contrast, the majority
of children with SVcPACNS present with mild to moderately raised
markers. Von Willebrand factor antigen, an endothelial cell–derived
protein, is a proposed biomarker of vasculitis correlating closely with
disease activity in cPACNS. It may be of particular importance for
distinguishing SVcPACNS from demyelinating disorders. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis is abnormal in up to 90% of SVcPACNS
patients and less than half of large/medium-­vessel cPACNS patients.
Within the latter group, children with the progressive subtype have a
higher likelihood of presenting with abnormal CSF findings, including elevated opening pressure, raised CSF cell count (typically with
lymphocyte predominance), and raised CSF protein. Oligoclonal
bands are positive in 20% of children with SVcPACNS. They are rarely
seen in other subtypes. Autoimmune encephalitis (see Chapter 638.4)
and anti–myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG)–associated

encephalitis are two of the key neuroinflammatory differential diagnoses of SVcPACNS.
Neuroimaging is a valuable diagnostic modality for cPACNS.
Parenchymal lesions may be inflammatory or ischemic in nature
and are best viewed on MRI, including T2/fluid-­attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequences and diffusion-­
weighted images
(DWIs) (Fig. 642.2). CNS lesions in children with large/medium-­
vessel cPACNS are predominantly ischemic in nature and restricted
to large vascular territories. In contrast, MRI lesions in children with
SVcPACNS are not restricted to major vascular territories; lesions
are primarily inflammatory and may enhance with contrast. In this
subtype, focal or generalized meningeal enhancement is commonly
seen if children are imaged before initiation of immunosuppressive
therapy.
Evidence of vessel stenosis confirms the diagnosis in large/medium-­
vessel cPACNS subtypes; brain biopsies are not required. Important
information about the disease activity can be obtained from post–
gadolinium contrast studies of the vascular wall. The vessel wall of
an inflamed cerebral vessel in active large/medium-­vessel cPACNS
subtypes is thickened and enhances contrast. Vessel wall enhancement may also be useful for the assessment of ongoing disease activity. Conventional angiography, when compared with MR angiography,
has a higher sensitivity in detecting vessel stenosis in the distal vessel
segments, the posterior circulation, and in very young children. Vessel
wall imaging is often normal in children with SVcPACNS, often mandating a brain biopsy to definitively confirm the diagnosis. Studies of
regional blood flow or therapeutic trials of antiinflammatory or immunosuppressive agents are nonsurgical alternatives that do not afford
specific diagnostic information.
If a biopsy is pursued, a targeted lesional biopsy is preferred if
an accessible lesion is identified on imaging. Biopsies should target
low-­risk, nonfunctional areas identified on MRI. In the appropriate
clinical context, nonlesional biopsies can also be done to confirm the
diagnosis of SVcPACNS and are typically taken from the nondominant frontal lobe. Diagnostic yield is improved if the biopsy is full
thickness and includes the meninges and gray and white matter and
if it is done before initiation of immunosuppression. In adults, one
study reported the diagnostic yield of biopsies for PACNS to be 11%,
with an identified alternative diagnosis reported in about 30% of
cases. In this study, smaller biopsies and closed procedures were less
likely to be diagnostic, and biopsy-­related complications occurred in
16% of patients.
Characteristic findings on biopsy in SVcPACNS include an intramural and/or perivascular lymphocytic infiltrate, evidence of endothelial activation, and reactive astrocyte activation. Gliosis and
perivascular demyelination are hallmarks of long-­standing disease.
Hemorrhagic lesions have also been reported. Findings typically seen
in adult PACNS, including granulomas or vessel wall necrosis, are
less commonly seen in children with SVcPACNS. Disorders that may
be seen in adolescents and young adults that produce the reversible
vasoconstriction syndrome must also be considered. These include
migraine, drug-­
induced vasospasm, and postpartum angiopathy.
Differentiating vasculitis from these other etiologies is important for
therapy and prognosis (Table 642.3).

TREATMENT

Corticosteroids are the mainstay of acute immunosuppressive management of cPACNS. Usually pulse therapy is initially given. Antithrombotic therapy is equally important, particularly in large/
medium-­vessel cPACNS subtypes, because children are at high
risk for recurrent ischemic events. For the distinct cPACNS subtypes, different treatment regimens should be considered. Nonprogressive cPACNS is a monophasic inflammatory illness with
the highest risk of poor neurologic outcome. Vessel wall inflammation causes severe proximal stenosis and a high risk of stroke
recurrence. High-­dose corticosteroid pulses are commonly given,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 642 u Central Nervous System Vasculitis

A

B

C

3757

D

Fig. 642.2 Imaging of patients with primary CNS vasculitis. A, Cerebral angiogram shows alternating stenosis and dilation of the distal middle

cerebral artery (arrows) and the anterior cerebral artery (arrowheads). B, MR angiography of the brain shows a short-­segment stenosis of the anterior
cerebral artery (green arrow) and stenosis of the distal middle cerebral artery (white arrow). C, Fluid attenuation inversion recovery–weighted MRI
shows a large abnormality within the right cerebral hemisphere consistent with ischemia (arrowheads). D, MRI shows diffuse, asymmetric, nodular,
and linear leptomeningeal enhancement, with the dura only slightly affected. (From Salvarani C, Brown RD Jr, Hunder GG. Adult primary central
nervous system vasculitis. Lancet. 2012;380:767–776, Fig. 2.)

Table 642.3  Characteristics of Primary CNS Vasculitis and Reversible Cerebral Vasoconstriction Syndrome
PCNSV

RCVS

Precipitating factor

None

Postpartum onset or onset after exposure to vasoactive
substances

Onset

More insidious, progressive course

Acute onset followed by a monophasic course

Headaches

Chronic and progressive

Acute, thunderclap type

CSF findings

Abnormal (leukocytosis and high total protein concentration)

Normal to near normal

MRI

Abnormal in almost all patients

Initially may be normal or demonstrate vasogenic
edema, vasospasm, or sequelae of vasospasm

Angiography

Possibly normal; otherwise, diffuse abnormalities are
often indistinguishable from RCVS; irregular and
asymmetric arterial stenoses or multiple occlusions are
more suggestive of PCNSV; abnormalities might be
irreversible

Always abnormal, strings-­of-­beads appearance of
cerebral arteries; abnormalities reversible within 6-­
12 wk

Cerebral biopsy

Vasculitis

No vasculitic changes

Drug treatment

Prednisone with or without cytotoxic agents

Nimodipine

CSF, Cerebrospinal fluid; PCNSV, primary CNS vasculitis; RCVS, reversible cerebral vasoconstriction syndrome.
From Salvarani C, Brown RD Jr, Hunder GG. Adult primary central nervous system vasculitis. Lancet. 2012;380:767–776, Table 2.

followed by a 6-­to 12-­week course of oral steroids at tapering
doses. Second-­line immunosuppressive agents are uncommonly
used. All children require antithrombotic therapy, though no unifying regimen exists. Many centers initially use low molecular
weight heparin followed by long-­term antiplatelet therapy. When
reimaged at 3 months, children should have stable or improved
vessel disease, no newly affected vessel segments, and no evidence
of vessel wall enhancement. At this point, the immunosuppressive
therapy is commonly discontinued, and children are only kept on
antiplatelet therapy.
Progressive cPACNS and SVcPACNS are considered chronic progressive vasculitis subtypes requiring a prolonged course of combination immunosuppression. High-­dose corticosteroids are initially used,
followed by long-­term oral corticosteroids with a slow taper. Many
centers use an induction-­maintenance protocol, adding cyclophosphamide to corticosteroids (for 6 months), followed by mycophenolate
mofetil or other oral second-­line agents during maintenance therapy
(usually 18 months). Symptomatic therapy is essential, including
anticonvulsants or psychotropic medication if required. Supportive

therapy includes bone protection with calcium and vitamin D, prophylaxis against Pneumocystis pneumonia, and gastric mucosal protection
as required.

PROGNOSIS

The mortality rate of cPACNS has significantly improved. In large-­
vessel cPACNS, the risk of stroke recurrence is thought to be high in
patients who are found to have progression on vascular imaging at 12
months (especially if there was simultaneous progression and improvement occurring across multiple vessels).
Some treatment protocols for SVcPACNS report a good outcome,
defined as no functional neurologic deficits, in two thirds of children.
Children presenting with status epilepticus and SVcPACNS have the
poorest cognitive outcome. Multidisciplinary care involving neurology, rheumatology, hematology, and rehabilitation is ideal and may
improve outcomes.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3758 Part XXV u The Nervous System

Chapter 643

Central Nervous System
Infections
Andrew B. Janowski and David A. Hunstad
Infection of the central nervous system (CNS) is a significant cause of
morbidity and mortality in children. Identification of CNS infections
can be problematic for clinicians because symptoms can be nonspecific
in younger infants, and delayed or missed diagnosis can amplify the
morbidity and mortality rates associated with these diseases. Implementation of multiple conjugate vaccines has greatly reduced the incidence
of bacterial infections of the CNS. Nonetheless, bacterial and viral infections remain a significant cause of CNS disease, with atypical bacterial,
fungal, and parasitic pathogens also causing a smaller number of cases.
Independent of etiology, many patients with CNS infection have
similar clinical manifestations. Common symptoms include headache, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, photophobia, restlessness, altered
state of consciousness, and irritability. Common signs of CNS infection include fever, neck pain, nuchal rigidity, focal neurologic deficits,
seizures, obtundation, and coma. The severity and constellation of
signs are determined by host-­pathogen interactions and the affected
region of the CNS. Meningitis describes primary involvement of the
meninges, and encephalitis indicates brain parenchymal involvement. However, these anatomic boundaries may be indistinct during
infection, and many patients have clinical or imaging evidence of both
meningeal and parenchymal involvement. Terms such as meningoencephalitis may better describe diffuse infections of the CNS by pathogens such as viruses. Brain abscess is the most common example of a
focal infection of the CNS (see Chapter 644).
The diagnosis of CNS infection depends on a combination of imaging of the brain, testing the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) by culture, polymerase chain reaction (PCR), and serologic methods and, in rare
situations, biopsy of brain tissue. Pending many of these tests, standard
CSF studies provide initial data to help guide selection of empiric antimicrobials. Table 643.1 provides an overview of the typical CSF abnormalities with various CNS disorders.

643.1 Acute Bacterial Meningitis Beyond
the Neonatal Period
Andrew B. Janowski and David A. Hunstad
Bacterial meningitis is one of the most serious pediatric infections
because it is associated with a high rate of acute complications and a risk
of long-­term morbidity and mortality. However, the use of antibiotics
and vaccines against the most common causes of bacterial meningitis
has significantly altered the spectrum of disease. In the 1980s, the most
common causes of bacterial meningitis in children older than 1 month
of age in the United States were Haemophilus influenzae type b, Streptococcus pneumoniae, and Neisseria meningitidis. The incidence of meningitis caused by all three organisms has been significantly reduced in
countries that have introduced universal immunization against these
pathogens. S. pneumoniae is now the most common cause of bacterial
meningitis in the United States. Demonstrating the impact of vaccination in the United States, invasive H. influenzae disease occurred in
67-­129 cases per 100,000 children under 5 years of age in the 1980s. By
2019, H. influenzae type b–associated diseases were exceptionally rare;
there were only 18 invasive cases in the United States, with a calculated
national rate of 0.08 cases per 100,000 children under 5 in the year
2017. Nonetheless, other serotypes of H. influenzae (particularly type
a and, rarely, other serotypes have emerged as a cause of meningitis).

EPIDEMIOLOGY

A major risk factor for bacterial meningitis is the lack of preexisting
immunity to specific pathogens and serotypes, reflected in a higher
incidence of meningitis in young infants. Additional risk factors include
recent colonization with pathogenic bacteria, close contact (household,
daycare centers, college dormitories, military barracks) with individuals having invasive disease caused by N. meningitidis or H. influenzae
type b, crowding, poverty, and male sex. The mode of transmission of
these pathogens is through contact with respiratory tract secretions or
droplets. The risk of meningitis is increased among infants and young
children with occult bacteremia; the odds ratio is greater for meningococcus (85 times) and H. influenzae type b (12 times) relative to that
for pneumococcus.
Indigenous Nation and Eskimo populations exhibit a higher incidence of bacterial meningitis because these populations have altered
immunoglobulin production in response to encapsulated pathogens.
Defects of the complement system (C5-­C8) are associated with recurrent meningococcal infection, and defects of the properdin system
are associated with a significant risk of lethal meningococcal disease.
Splenic dysfunction (e.g., in sickle cell anemia) or asplenia (caused by
trauma or a congenital defect) is associated with an increased risk of
pneumococcal, H. influenzae type b, and meningococcal sepsis and
meningitis. T-­lymphocyte defects (congenital or acquired by chemotherapy, AIDS, or malignancy) are associated with an increased risk of
Listeria monocytogenes infections of the CNS.
The risk of pneumococcal meningitis is increased in children with
congenital or acquired CSF leak across a mucocutaneous barrier, such
as a lumbar dural sinus, cranial or midline facial defects (cribriform
plate), fistulas of the middle ear (stapedial foot plate) or inner ear (oval
window, internal auditory canal, cochlear aqueduct), or CSF leakage
as a result of basilar or other skull fracture. The risk of pneumococcal
bacterial meningitis was historically increased by more than 30-­fold in
children with cochlear implants, though advances in implant design
have reduced this risk. Lumbosacral dermal sinus and myelomeningocele are associated with staphylococcal, anaerobic, and gram-­negative
enteric bacterial meningitis. CSF shunt infections increase the risk of
meningitis caused by Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Staphylococcus spp. (S.
aureus and coagulase-­negative species), Cutibacterium spp. (formerly
Propionibacterium spp.), and other lower-­virulence bacteria that typically colonize the skin.

Streptococcus pneumoniae

See also Chapter 228.
Although the incidence of pneumococcal meningitis has been
reduced, S. pneumoniae remains the most frequently identified pathogen from cases of bacterial meningitis in the United States and in other
countries that have adopted similar vaccination strategies. The seven-­
valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV7) was included in the
routine U.S. vaccination schedule in 2000 and contained serotypes 4,
6B, 9V, 14, 18C, 19F, and 23F, responsible for ∼85% of invasive pneumococcal infections in the country. A dramatic decrease in the rate
of pneumococcal meningitis followed, from 8.2 cases per 100,000 in
1998-­1999 to 0.59 cases per 100,000 in 2004–2005. Similar reductions
were also identified in other nations that introduced this vaccine. However, this was followed by an increased incidence of invasive disease
caused by serotypes not contained in the original vaccine, known as
serotype replacement. In response, a 13-­valent pneumococcal conjugate
vaccine (PCV13) was licensed in the United States in 2010, containing
the serotypes in PCV7 plus serotypes 1, 3, 5, 6A, 7F, and 19A. Postmarketing surveillance data suggest the rate of invasive pneumococcal
infections has decreased further, though there are conflicting data as
to whether the rate of pneumococcal meningitis has decreased. Based
on data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
Active Bacterial Surveillance system, the incidence of invasive pneumococcal infections has fallen from 142.9 per 100,000 children under
age 1 in 1977 to 13.3 per 100,000 children under age 1 in 2018. Children with anatomic or functional asplenia secondary to sickle cell disease and those infected with HIV have infection rates that are 20-­to
100-­fold higher than those of healthy children in the first 5 years of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 643 u Central Nervous System Infections

3759

Table 643.1  Cerebrospinal Fluid Findings in Central Nervous System Disorders
CONDITION

PRESSURE (cm H2O)

LEUKOCYTES (mm3)

PROTEIN (mg/dL)

GLUCOSE (mg/dL)

Normal

<28

<5, ≥75% Lymphocytes
in neonates: <20

20-­45

>50 (or 75% serum
glucose)

100-­10,000 or more;
usually 300-­2,000;
PMNs predominate

Usually 100-­500

Decreased, usually
<40 (or <50% of
serum glucose)

Organisms usually seen
on Gram stain and
isolated by culture or
identified by PCR

COMMON FORMS OF MENINGITIS
Acute bacterial
Usually elevated
meningitis

COMMENTS

Partially treated
bacterial meningitis

Normal or elevated

5-­10,000; PMNs
usual, but
mononuclear cells
may predominate
if pretreated for
extended period

Usually 100-­500

Normal or
decreased

Organisms may be seen
on Gram stain.
Pretreatment may
render CSF sterile.
PCR-­based assays may
detect bacterial DNA.

Viral meningitis or
meningoencephalitis

Normal or slightly
elevated

Rarely >1,000 cells.
Eastern equine
encephalitis
and lymphocytic
choriomeningitis may
have cell counts of
several thousand.
PMNs early, but
mononuclear cells
predominate through
most of the course,

Usually 50-­200

Generally normal;
may be decreased
to <40 in some
viral diseases,
particularly
mumps (15–20%
of cases)

HSV encephalitis is
suggested by focal
seizures or by focal
findings on MRI or CT
scans or EEG. Most
arboviruses detected
by PCR of CSF or
urine and serology.

10-­500; PMNs early,
but lymphocytes
predominate through
most of the course

100-­3,000; may
be higher in
presence of
obstruction

<50 in most cases;
decreases with
time if treatment
is not provided

Acid-­fast organisms
rarely seen on smear.
Large volumes of
CSF required for
recovery of organisms.
Mycobacterium
tuberculosis can be
detected by PCR of
CSF.

UNCOMMON FORMS OF MENINGITIS
Tuberculous meningitis Usually elevated

Fungal meningitis

Usually elevated

5-­500; PMNs early,
but mononuclear
cells predominate
for most of the
course. Cryptococcal
meningitis may
lack pleocytosis.
Coccidioidal
meningitis may have
eosinophilia

25-­500

<50; decreases with
time if treatment
is not provided

Budding yeast
may be seen.
Organisms may be
recovered by culture.
Cryptococcal antigen
(CSF and serum)
may be positive in
cryptococcal infection.

Syphilis (acute),
Lyme disease, and
leptospirosis

Usually elevated

50-­500; lymphocytes
predominate

50-­200

Usually normal

Positive CSF serology.
Spirochetes not
demonstrable by
smear or culture; dark-­
field examination may
be positive. Positive
Lyme serology.

Amebic (Naegleria)
meningoencephalitis

Elevated

1,000-­10,000 or more;
PMNs predominate

50-­500

Normal or slightly
decreased

Mobile amoebas may
be seen by wet-­mount
microscopy of CSF

75-­500

Normal unless
abscess ruptures
into ventricular
system

CSF cultures are only
positive in 24%
of cases unless
abscess ruptures into
ventricular system

BRAIN ABSCESSES AND PARAMENINGEAL FOCUS
Brain abscess
Usually elevated
5-­200; CSF
rarely acellular;
lymphocytes
predominate; if
abscess ruptures
into ventricle, PMNs
predominate and
cell count may reach
>100,000

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3760 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 643.1  Cerebrospinal Fluid Findings in Central Nervous System Disorders—cont’d
CONDITION

PRESSURE (cm H2O)

LEUKOCYTES (mm3)

PROTEIN (mg/dL)

GLUCOSE (mg/dL)

COMMENTS

Subdural empyema

Usually elevated

100-­5,000; PMNs
predominate

100-­500

Normal

No organisms on smear
or culture of CSF
unless meningitis also
present; organisms
found on tap of
subdural fluid

Cerebral epidural
abscess

Normal to slightly
elevated

10-­500; lymphocytes
predominate

50-­200

Normal

No organisms on smear
or culture of CSF

Spinal epidural
abscess

Usually low, with spinal
block

10-­100; lymphocytes
predominate

50-­400

Normal

No organisms on smear
or culture of CSF

Chemical (drugs,
dermoid cysts,
myelography dye)

Usually elevated

100-­1,000 or more;
PMNs predominate

50-­100

Normal or slightly
decreased

Epithelial cells may be
seen within CSF by
use of polarized light
in some children with
ruptured dermoids

0-­100; mononuclear

40-­100

Normal

No specific findings

NONINFECTIOUS CAUSES
Sarcoidosis
Normal to elevated
slightly
Systemic lupus
erythematosus with
CNS involvement

Slightly elevated

0-­500; PMNs usually
predominate;
lymphocytes may be
present

100

Normal or slightly
decreased

No organisms on
smear or culture.
Positive neuronal and
ribosomal P protein
antibodies in CSF.

Tumor, leukemia

Slightly elevated to
very high

0-­100 or more;
mononuclear or blast
cells

50-­1,000

Normal to
decreased (20-­40)

Cytology may be
positive

Acute disseminated
encephalomyelitis

Normal or elevated

∼100 lymphocytes

Normal to elevated

Normal

MRI adds to diagnosis

Autoimmune
encephalitis

Normal

∼100 lymphocytes

Normal to elevated

Normal

Anti-­NMDAR or
other autoimmune
antibody–positive
(CSF is often more
sensitive than serum)

CSF, Cerebrospinal fluid; EEG, electroencephalogram; HSV, herpes simplex virus; NMDAR, N-­methyl-­d-­aspartate receptor; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; PMN, polymorphonuclear
neutrophils.

life. Additional risk factors for contracting pneumococcal meningitis
include endocarditis, otitis media, mastoiditis, sinusitis, pneumonia,
CSF otorrhea or rhinorrhea, the presence of a cochlear implant, and
immunosuppression.

15 and 24 years of age. First-­year college students living in dormitories
have an increased incidence of infection compared with non–college-­
attending, age-­matched controls.

Neisseria meningitidis

See also Chapter 240.
Before universal H. influenzae type b vaccination in the United
States, approximately 70% of cases of bacterial meningitis occurring
in the first 5 years of life were caused by this pathogen. Invasive infections occurred primarily in infants 2 months to 2 years of age, the peak
incidence was at 6-­9 months of age, and 50% of cases occurred in the
first year of life. The risk to children was markedly increased among
household or daycare contacts of patients with H. influenzae type b
disease. Global vaccination efforts have also led to remarkable declines
in the incidence of this disease. Incompletely vaccinated individuals,
those in underdeveloped countries who are not vaccinated, and those
with immune-­compromising conditions remain at risk for H. influenzae type b meningitis. Other serotypes of H. influenzae (a, f) have been
associated with meningitis.

See also Chapter 237.
Six serogroups of meningococcus (A, B, C, X, Y, and W-­135) are
responsible for invasive disease in humans. Meningococcal meningitis may be sporadic or may occur in major epidemics, particularly in
the African meningitis belt, where serogroup A accounts for 80–85%
of outbreaks. In the United States, serogroup B is the most common
cause of meningitis in infants and is also a cause of outbreaks on college
campuses. Meningococcal cases are more common in the winter and
spring, likely because of associations with viral infections, including
influenza. Nasopharyngeal carriage of N. meningitidis occurs in up to
15% of adults. Most infections in children are acquired from a contact
in a daycare facility, a colonized adult family member, or an ill patient
with meningococcal disease. Colonization may last weeks to months;
recent colonization places nonimmune younger children at greatest
risk for meningitis. The incidence of disease occurring in association
with an index case in the family is 1%, a 1,000-­fold increase in risk
in comparison to the general population. The risk of secondary cases
occurring in contacts at daycare centers is approximately 1 in 1,000.
Children under 5 years of age have the highest rates of meningococcal
infection, and a second peak in incidence occurs in persons between

Haemophilus influenzae Type b

PATHOLOGY AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

A purulent exudate of varying thickness may be distributed around the
cerebral veins, venous sinuses, convexity of the brain, and cerebellum
and in the sulci, sylvian fissures, basal cisterns, and spinal cord. Ventriculitis with bacteria and inflammatory cells in ventricular fluid may
be present (more often in neonates) in addition to subdural effusions

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 643 u Central Nervous System Infections
and empyema. Perivascular inflammatory infiltrates may also be evident, and the ependymal membrane may be disrupted. Vascular and
parenchymal cerebral changes have been described at autopsy, including polymorphonuclear infiltrates extending to the subintimal region
of small arteries and veins, vasculitis, thrombosis of small cortical
veins, occlusion of major venous sinuses, necrotizing arteritis producing subarachnoid hemorrhage, and cerebral cortical necrosis in the
absence of identifiable thrombosis. Cerebral infarction is a frequent
sequela that is caused by vascular occlusion from inflammation, vasospasm, or thrombosis. The extent of an infarct may range from microscopic to an entire hemisphere.
Inflammation of spinal nerves and roots produces meningeal signs,
and inflammation of the cranial nerves produces cranial neuropathies
of optic, oculomotor, facial, and auditory nerves. Increased intracranial
pressure (ICP) also produces oculomotor nerve palsy because of temporal lobe compression of the nerve during tentorial herniation. Abducens nerve palsy may be an early nonlocalizing sign of elevated ICP.
Increased ICP is a result of cell death (cytotoxic cerebral edema),
cytokine-­induced increased capillary vascular permeability (vasogenic
cerebral edema), and increased hydrostatic pressure (interstitial cerebral edema) after obstructed reabsorption of CSF in the arachnoid
villus or obstruction of the flow of fluid from the ventricles. ICP may
exceed 30 cm H2O and cerebral perfusion may be further compromised
if the cerebral perfusion pressure (mean arterial pressure minus mean
ICP) falls below 50 mm Hg as a result of systemic hypotension. The
syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH)
may produce excessive water retention and potentially increase the risk
of elevated ICP (see Chapter 597). Hypotonicity of brain extracellular
spaces may cause cytotoxic edema with cell swelling and lysis. Tentorial, falcine, or cerebellar herniation does not usually occur, because
the increased ICP is transmitted to the entire subarachnoid space and
there is little structural displacement. Furthermore, if the fontanels are
still patent, increased ICP is not always dissipated.
Hydrocephalus can occur as an acute complication of bacterial
meningitis because it is often caused by adhesive thickening of the
arachnoid villi around the cisterns at the base of the brain. Thus this
thickening leads to interference with the normal resorption of CSF and
development of hydrocephalus. Less often, obstructive hydrocephalus develops after fibrosis and gliosis of the cerebral aqueduct or the
foramina of Magendie and Luschka.
Elevated CSF protein levels are partly a result of increased vascular
permeability of the blood-­brain barrier (BBB) and the loss of albumin-­
rich fluid from the capillaries and veins traversing the subdural space.
Continued transudation may result in subdural effusions, usually
observed in the later phase of acute bacterial meningitis. Hypoglycorrhachia (reduced CSF glucose level) is attributable to altered glucose
transport by the cerebral tissue.
Damage to the cerebral cortex may be a result of the focal or diffuse effects of vascular occlusion (infarction, necrosis, lactic acidosis),
hypoxia, bacterial invasion (cerebritis), toxic encephalopathy (bacterial toxins), elevated ICP, ventriculitis, and/or transudation (subdural
effusions). These pathologic factors result in the clinical manifestations
of impaired consciousness, seizures, cranial nerve deficits, motor and
sensory deficits, and later, psychomotor retardation.

PATHOGENESIS

Bacterial meningitis outside the neonatal period is typically the result
of bacterial colonization of the nasopharynx with subsequent invasion
into the bloodstream, causing bacteremia. Circulating bacteria then
breach the BBB to cause CNS infection and inflammation.
Meningitic pathogens frequently colonize the nasopharynx of
asymptomatic children, but rapid invasion after recent colonization
may also occur. Bacterial proteins termed adhesins act to enhance colonization by enabling N. meningitidis and H. influenzae type b to attach
to mucosal epithelial cell receptors. The microbiome of the nasopharynx is a complex community of bacteria that may enhance or inhibit
colonization by other bacteria. S. pneumoniae can synthesize hydrogen
peroxide, which can inhibit growth of H. influenzae type b; conversely,
H. influenzae type b can invoke a specific immune response that targets

3761

clearance of S. pneumoniae. Other bacteria may alter the microbiome of
the nasopharynx, and studies after implementation of PCVs have identified alterations to the composition of nasopharyngeal bacterial populations. Viruses can also enhance bacterial adherence by a combination
of expression of viral factors that interact with host adhesion proteins.
After attachment to epithelial cells, bacteria may breach the mucosa
and enter the bloodstream. Various models of invasion have been
developed; N. meningitidis can be transported across the mucosal
surface within a phagocytic vacuole after ingestion by the epithelial
cell. Expression of the polysaccharide capsule in relevant bacteria also
appears to be tightly regulated, as it can enhance or inhibit the efficiency
of bacterial translocation across the mucosal barrier. Viral infection
can disrupt the mucosal barrier, thereby facilitating bacterial invasion; specifically, there is a significant association between recent influenza infection and development of meningococcemia. Once bacteria
reach the bloodstream, the capsule is a critical component for survival
because it interferes with opsonic phagocytosis. Host-­related immune
defects in bacterial opsonic phagocytosis can also allow bacteremia. In
nonimmune hosts, the defect may be from an absence of preformed
IgM or IgG anticapsular antibodies (as in an unimmunized toddler),
whereas deficiencies in components of the complement or properdin
system may preclude effective opsonic phagocytosis. Asplenia may also
hamper opsonic phagocytosis by the reticuloendothelial system.
There is a positive correlation between the bloodstream bacterial
titer and the accompanying risk of developing meningitis, suggesting that a critical threshold may be necessary for breaching the BBB.
Bacterial factors, including the capsule, play a role in crossing the BBB
through transcellular, paracellular, or Trojan horse (within infected
phagocytes) mechanisms. Bacteria gain entry to the CSF through the
choroid plexus of the lateral ventricles and the meninges and then circulate to the extracerebral CSF and subarachnoid space. Bacteria multiply rapidly because CSF concentrations of complement and antibodies
are inadequate to contain bacterial proliferation. Chemotactic factors
then incite a local inflammatory response characterized by polymorphonuclear cell (neutrophil) infiltration. The presence of lipopolysaccharide (endotoxin) from gram-­negative bacteria (H. influenzae type
b, N. meningitidis) or of pneumococcal cell wall components (teichoic
acid, peptidoglycan) stimulates a marked inflammatory response, with
local production of tumor necrosis factor, interleukin-­1, prostaglandin E, and other inflammatory mediators. The subsequent inflammatory response is characterized by neutrophilic infiltration, increased
vascular permeability, further compromise of the BBB, and vascular
thrombosis. Meningitis-­associated brain injury is not simply caused by
bacterial-­derived factors but also occurs as a consequence of the host
inflammatory cascade triggered by bacterial components.
Uncommonly, meningitis may follow bacterial invasion from a contiguous focus of infection such as paranasal sinusitis, otitis media, mastoiditis, orbital cellulitis, or cranial or vertebral osteomyelitis; or it may
occur after introduction of bacteria via penetrating cranial trauma,
dermal sinus tracts, or myelomeningocele.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The onset of acute meningitis has two predominant patterns. Most
often, meningitis is preceded by several days of fever accompanied by
upper respiratory tract or, less often, gastrointestinal symptoms, followed by nonspecific signs of CNS infection, such as lethargy and irritability. Fortunately, the more dramatic presentation is less common
and features sudden and progressive shock, purpura, disseminated
intravascular coagulation, and reduced levels of consciousness, often
resulting in progression to coma or death within 24 hours.
The signs and symptoms of meningitis reflect the nonspecific findings associated with any systemic infection and the manifestations
of meningeal irritation. Nonspecific findings include fever, anorexia
or poor feeding, headache, upper respiratory symptoms, myalgias,
arthralgias, tachycardia, hypotension, and various cutaneous signs,
such as petechiae, purpura, or an erythematous macular rash. The
rash of meningococcemia is typified by an initial petechial rash that
evolves into ecchymotic and purpuric lesions. Meningeal irritation
is manifested as nuchal rigidity, back pain, Kernig sign (flexion of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3762 Part XXV u The Nervous System
the hip 90 degrees with subsequent pain upon extension of the leg),
and Brudzinski sign (involuntary flexion of the knees and hips after
passive flexion of the neck while supine). In children, particularly in
those younger than 12-­18 months, Kernig and Brudzinski signs are
not consistently present. In adults, fever, headache, and nuchal rigidity are present in only 40% of cases of bacterial meningitis. Increased
ICP is suggested by headache, emesis, bulging fontanelle or diastasis (widening) of the sutures, oculomotor (anisocoria, ptosis) or
abducens nerve paralysis, hypertension with bradycardia, apnea, or
hyperventilation, decorticate or decerebrate posturing, stupor, coma,
or signs of herniation. Papilledema is more common in complicated
meningitis and is suggestive of a chronic process, such as the presence of an intracranial abscess, subdural empyema, or occlusion of
a dural venous sinus. Focal neurologic signs usually are a result of
vascular occlusion. Cranial neuropathies of the ocular, oculomotor,
abducens, facial, and auditory nerves may also be the result of focal
inflammation. Overall, 10–20% of children with bacterial meningitis
have focal neurologic signs.
Seizures (focal or generalized) related to cerebritis, infarction, or
electrolyte disturbances occur in 20–30% of patients with meningitis.
Seizures that occur on presentation or within the first 4 days of onset
usually are of little prognostic significance. Poorer prognosis is suggested when seizures persist after the fourth day of illness, as these can
be refractory to treatment.
Alteration in mental status is common among patients with
meningitis and may be the consequence of increased ICP, cerebritis,
or hypotension; manifestations include irritability, lethargy, stupor,
obtundation, and coma. Comatose patients have a poor prognosis.
Additional manifestations of meningitis include photophobia and
tache cérébrale, which is elicited by stroking the skin with a blunt
object and observing a raised red streak within 30-­60 seconds.

DIAGNOSIS

Lumbar puncture (LP), to obtain CSF for Gram stain and culture, is the
most important step in the diagnosis of meningitis. Testing of the CSF
for neutrophilic pleocytosis, elevated protein, and/or reduced glucose
concentrations can yield results within a few hours and can indicate
bacterial meningitis (see Table 643.1). Contraindications to immediate LP include (1) evidence of increased ICP (other than a bulging
fontanel), such as third or sixth cranial nerve palsy with a depressed
level of consciousness, or the Cushing reflex (hypertension and bradycardia associated with respiratory abnormalities; see Chapter 630);
(2) severe cardiopulmonary compromise requiring prompt resuscitative measures for shock or in patients in whom positioning for the LP
would further compromise cardiopulmonary function; or (3) infection
of the skin overlying the site of the LP. Thrombocytopenia is a relative
contraindication for LP. If LP is delayed, empiric antibiotic therapy
should be initiated.
Some clinicians obtain a head CT scan before LP to evaluate for evidence of increased ICP because an LP in the setting of elevated ICP
may promote brain herniation. However, a head CT scan may delay
diagnosis of meningitis and initiation of antimicrobials, and it does
not always rule out increased ICP. Therefore head CT scans before
LP are not routinely recommended unless the patient has clinical
signs or is at risk for elevated ICP, including papilledema, focal neurologic findings, coma, history of hydrocephalus, or prior neurosurgical procedures including shunt placement. However, if a CT scan is to
be obtained before LP, antimicrobial therapy should not be delayed.
LP can safely be performed after increased ICP (if present) has been
appropriately treated.
Blood cultures should be performed in all patients with suspected
meningitis. Blood cultures reveal the responsible bacteria in up to
80–90% of cases of meningitis. Elevations of C-­reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and procalcitonin can be seen in both bacterial and viral meningitis, but some clinical prediction tools include
these tests to determine risk for bacterial meningitis.

Lumbar Puncture
See also Chapter 630.

The CSF leukocyte count in bacterial meningitis often is elevated
to >1,000/mm3 and, typically, there is a neutrophilic predominance
(75–95%). Turbid CSF is observed when the leukocyte count exceeds
200-­400/mm3. Healthy neonates may have as many as 20 leukocytes/
mm3, but older children without viral or bacterial meningitis have <8
leukocytes/mm3 in the CSF, and these should be nearly all lymphocytes
or monocytes.
The CSF leukocyte count is <250/mm3 in as many as 20% of patients
with acute bacterial meningitis. Pleocytosis may be absent in patients
with severe overwhelming sepsis associated with meningitis; this is a
poor prognostic sign. Of note, neutrophilic pleocytosis may be present
in the early stages of acute viral meningitis. The shift to lymphocytic-­
monocytic predominance in viral meningitis invariably occurs within
8-­24 hours of an initial LP. In the absence of CNS infection or inflammatory disease, children with seizures (including febrile seizures) do
not exhibit CSF pleocytosis.
A diagnostic conundrum in the evaluation of children with suspected
bacterial meningitis is the analysis of CSF obtained from children who
have already received antibiotic therapy. This is a common clinical scenario, as 25–50% of children undergoing evaluation for bacterial meningitis have received antibiotics before a CSF sample is obtained. CSF
from children with bacterial meningitis can be negative on Gram stain
and culture as early as 2-­4 hours after administration of antibiotics,
especially in situations of N. meningitidis and sensitive S. pneumoniae
meningitis. However, pleocytosis with a predominance of neutrophils,
an elevated protein level, and a reduced concentration of CSF glucose
will usually persist for several days after initiation of appropriate parenteral antibiotics. Therefore despite negative cultures, the presumptive
diagnosis of bacterial meningitis can be made on the basis of an abnormal CSF cell count, protein, and glucose. A multiplex PCR test for common CNS bacterial and viral pathogens is available for testing on CSF
samples, with turnaround times of only a few hours. This test is often
used as an adjunct (and rapid) diagnostic test, as its current sensitivity
and specificity have not supplanted the use of routine bacterial cultures;
in particular, its highest false-­positive rate is for S. pneumoniae. PCR
of bacterial 16S ribosomal RNA sequences may be useful in diagnosing the cause of culture-­negative meningitis caused by prior antibiotic
therapy or for the detection of nonculturable or fastidious pathogens.
A traumatic LP may also complicate the interpretation of CSF tests,
as CSF leukocyte count and protein concentration are significantly
affected by blood in the sample. However, the Gram stain, culture, and
glucose level are unlikely to be influenced by blood in a CSF sample.
Repeat LP at a higher interspace may produce fluid that is less hemorrhagic, but this fluid usually still contains red blood cells. Although
methods for correcting for the presence of red blood cells have been
proposed for red blood cell counts <10,000 cells/mm3, these corrections can be imprecise and unreliable, so empiric treatment with antibiotics pending any bacterial culture result might be indicated.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Most bacterial meningitis is caused by S. pneumoniae and N. meningitidis, whereas H. influenzae type b is relatively rare in nations with
high immunization rates. However, other pathogens less frequently
identified in meningitis can cause similar clinical manifestations. These
organisms include other bacteria, including non–type-­b H. influenzae, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Nocardia spp., Treponema pallidum
(syphilis), and Borrelia burgdorferi (Lyme disease); fungi, such as those
endemic to specific geographic areas (Coccidioides, Histoplasma, and
Blastomyces) and those responsible for infections in compromised
hosts (Candida, Cryptococcus, and Aspergillus); parasites, such as Toxoplasma gondii and Taenia solium; and most frequently, viruses (Tables
643.2 and 643.3 and see Chapter 643.2). Focal infections of the CNS,
including brain abscess and parameningeal abscess (subdural empyema, cranial and spinal epidural abscess), may also be confused with
meningitis. In addition, noninfectious illnesses can cause generalized
inflammation of the CNS; relative to infections, these disorders are
very uncommon and include malignancy (lymphoma), immunologic
diseases (CNS vasculitis, sarcoidosis, autoimmune encephalitis), and
exposure to toxins (see Table 643.3).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 643 u Central Nervous System Infections
Table 643.2

3763

Causes of Aseptic Meningitis and Encephalitis Including Differential Diagnosis at Different Ages

 

AGE

INFECTIOUS

INFLAMMATION

AUTOIMMUNE

MIMICS

0-­24 mo

Enteroviruses
Parechovirus
HSV
Congenital infections
Arboviruses
HIV

Cryopyrin disorders
Interferonopathies
Complement disorders
(HUS/TTP) Aicardi-­
Goutieres syndrome

Paraneoplastic rare
under 12 mo

• Bacterial meningitis
• Urea cycle disorders, maple syrup
urine disease, MCAD deficiency, CPT2,
mitochondrial disorders (Leigh)
• Brain malformations
• Intoxication
• Epilepsy
• Dravet (SCNA1) and other epilepsy
encephalopathy syndromes
• Acute adrenal crisis
• Hydrocephalus
• HLH
• Glioma

2-­5 yr

Enteroviruses
HSV
Influenza
Arboviruses
Adenovirus
Bartonella
Ehrlichia and Borrelia
spp.
Rabies

Complement disorders
(HUS/TTP)

ADEM
NMOSD
VZV
AFP
TM

• Bacterial meningitis
• Intoxication
• MCAD deficiency
• Epilepsy
• Dravet (SCNA1) and other epilepsy
encephalopathy syndromes
• Infectious HUS
• HLH
• Mitochondrial disorders (MELAS)
• Glioma; CNS lymphoma

5-­18 yr

Enteroviruses
HSV
Influenza
Arboviruses
Adenovirus
Bartonella
Ehrlichia and Borrelia
spp.
Rabies

ADEM
NMDAR
NMOSD
VZV
AFP
SLE
TM

• Bacterial meningitis
• Epilepsy
• Intoxication
• Psychosis
• Wilson disease
• Pseudotumor cerebri
• Multiple sclerosis
• Dravet (SCNA1) and other epilepsy
encephalopathy syndromes
• HLH
• Mitochondrial disorders (MELAS)
• Vasculitis (primary, rickettsia, VZV)
• Tumors: Glioma; CNS lymphoma; Metastatic

Young adult

Enteroviruses
HSV
Influenza
Arboviruses
Ehrlichia and Borrelia
spp.
HIV
Rabies

ADEM
NMDAR
NMOSD
SLE
Paraneoplastic
AFP
TM

• Bacterial meningitis
• Intoxication
• Psychosis
• Wilson disease
• HLH
• Periarteritis nodosa, Takayasu, giant cell,
ANCA + arteritis
• Acute intermittent porphyria
• Multiple sclerosis
• Vasculitis (primary, rickettsia, VZV)
• Tumors: Glioma; CNS lymphoma; metastatic

Older adult

Enteroviruses
HSV
Influenza
Arboviruses
Ehrlichia and Borrelia
spp.
HIV
Rabies

Limbic encephalitis
SLE
AFP
NMOSD
NMDAR

• Bacterial meningitis
• Intoxication
• TTP
• Neurodegeneration
• Tumor metastases
• HLH
• Periarteritis nodosa, Takayasu, giant cell,
ANCA + arteritis
• Multiple sclerosis
• Mitochondrial disorders (MELAS)
• Vasculitis (primary, rickettsia, VZV)
• Tumors: Glioma; CNS lymphoma; metastatic

ADEM, Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis; AFP, acute flaccid paralysis; ANCA, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody; CNS, central nervous system; CPT2, carnitine
palmitoyltransferase-­2; HLH, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis; HSV, herpes simplex virus; HUS, hemolytic uremic syndrome; MCAD, medium-­chain acylcarnitine deficiency;
MELAS, mitochondrial encephalopathy lactic acidosis syndrome; NMDAR, N-­methyl-­D-­aspartate receptor encephalitis; NMOSD, neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder; SCNA1,
sodium voltage-­gated channel alpha subunit 1; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus; SMA, spinal muscular atrophy; TM, transverse myelitis; TTP, thrombotic thrombocytopenic
purpura; VZV, varicella-­zoster virus
Modified from Kliegman RM. Encephalitis. In: Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, et al, eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based Diagnosis, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2023:
Table 42.2, p. 768.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3764 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 643.3  Exposures Associated with Agents Causing Aseptic Meningitis, Encephalitis, and Encephalitis-­Like Syndrome
EXPOSURE

AGENT

RISK FACTORS AND EPIDEMIOLOGY

ARTHROPODS
Mosquitoes
Togaviridae
Chikungunya virus

Humans and other vertebrates serve as reservoirs. Vertical transmission has been
reported.

Eastern equine encephalitis virus

Like Western equine encephalitis, birds are the primary reservoir, exposure to horses is
not a risk factor. High frequency of symptomatic infections in children and elderly.

Semliki Forest virus

Cases are rare; one reported death attributed as part of a possible laboratory accident

Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus

Equids and small mammals are the primary reservoir. Children are at higher risk for
development of long-­term neurological sequelae.

Western equine encephalitis (WEE)
virus

Birds are the primary reservoir. Viremia is too low in humans or horses to infect
mosquitoes, so horse exposure is not a true risk factor for disease.

Flaviviridae
Dengue virus

The primary reservoir is humans and other primates. Vertical transmission has been
reported, as well through organ transplant and blood transfusion

Japanese encephalitis virus

Primary reservoir is birds and pigs. Bats may also contribute to circulation of the virus.

Murray Valley encephalitis virus

Waterfowl are the primary reservoir

St. Louis encephalitis virus

Birds are the primary reservoir

West Nile virus

Birds are the primary reservoir. Transmission has also been reported through organ
transplantation or blood transfusions.

Zika virus

Humans and non-­human primates are the like primary reservoir. Transmission has also
been reported through sexual contact and vertical transmission.

Reoviridae
Banna virus

Unknown reservoir

Bunyavirales
Jamestown Canyon virus

The primary reservoir is deer and other ungulates (moose and bison)

La Crosse encephalitis virus

Small mammals (chipmunks and squirrels) serve as the primary reservoir. Peak
incidence in school-­age children

Rift Valley fever virus

Mosquitos are the vector and reservoir. Further viral amplification occurs in livestock
and other domestic ruminants. Small mammals and bats may also contribute to
persistence. Transmission may also occur from handling infected animal tissue or
drinking unpasteurized milk.

Anaplasma phagocytophilum

White-­footed mouse is hypothesized the primary reservoir, with other sources
including various mammals including deer. Rare reports of transmission through
blood transfusion.

Borrelia burgdorferi

White-­footed mouse and other small mammals are the primary reservoir. Deer serve to
support the tick population but not Borrelia.

Ehrlichia chaffeensis

Primary reservoir is white-­tailed deer. Transmission also reported through blood
transfusion or solid organ transplantation.

Ehrlichia ewingii

Dogs and deer are hypothesized to be the primary reservoirs.

Powassan virus

Small mammals are the primary reservoir.

Rickettsia rickettsii

Transmission may occur with very short tick attachment times. Ticks serve as both the
vector and reservoir. Rare reports of transmission through blood transfusion.

Kyasanur Forest disease virus

Transmission may also occur from contact with an infected animal. While it can infect
livestock, there are no reports of transmission through unpasteurized milk

Tickborne encephalitis virus

Reservoirs include ticks, birds, and small mammals. Transmission may also occur via
direct contact, consuming unpasteurized dairy products, blood transfusion, organ
transplantation, and breastfeeding.

Bartonella bacilliformis

Reservoir is unknown. Most infections occur at sunrise or sundown as the flies are most
active during these time periods.

Ticks

Sandflies

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 643 u Central Nervous System Infections

3765

Table 643.3  Exposures Associated with Agents Causing Aseptic Meningitis, Encephalitis, and Encephalitis-­Like Syndrome—
cont’d
EXPOSURE

Tsetse flies

AGENT

RISK FACTORS AND EPIDEMIOLOGY

Chandipura vesiculovirus

Mosquitos may also play a role in transmission. No other vertebrate has been
identified as a potential reservoir. Cases described from India and West Africa.

Toscana virus

Reservoir is presumed to be sandflies; very little data exist as to whether other
mammals could serve as a source of the virus.

Trypanosoma brucei gambiense

Humans are the primary reservoir although it can also be identified in primates and
ungulates. Vertical transmission has been reported.

Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiense

Livestock such as cattle and other large mammals are considered to be the primary
reservoir

WILD OR DOMESTIC ANIMALS
Bats
Australian bat lyssavirus

It is assumed that any bat in Australia could carry this virus.

Histoplasma capsulatum

Guano promotes fungal growth. Bats can develop chronic and disseminated infection
with Histoplasma, but risk of transmission is likely highest through guano exposure.

Nipah virus

Reports of transmission via direct contact with bats or coming into contact with bat
bodily fluids on food. Human to human transmission has been reported.

Rabies virus

Some bat bites are too small to be detected, often post-­exposure prophylaxis is
offered to anyone with direct contact with bats or if contact cannot be ruled out (e.g.,
an individual waking up to a bat flying in the same room). Transmission has been
reported via solid organ transplant

Cattle

Brucella abortus

Many large mammals can be infected. Nearly eradicated from cattle in the US,
Canada, Europe, Australia, New Zealand, and some Asian countries including Japan
and Israel.

Dogs

Rabies virus

Many countries have been declared rabies-­free in dogs, including Europe, Japan, the
US, Australia, and New Zealand. Other countries remain at high risk for transmission
from dogs.

Toxocara canis

Dogs (especially puppies) shed eggs in feces, and organism survives in soil for
prolonged period

Bartonella henselae

Typically follows scratch or bite from cat or kitten; highest incidence in children, in the
fall, and around holidays (when cats are given as gifts)

Rabies virus

In the US, more rabid cats are detected than dogs. In other countries, cats are second
to dogs in prevalence.

Toxoplasma gondii

Cats and other felines are reservoir hosts; they shed oocytes in feces, and the soil
becomes contaminated. Sheep, goats, swine, cattle serve as intermediate hosts.
Transmission may also occur vertically or through blood transfusion or solid organ
transplantation. Worldwide distribution

Toxocara cati

Cats, (specially kittens) shed eggs in feces, and organism survives in soil for prolonged
period

Leptospira spp.

Rodents (and many other animals) excrete organism in urine, and the organism remains
viable in soil or water for weeks to months

Lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus

Peak incidence in fall and winter; chronic infection in mice, hamsters, and guinea pigs;
humans infected by inhalation or ingestion of dust or food contaminated by urine,
feces, blood, nasopharyngeal secretions of infected rodents. Transmission has also
occurred by vertical transmission and solid organ transplant,

Baylisascaris procyonis

Young children at risk due to pica, particularly near raccoon latrines. Other animal
handlers, including hunters, at risk.

Rabies virus

“Raccoon strain” extends along Eastern seaboard of the USA and has reached
northward into Canada

Brucella melitensis

Direct contact with infected animals or their secretions. Present world-­wide but has
been eradicated in some countries including Northern and Central Europe, US,
Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and Japan. Transmission has also occurred from
sexual intercourse, vertical transmission, solid organ transplantation and transfusions.

Coxiella burnetii

Inhalation; either direct exposure to animal or exposure to contaminated materials
particularly dust or during birth. Rare reports of vertical transmission, through blood
transfusions, or sexual intercourse

Chlamydophila psittaci

Birds can harbor and transmit organism to humans; usually acquired via inhalation of
fecal dust/sections of birds. Rare cases have been reported in exposures to other
non-­avian livestock.

Cats

Rodents

Raccoons

Sheep, goats

Birds

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3766 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 643.3  Exposures Associated with Agents Causing Aseptic Meningitis, Encephalitis, and Encephalitis-­Like Syndrome—
cont’d
EXPOSURE

AGENT

RISK FACTORS AND EPIDEMIOLOGY

Cryptococcus neoformans

Primarily in immunocompromised individuals. Some association with exposure to soil
contaminated with bird droppings, particularly pigeons

Old World
monkeys

B virus

Bite of Old World macaques. Present in both wild and captive settings.

Horses

Hendra virus

Endemic in Australia; associated with excretions/tissues from horses

Swine

Nipah virus

Close contact with pigs was the primary cause of an outbreak in Malaysia

Brucella suis

Prevalent in many locations in the world, some countries have achieved eradication
including Europe, Canada, US, and Australia.

Skunks

Rabies virus

Skunk populations are the primary reservoir in the central US and California

Squirrels

Variegated squirrel bornavirus 1

Detected in Germany, particularly in captive squirrels originating from Latin America or
Asia. Unclear if this virus originates in Europe or was imported.

INGESTION OR INHALATION
Fresh water
Leptospira spp.

Soil

Spelunking

Undercooked
pork, lamb, or
beef

Organisms from animal urine or placental tissue can remain viable for weeks to months
in soil or water; recreational exposure associated with wading or swimming in
contaminated water (particularly after floods or hurricanes)

Naegleria fowleri

Swimming in warm, natural bodies of water (rarely poorly chlorinated pools reported).
Not found in salt water. Cases also linked to nasal rinses or neti pot usage.

Acanthamoeba spp.

Found in soil and water. Transmission through inhalation or inoculation; cases of
keratitis associated with contact lens usage

Balamuthia mandrillaris

Soil living organism, transmission presumably occurs through inhalation or inoculation
into cuts or wounds. Transmission has also been reported via solid organ
transplantation.

Baylisascaris procyonis

Widespread in the US; export of raccoons has led to spread to Europe and Asia.

Blastomyces dermatitidis

Present in the eastern half of the US (particularly along the Mississippi, Ohio, and St.
Lawrence Rivers), Canada, Africa, and India.

Coccidioides spp.

Also known as valley fever. Infection is seasonal and is acquired by inhalation of soil or
dust. Transmission has occurred from solid organ transplantation.

Histoplasma capsulatum

Inhalation of airborne spores from soil. Outbreaks have occurred in endemic areas with
exposure to bird, chicken, or bat droppings or recently contaminated soil. Globally
distributed, with as many as 80% of children have been infected.

Toxocara canis/Toxocara cati

Eggs in sandboxes and playgrounds; organisms survive long periods in soil

Histoplasma capsulatum

Reports of infections due to indirect exposure near the entrance of bat caves

Rabies virus

Aerosol transmission has been implicated in very rare cases after exploring caves with
large bat populations

Toxoplasma gondii

Cook meats to a minimum of 145-­160°F. Meat color is an insufficient marker to kill
tissue cysts

Undercooked
Gnathostoma spp.
freshwater fish,
birds, reptiles,
or amphibians

Marinating in lime juice (ceviche) does not kill the parasite.

Freshwater
crayfish or
crabs

Paragonimus westermani

Mostly in Asia. Related species present in Africa, North and South America.

Raw or
undercooked
meat

Trichinella spp.

Mostly associated with pigs but has been found in other wild game meat. Worldwide
distribution

Raw or
undercooked
snails, slugs,
freshwater
prawns, crabs,
or frogs,

Angiostrongylus cantonensis

Worldwide distribution. Snails and slugs can be accidentally chopped up with
vegetables and consumed, leading to infection.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 643 u Central Nervous System Infections

3767

Table 643.3  Exposures Associated with Agents Causing Aseptic Meningitis, Encephalitis, and Encephalitis-­Like Syndrome—
cont’d
EXPOSURE

AGENT

RISK FACTORS AND EPIDEMIOLOGY

Unpasteurized
milk

Tickborne encephalitis virus

Unpasteurized milk or cheeses from cows, sheep, or goats have been implicated

Coxiella burnetii

Highly prevalent in many types of raw milk, pasteurization reduces risk

Listeria monocytogenes

Also found in various raw dairy, vegetable, and meat products

Toxoplasma gondii

Consumption of raw goat, sheep, or camel milk

Arthropod-­borne pathogens

Prevalence mirrors insect populations, infections nadir during the winter in temperate
regions.

Common viral infections (influenza,
coronaviruses, adenoviruses,
astroviruses, and other respiratory
or gastrointestinal viruses);
mycoplasma

Many viral and atypical bacterial infections predominant in the winter in temperate
regions. Unclear if SARS-­CoV-­2 will follow the same seasonality.

Enteroviruses and parechoviruses

Peak incidence in late summer and early fall in temperate regions. In tropical regions,
enteroviruses circulate year round. Hypothesized that humidity may stabilize viral
particles in the environment.

Enterovirus D68

Reemergence in 2014 in causing acute flaccid paralysis. Outbreaks occurred every two
years until 2020.

Naegleria fowleri

Thrives in warmer water temperatures, leading to increased incidence of disease
during the summer and early fall.

SEASONAL

SEXUAL ACTIVITY
Herpes simplex virus 1/2
HIV

Highest risk with unprotected sex with viremic subjects. Undetectable viral load equals
untransmittable.

Treponema pallidum

Resurgence in cases over the past decade particularly in the US

Zika virus

Reports of sexual transmission. Virus is present in saliva, semen, vaginal fluids, urine,
and breast milk. Virus may persist longer in semen than other bodily fluids.

FOREIGN TRAVEL
Global
Chikungunya virus

Africa

Primary HSV-­2 infection can cause meningitis particularly in young females.

Spread to the Africa, Americas, Asia, and Europe. Large outbreak in Latin America in
the mid 2010’s.

Dengue virus

Cases occur on most continents. In the US, occasional local transmission reported in
Florida, Texas, Arizona, Hawaii, and US territories

Rabies virus

Prevalent worldwide but most cases occur in Asia and Africa. Dog bites are the most
common mode of acquisition in developing countries

West Nile virus

Outbreaks have been reported on all continents except Antarctica. In the US, most
cases now occur west of the Mississippi River. A few thousand cases are diagnosed
each year in the US.

Zika virus

Worldwide distribution including North/South America, Africa, Asia

Measles

Most cases now occur in South America, Africa, and Asia, including the Malay
Archipelago and the Philippines. Secondary spread has led to outbreaks in many
other countries.

Mumps

Remains prevalent worldwide and a frequent cause of viral meningitis

Rubella

Endemic in the Eastern Hemisphere, particularly in Asia and Africa.

Gnathostoma spp

Worldwide distribution of different species. Most cases have occurred in Asia and Latin
America.

Plasmodium spp.

Tropical and subtropical areas in most continents

Taenia spp.

Endemic to most countries. Most cases are travel associated when they occur in the
US, Canada, and Australia.

Poliovirus

Africa was declared polio free in 2020, but in 2023, transmission of poliovirus type 1
was detected in Mozambique

Rift Valley fever virus

Most prevalent in southern and eastern Africa, most countries report cases or isolation
of virus

Toscana virus

Reported in Morocco, Tunisia, and Algeria
Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3768 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 643.3  Exposures Associated with Agents Causing Aseptic Meningitis, Encephalitis, and Encephalitis-­Like Syndrome—
cont’d
EXPOSURE

Asia

Australia

Europe

North America

AGENT

RISK FACTORS AND EPIDEMIOLOGY

Blastomyces dermatitidis

Rare cases described throughout Africa. Other related Blastomyces spp. present in
Africa.

Trypanosoma brucei gambiense

West and central Sub-­Saharan Africa

Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiense

East Africa, predominantly Uganda, Kenya, Tanzania, Zambia, Malawi, Zimbabwe, and
Mozambique

Banna virus

Detected in mosquitoes in China, Vietnam, Indonesia

Japanese encephalitis virus

Mostly southern and eastern Asia, Malay archipelago, and Australia

Kyasanur Forest disease virus

Detected so far only in India

Nipah virus

Southeast Asia, particularly Malaysia

Poliovirus

Wild type continues to circulate in Pakistan and Afghanistan.

Tickborne encephalitis virus

Central Europe to eastern Asia, includes Japan

Borrelia burgdorferi

Temperate forested regions throughout northern Asia

Australian bat lyssavirus

Exclusive to Australia, spread by bats. Closely related to rabies virus.

Hendra virus

Exposure to body fluids and excretions of infected horses is the primary risk for
transmission. Most cases reported in Queensland

Japanese encephalitis virus

Cases reported in northern and eastern regions

Murray Valley encephalitis virus

Cases throughout Australia, many have occurred in the Northern Territory. Also in New
Guinea

Tickborne encephalitis virus

Central Europe to Japan

Toscana virus

Endemic in most Mediterranean countries

Anaplasma phagocytophilum

Temperate zones, particularly western and central Europe

Borrelia burgdorferi

Temperate forested regions, particularly eastern and central Europe

California/La Crosse virus

Most cases in Ohio, West Virginia, Tennessee, and North Carolina, but many other
cases reported in the Midwest and South. From 2003-­2022, a total of 1,431 cases
have been reported to the CDC.

Eastern equine encephalitis

A total of 189 cases reported to the CDC from 2003-­2022. Most cases east of the
Mississippi River, particularly Michigan, Florida, New Hampshire, and Massachusetts.

Jamestown canyon virus

Majority of cases in Wisconsin and Minnesota, with other Midwest and Eastern states
reporting cases. A total of 282 cases reported in the past decade to the CDC.

Powassan virus

Wisconsin Minnesota, northeastern US, Canada. A total of 290 cases have been
reported to the CDC between 2004-­2002.

St. Louis encephalitis virus

Most cases in Arizona, California and Texas, but many other states have sporadic
cases. A total of 284 cases reported to the CDC in the past two decades

Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus

Sporadic cases in Florida and along the Mexican border

Western equine encephalitis virus

Most cases occurred west of the Mississippi River extending into Latin America. Cases
are now rare; no infections reported to the CDC in over a decade.

Anaplasma phagocytophilum

Majority of cases in Wisconsin, Minnesota and northeastern US. Cases also occur in
mid-­Atlantic, Midwest, West coast

Borrelia burgdorferi

Eastern USA as far south as Ohio, West Virginia, Virginia, and North Carolina. Also
includes Wisconsin and Minnesota, with cases occurring less commonly in California,
Oregon, and Washington state. Nearly 500,000 Americans are diagnosed with Lyme
disease each year.

Ehrlichia chaffeensis

Southern and central USA and Mid-­Atlantic and coastal states

Rickettsia rickettsii

Majority of cases in a central band of the US including Kansas, Missouri, Arkansas,
Kentucky, Tennessee, Mississippi, Alabama, Virginia and North Carolina. Other cases
identified throughout the US.

Blastomyces dermatitidis

Predominates along the Mississippi, Ohio, and St Lawrence Rivers, but many cases
reported throughout the eastern US and Canada. Estimated ∼2 cases per 100,000
each year in the US.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 643 u Central Nervous System Infections

3769

Table 643.3  Exposures Associated with Agents Causing Aseptic Meningitis, Encephalitis, and Encephalitis-­Like Syndrome—
cont’d
EXPOSURE

South America

AGENT

RISK FACTORS AND EPIDEMIOLOGY

Coccidioides spp.

Semiarid regions of southwestern US (California, Nevada, Utah, Arizona, New Mexico,
Texas, and southern portions of Colorado and Oklahoma. Extends south into much
of Mexico and central America. Around 20,000 cases diagnosed each year in the US.

St. Louis encephalitis virus

Sporadic cases in Argentina, Brazil, and Peru, but far more prevalent in the US.

Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus

Tropical latitudes, particularly Colombia, Venezuela, Peru, and Ecuador. Sporadic cases
reported in Brazil, Bolivia, and Argentina.

Western equine encephalitis virus

Rare cases in Brazil and Colombia.

Rickettsia rickettsii

Cases reported in Colombia, Brazil, and Argentina.

Coccidioides spp.

Many countries in Latin America, including Brazil, Argentina, Colombia, Venezuela, and
Paraguay

Bartonella bacilliformis

Predominantly occurs in the Andes at elevations of 3,000 to 10,000 feet above sea
level. Most cases in Peru, but has been reported in Colombia and Ecuador.

Modified from Kliegman RM. Encephalitis. In: Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, et al., eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based Diagnosis, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2023:
Table 42.3, p. 770-­775.

Determining the specific cause of CNS infection is facilitated by
careful examination of the CSF with specific stains (e.g., Kinyoun
carbol fuchsin for mycobacteria, India ink for fungi), cytology, antigen detection (Cryptococcus), CSF serology (syphilis, West Nile virus
[WNV], arboviruses), and PCR (bacteria and viruses). Other potentially valuable diagnostic tests include blood cultures, CT or MRI of
the brain, serum serologic tests, and, rarely, meningeal or brain biopsy.
Acute viral meningoencephalitis is the most likely infection to be
confused with bacterial meningitis (see Table 643.2 and Table 643.3).
Although children with viral meningoencephalitis typically appear less
ill than those with bacterial meningitis, both types of infection have
a spectrum of severity. Some children with bacterial meningitis may
have relatively mild signs and symptoms, whereas some with viral
meningoencephalitis may be critically ill. Although classic CSF profiles
associated with bacterial versus viral infection tend to be distinct (see
Table 643.1), these cases can overlap in the number of CSF leukocytes
and glucose and protein levels. Quite often, children are empirically
treated with antibiotics for >48 hours to await CSF culture and PCR
results to distinguish these two groups of pathogens.

TREATMENT

Essential to improving clinical outcomes in patients with bacterial
meningitis is prompt recognition, diagnostic testing, and initiation of
appropriate antimicrobial therapy. Several studies have demonstrated
that delays in initiating antimicrobial therapy, even a few hours, are significantly associated with adverse clinical outcomes and death. If focal
neurologic findings, papilledema, or increased ICP is present, antibiotics
should be given before obtaining a head CT scan (and subsequent LP),
and the increased ICP should be treated simultaneously (see Chapter
82). Some patients with meningitis will develop multisystem organ failure, shock (see Chapter 85), and acute respiratory distress syndrome (see
Chapter 86), requiring further management in an intensive care unit.

Initial Antibiotic Therapy

The initial (empiric) choice of antibiotic therapy for meningitis in immunocompetent infants and children should achieve bactericidal levels in
the CSF and have excellent activity against the typical bacterial causes
of meningitis (Table 643.4). Although there is substantial geographic
variation in the frequency of resistance of S. pneumoniae to β-­lactam
antibiotics, rates are increasing throughout the world. In the United
States, 25–50% of meningitic strains of S. pneumoniae have some level
of resistance to penicillin; relative resistance (minimal inhibitory concentration = 0.1-­1.0 μg/mL) is more common than high-­level resistance

(minimal inhibitory concentration = 2.0 μg/mL). Resistance to ceftriaxone and cefepime is globally variable, but in some studies can be as high
as 25%. Resistance to cephalosporins declined in the United States after
the introduction of PCV13 because of the reduction in disease caused by
serotype 19A, which is commonly associated with resistance. However,
current surveillance suggests rising rates of cephalosporin resistance
in non-­PCV13 serotypes. In contrast, most strains of N. meningitidis
are sensitive to penicillin and cephalosporins, although rare resistant
isolates have been reported. Approximately 30–40% of isolates of H.
influenzae type b and 10% of H. influenzae type a produce β-­lactamases
and therefore are resistant to ampicillin. These β-­lactamase–producing
strains remain sensitive to third-­and fourth-­generation cephalosporins.
The recommended empiric antibiotic regimen in suspected bacterial
meningitis beyond the neonatal period is a third-­generation cephalosporin (ceftriaxone) plus vancomycin. Because of the efficacy of
third-­generation cephalosporins in the therapy of meningitis caused
by sensitive S. pneumoniae, N. meningitidis, and H. influenzae type b,
ceftriaxone (50 mg/kg/dose given every 12 hours) should be part of initial therapy. Based on the current incidence of cephalosporin-­resistant
strains of S. pneumoniae, vancomycin is also recommended as part
of empiric therapy. Vancomycin dosing guidelines have shifted from
trough-­based dosing to area under the curve/minimum inhibitory
concentration (AUC/MIC; see Chapter 225). Although current clinical data are limited, vancomycin dosing for meningitis should attain
a target AUC/MIC of 400-­600 mg*h/L (previous vancomycin trough
goals were 15-­20 mg/L). Patients allergic to penicillin and cephalosporin antibiotics can be treated with meropenem (40 mg/kg/dose every 8
hours); other alternatives include fluoroquinolones or chloramphenicol, if available. Alternatively, allergic patients can be desensitized to
the preferred antibiotic (see Chapter 193).
If L. monocytogenes infection is suspected, as in young infants or
those with a T-­
lymphocyte deficiency, ampicillin (300 mg/kg/day,
divided every 6 hours) also should be given because cephalosporins
are inactive against L. monocytogenes. Intravenous trimethoprim-­
sulfamethoxazole is an alternative treatment for L. monocytogenes and
has documented clinical efficacy.
If a patient is immunocompromised and gram-­negative bacterial
meningitis is suspected, initial therapy might include cefepime or
meropenem.

Duration of Antibiotic Therapy

The duration of antibiotic therapy for meningitis had been based on
experience and expert opinion rather than randomized clinical trials.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3770 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 643.4  Antibiotics Used for the Treatment of Bacterial Meningitis*
NEONATES (TERM)
DRUGS

0-­7 DAYS

8-­28 DAYS

INFANTS AND CHILDREN

Amikacin†‡

15 divided q24h

18 divided q24h

15-­22.5 divided q8h, q12h, or q24h

Ampicillin

300 divided q8h

300 divided q6h

300-­400 divided q4h, max 12 g/day

Cefepime

100 divided q12h

100 divided q12h

150 divided q8h, max 6 g/day

Ceftriaxone§

—

—

100 divided q12h or q24h. max 4
g/day

Ceftazidime

100 divided q12h

150 divided q8h

150-­200 divided q8h, max 6 g/day

Gentamicin†‡

4 divided q24h

5 divided q24h

7.5 divided q8h

Meropenem

60 divided q8h

90 divided q8h
for days 14-­28

120 divided q8h, max 6 g/day

Nafcillin

75 divided q8h

100 divided q6h

200 divided q4h-­q6h, max 12 g/day

Penicillin G

450,000 divided q8h

500,000 divided q6h

300,000-­400,000 divided q4h, max
24 million U/day

Rifampin

—

10 q24h

15-­20 divided q12h or q24h, max
600 mg/day

Tobramycin†‡

4 divided q24h

5 divided q24h

7.5 divided q8h

Vancomycin†‡#

40 divided q12h

60 divided q8h

age 3 mo-­12: 60-­80 divided q6h
age >12 yr: 60-­70 divided q6h-­q8h

*Dosages in mg/kg (units/kg for penicillin G) per day.
†Smaller doses and longer dosing intervals, especially of aminoglycosides and vancomycin for very low-­birthweight neonates, may be advisable.
‡Monitoring of serum levels is recommended to ensure safe and therapeutic values.
§Use in neonates is not routinely recommended because of inadequate experience in neonatal meningitis and concerns of displacement of bilirubin from albumin, leading to
worsening of hyperbilirubinemia. Some centers use ceftriaxone in term neonates older than 7 days of age who are not receiving calcium-­containing solutions or total parenteral
nutrition and have normal albumin level and total serum bilirubin <5 mg/dL.
#Goal vancomycin AUC/MIC of 400-­600 mg*hr/L or trough of 15-­20 mg/L.
Adapted from Tunkel AR, Hartman BJ, Kaplan SL, et al. Practice guidelines for the management of bacterial meningitis. Clin Infect Dis. 2004;39:1267–1284. Table 6; with updated data
from Kimberlin DW, Barnett ED, Lynfield R, et al. Red Book (2021): Report of the Committee on Infectious Diseases, 32nd ed. Itasca, IL: American Academy of Pediatrics; 2021.

In the past, the standard of care for the treatment of meningitis included
repeating an LP before the end of antimicrobial therapy. The total length
of therapy would be determined according to whether the CSF parameters (white blood cell count, protein, and glucose) had normalized or
not. However, further studies showed that abnormal CSF parameters
did not predict which patients would develop relapsed infection after
stopping antibiotics. Therefore repeat LP before discontinuation of
antibiotics for typical bacterial meningitis is not recommended.
Currently, the recommended treatment duration for uncomplicated S. pneumoniae meningitis is 10-­14 days with a third-­generation
cephalosporin, or intravenous penicillin (300,000-­400,000 units/kg/
day, divided every 4 hours) for penicillin-­sensitive isolates, or vancomycin if the isolate is resistant to penicillins and cephalosporins.
For N. meningitidis meningitis, the recommended treatment duration is 5-­7 days with intravenous penicillin for strains with an MIC of
penicillin <0.1 μg/mL, or ceftriaxone for strains with an MIC of 0.1-­1
μg/mL. Uncomplicated H. influenzae type b meningitis should be
treated for 7-­10 days with ampicillin for β-­lactamase–negative strains
or with a third-­generation cephalosporin for β-­lactamase–positive
isolates. Patients who receive intravenous or oral antibiotics before
LP and do not have an identifiable pathogen from cultures but do
have evidence of bacterial meningitis based on their CSF profile and
PCR should receive therapy with ceftriaxone for 7-­10 days. Shorter
durations of antibiotics for meningitis might be effective; one double-­
blinded, randomized study of children with meningitis demonstrated
equivalent outcomes when treating with ceftriaxone for 5 versus 10
days. In addition, during epidemics of meningococcal meningitis in
Africa, single intramuscular dosages of ceftriaxone or chloramphenicol can be used.

Meningitis caused by Escherichia coli or P. aeruginosa may require
therapy with a third-­or fourth-­generation cephalosporin or carbapenem active against the isolate in vitro. Many isolates of E. coli are sensitive to ceftriaxone, and isolates of P. aeruginosa are often sensitive to
ceftazidime. Repeat examination of CSF should be considered in some
neonates and in patients with meningitis from gram-­negative bacilli or
β-­lactam–resistant S. pneumoniae. The CSF in most cases will be sterile within 24-­48 hours of initiation of appropriate antibiotic therapy.
Gram-­negative bacillary meningitis should be treated for 3 weeks, or at
least 2 weeks after CSF sterilization, if documented.
Side effects of antibiotic therapy for meningitis include phlebitis,
drug fever, rashes, emesis, oral or vaginal candidiasis, and diarrhea.
Ceftriaxone may cause reversible gallbladder pseudolithiasis, detectable by abdominal ultrasonography. This is usually asymptomatic but
may be associated with emesis and upper right quadrant pain.

Corticosteroids

Rapid killing of bacteria in the CSF by the host’s immune response and
antibiotics leads to release of inflammatory agents (e.g., endotoxin)
that precipitate a cytokine-­mediated inflammatory cascade. The resultant edema and neutrophilic infiltration may aggravate neurologic
injury with worsening of CNS signs and symptoms. Therefore agents
that restrain production of inflammatory mediators could be of benefit
in bacterial meningitis.
In a Cochrane review of corticosteroid use in meningitis, steroids
reduced hearing loss in children with meningitis caused by H. influenzae type b but not by other pathogens. The use of adjunctive steroids in
children did not reduce mortality; however, steroids did improve survival rates in adults with pneumococcal meningitis. These data support

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 643 u Central Nervous System Infections

3771

the use of intravenous dexamethasone 0.15 mg/kg/dose given every 6
hours for 2 days in the treatment of H. influenzae type b meningitis
in children over 6 weeks of age. Corticosteroids appear to have maximum benefit if given 1-­2 hours before antibiotics are initiated, which
is difficult to operationalize; steroids may also be effective if given concurrently with or soon after the first dose of antibiotics. Pediatric data
regarding benefits, if any, of corticosteroids in the treatment of meningitis caused by other bacteria remain inconclusive.

in the outpatient setting is indicated for patients who develop a hearing
deficit.

COMPLICATIONS

See also Chapter 237.
Chemoprophylaxis is recommended for all close contacts of patients
with meningococcal meningitis, regardless of age or immunization status. Close contacts >1 month of age should be treated with rifampin 15-­
20 mg/kg/dose every 12 hours (maximum dose 600 mg) for 2 days as
soon as possible after identification of a case of suspected meningococcal meningitis or sepsis. Alternative options include intramuscular ceftriaxone (125 mg once for children under age 15 years, or 250 mg once
for persons older than 15 years) or ciprofloxacin 20 mg/kg as a single
oral dose (maximum 500 mg). Close contacts include household, daycare, and nursery school contacts and healthcare workers who have
direct exposure to oral secretions (mouth-­to-­mouth resuscitation, suctioning, intubation). If there is a high suspicion of meningococcemia
in the index patient, exposed contacts should be prophylaxed immediately. In addition, all contacts should be educated about the early signs
of meningococcal disease and the need to seek prompt medical attention if these signs develop.
Many countries have included quadrivalent conjugate meningococcal vaccine (types A, C, Y, and W-­135) as part of routine immunization schedules. The Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices
(ACIP) of the U.S. CDC recommends a two-­dose vaccine series for all
children, with the first dose administered at the age of 11-­12 years and
a second dose at age 16-­18 years. Vaccination is also recommended
for persons 2 months to 18 years of age who are at increased risk for
meningococcal disease, including those with anatomic or functional
asplenia or complement deficiencies or who are receiving a terminal
complement inhibitor (e.g., eculizumab). Two meningococcal vaccines
against serogroup B have been developed. In the United Kingdom, the
vaccine is administered to all infants at 2, 4, and 12 months of age.
This differs from the United States, where currently meningococcal B
vaccine is recommended for children 10 years and older at increased
risk for invasive disease and is optional for persons 16-­23 years of age.

Treatment of meningitis can be accompanied by acute CNS complications, including seizures, increased ICP, cranial nerve palsies, stroke,
cerebral or cerebellar herniation, SIADH, and thrombosis of dural
venous sinuses.
Collections of fluid in the subdural space develop in 10–30% of
patients with meningitis and are asymptomatic in 85–90% of patients.
Subdural effusions are especially common in infants. Symptomatic
subdural effusions may result in a bulging fontanel, diastasis of sutures,
enlarging head circumference, emesis, seizures, fever, or abnormal
results of cranial transillumination. CT or MRI scanning can confirm
the presence of subdural effusion. In the presence of increased ICP
or depressed level of consciousness, symptomatic subdural effusion
should be treated by aspiration through the open fontanel (see Chapters 82 and 630). Fever alone is not an indication for aspiration.
SIADH occurs in some patients with meningitis, resulting in hyponatremia and reduced serum osmolality. This may exacerbate cerebral
edema or result in hyponatremic seizures (see Chapter 82).
Fever associated with bacterial meningitis usually resolves within
5-­7 days of the onset of therapy. Prolonged fever (>10 days) is noted
in approximately 10% of patients. Prolonged fever is usually related
to intercurrent viral infection, nosocomial or secondary bacterial
infection, thrombophlebitis, or drug reaction. In meningitis caused
by N. meningitidis, pericarditis or arthritis may occur during treatment (sometimes accompanied by recrudescent fever) and is caused
by either bacterial dissemination or immune complex deposition. In
general, infectious pericarditis or arthritis occurs earlier in the course
of treatment than immune-­mediated disease.
Thrombocytosis, eosinophilia, and anemia may develop during
therapy for meningitis. Anemia may be a result of hemolysis or bone
marrow suppression. Disseminated intravascular coagulation is most
often associated with the rapidly progressive pattern of presentation
and is observed most commonly in patients with shock and purpura.
The combination of endotoxemia and severe hypotension initiates the
coagulation cascade; coexistence of ongoing thrombosis may produce
symmetric peripheral gangrene.

PROGNOSIS

Appropriate antibiotic therapy and supportive care have reduced the
mortality rate of bacterial meningitis beyond the neonatal period to
under 10%. The highest mortality rates are observed with pneumococcal meningitis. Severe neurodevelopmental sequelae may occur in
10–20% of patients recovering from bacterial meningitis, and as many
as 50% have some neurologic sequelae. The prognosis is poorer among
infants under 6 months of age and in those with high CSF bacterial
burden. Those with seizures occurring later than 4 days into therapy
or with coma or focal neurologic signs on presentation also have
increased risk of long-­term sequelae. There does not appear to be a
correlation between the duration of symptoms before a diagnosis of
meningitis and the subsequent outcome.
The most common neurologic sequelae of meningitis include hearing loss, cognitive impairment, recurrent seizures, delay in acquisition
of language, visual impairment, and behavioral problems. Sensorineural hearing loss is most frequently detected and is often already present
at the time of initial presentation. It results from cochlear or auditory
nerve inflammation and occurs in as many as 30% of patients with
pneumococcal meningitis, 10% with meningococcal meningitis, and
5–20% of those with H. influenzae type b meningitis. All patients with
bacterial meningitis should undergo careful audiologic assessment
before or soon after discharge from the hospital. Frequent reassessment

PREVENTION

Vaccination and antibiotic prophylaxis of susceptible at-­risk contacts
represent two opportunities to reduce the transmission and development of secondary cases of bacterial meningitis.

Neisseria meningitidis

Haemophilus influenzae Type b

See also Chapter 240.
Rifampin prophylaxis should be given to all household contacts of
patients with invasive disease caused by H. influenzae type b if any close
family member younger than 48 months has not been fully immunized
or if an immunocompromised child of any age resides in the household. A household contact is one who lives in the residence of the index
case or who has spent a minimum of 4 hours with the index case for
at least 5 of the 7 days preceding the patient’s hospitalization. Family
members should receive rifampin prophylaxis immediately after the
diagnosis is suspected in the index case, because over 50% of secondary cases occur in the first week after the index patient is hospitalized.
The dose of rifampin is 20 mg/kg/day (maximum dose 600 mg) given
once daily for 4 days.
Three conjugate monovalent vaccines for H. influenzae type b are
licensed in the United States along with two other multivalent vaccines
that include H. influenzae type b components. Although each vaccine
elicits different profiles of antibody response in infants immunized at
2-­6 months of age, all result in protective levels of antibody with a 93%
efficacy rate against invasive infections after the primary series. Thus
all children should be immunized with H. influenzae type b conjugate
vaccine beginning at 2 months of age. Efficacy is not as consistent in
Indigenous Nation populations, a group recognized as having a higher
incidence of H. influenzae disease.

Streptococcus pneumoniae
See also Chapter 228.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3772 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Antibiotic prophylaxis should not be administered to contacts of
children diagnosed with pneumococcal meningitis. Routine administration of pneumococcal conjugate vaccine is recommended for children under 5 years of age. The initial dose of the series is given at 2
months of age. Children who are at high risk for invasive pneumococcal infection, including those with functional or anatomic asplenia
(including sickle cell disease), cochlear implants, CSF leaks, chronic
illnesses (chronic heart disease, chronic lung disease, or diabetes mellitus), and underlying immunodeficiency (such as infection with HIV,
primary immunodeficiency, and those receiving immunosuppressive therapy) should receive pneumococcal conjugate vaccine and the
23-­valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (PPSV23).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

643.2 Viral Meningoencephalitis
Andrew B. Janowski and David A. Hunstad
Viral meningoencephalitis is an acute inflammatory process involving
the meninges and/or brain parenchymal tissue. These infections are
caused by a number of different pathogens, and quite often, no pathogen can be identified from the CSF or brain tissue specimens after routine clinical testing. The CSF is characterized by pleocytosis and the
absence of microorganisms on Gram stain and routine bacterial culture. Outcomes are quite variable because cases of meningoencephalitis caused by some pathogens are self-­limited, whereas others cause
significant long-­term neurologic sequelae.

ETIOLOGY

Among the most common causes of viral meningoencephalitis are
viruses of the family Picornaviridae, including the enteroviruses
(poliovirus, coxsackievirus, enterovirus, and echovirus) and parechoviruses (see Chapters 296 and 297) (see Tables 643.2 and 643.3).
Meningoencephalitis caused by these viruses is often self-­limited but
can be severe in neonates or chronic in immunocompromised hosts
(particularly X-­linked agammaglobulinemia; see Chapter 166). Human
coxsackievirus A7 and enteroviruses D68 and 71 have been associated
with neurologic symptoms, including acute flaccid paralysis. Parechoviruses are an important cause of meningoencephalitis in infants and
rarely cause disease in older children. Clinical manifestations in infants
are generally similar to those of enteroviral infection, but infants with
parechovirus infection may also exhibit abdominal signs or a sepsis-­
like syndrome. In addition, parechovirus infection is associated with
more severe MRI lesions of the cerebral cortex, and CSF pleocytosis
may be minimal or absent.
The term arbovirus refers to a broad range of viruses from multiple
viral families that are transmitted by arthropod vectors, typically mosquitoes or ticks (see Chapters 314 and 315). Most of these viral infections are considered zoonotic, as their primary reservoir is in birds or
small animals. Humans often represent dead-­end hosts because sufficient viremia does not develop to enable transmission back to arthropod vectors. However, humans are the primary reservoir for viruses
such as Zika, chikungunya, and dengue. The arboviruses that most
often cause meningoencephalitis include WNV, Japanese encephalitis
virus, and La Crosse virus; other arboviruses are described in Table
643.3. WNV made its appearance in the Western Hemisphere in 1999
and is now the most common arbovirus causing meningoencephalitis
in the United States. WNV may also be transmitted by blood transfusion, organ transplantation, or vertically across the placenta. Most children with WNV are either asymptomatic or have nonspecific viral-­like
illness. Approximately 1% of infected humans develop CNS disease;
adults are more severely affected than children.
Several members of the viral family Herpesviridae can cause meningoencephalitis (see Chapters 299-­304). Herpes simplex virus (HSV)
type 1 is an important cause of severe, sporadic encephalitis in children and adults, with progression to coma and death in 70% of cases
without antiviral therapy. In neonates, severe encephalitis with diffuse

brain involvement can be caused by HSV type 2, transmitted vertically
at delivery. A mild transient (and sometimes recurrent) form of meningoencephalitis with HSV-­2 may accompany genital herpes infection in
sexually active adolescents and adults. Varicella-­zoster virus (VZV)
may cause CNS infection in a close temporal relationship with clinical manifestations of chickenpox. The most common manifestation of
CNS involvement by VZV is cerebellar ataxia, whereas the most severe
form is acute encephalitis. After primary infection, VZV establishes
latency in spinal and cranial nerve roots and ganglia, and reactivation
is evidenced by herpes zoster that can be accompanied by mild meningoencephalitis. Epstein-­Barr virus is associated with various CNS syndromes (see Chapter 301). Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection of the
CNS can occur with congenital infection or disseminated disease in
immunocompromised hosts, but it is an exceptionally rare cause of
meningoencephalitis in immunocompetent infants and children (see
Chapter 302). Human herpesvirus 6 is associated with encephalitis, but
detection of the virus can also be reflective of latency in lymphocytes
with reactivation caused by inflammation (see Chapter 303).
Mumps can cause meningoencephalitis and has a higher incidence
in regions where the mumps vaccine is not implemented (see Chapter
295). Mumps meningoencephalitis is typically mild, but deafness from
damage of the eighth cranial nerve can occur. Meningoencephalitis
is also associated with acute infection with measles, rubella, respiratory viruses (adenovirus, coronaviruses, influenza virus, parainfluenza
virus, respiratory syncytial virus), rotavirus, astroviruses, lymphocytic
choriomeningitis virus, or rabies. HIV is associated with acute meningoencephalitis and can cause chronic encephalopathy leading to neurocognitive decline (see Chapter 322). In exceptionally rare situations,
meningoencephalitis may follow live virus vaccination against polio,
measles, mumps, rubella, or varicella.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Meningoencephalitis has a seasonal pattern, with a peak incidence in
the summer and late fall caused by a spike in circulation of enteroviruses and arboviruses. In 2018, the most common identifiable arbovirus responsible for meningoencephalitis in the United States was WNV,
with a total of 2,647 cases; fewer than 200 combined cases were caused
by the La Crosse, Jamestown Canyon, Powassan, St. Louis, and eastern equine encephalitis viruses (see Chapter 314). In 2019, an outbreak
of 39 cases of eastern equine encephalitis occurred across the eastern
United States, and 15 cases of St. Louis encephalitis were present in the
western and central United States. In Asia, the most common cause is
Japanese encephalitis virus, with an estimated >60,000 cases per year.
Epidemiologic considerations in aseptic meningitis caused by agents
other than enteroviruses also include the season, location of residence,
recent travel, animal exposures, mosquito or tick bites, and additional
factors related to specific pathogens.
Several studies have attempted to describe the causative pathogens
associated with meningoencephalitis, including the California Encephalitis Project. Despite extensive testing, however, no pathogen can be
identified in up to 63% of cases. Newer assays such as next-­generation
sequencing have the potential to identify novel or previously unrecognized pathogens in causing meningoencephalitis. Occult meningoencephalitis cases caused by pathogens such as Leptospira, astroviruses,
and Cutibacterium (formerly Propionibacterium) acnes have been
identified through this methodology. In addition to infectious agents,
autoimmune encephalitis is a common cause of encephalitis-­like illness (see Chapter 638.4).

PATHOGENESIS AND PATHOLOGY

Neurologic damage is caused by direct invasion and destruction of
neural cells and tissues by actively multiplying viruses and by the host
reaction to viral antigens. Tissue sections of the brain generally are
characterized by meningeal congestion and mononuclear infiltration,
perivascular cuffs of lymphocytes and plasma cells, some perivascular tissue necrosis with myelin breakdown, and neuronal disruption
in various stages, including, ultimately, neuronophagia and endothelial proliferation or necrosis. A marked degree of demyelination with
preservation of neurons and their axons is considered to represent

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 643 u Central Nervous System Infections
predominantly “postinfectious” or autoimmune encephalitis. In HSV
encephalitis, the cerebral cortex (classically the temporal lobes in
HSV-­1 infection) is often severely affected. Arboviruses tend to affect
the entire brain, whereas rabies has a predilection for the basal structures. The involvement of the spinal cord, nerve roots, and peripheral
nerves can be variable with these viruses.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The progression and severity of disease are related to the relative degree
of meningeal and parenchymal involvement, which, in part, is determined by the specific etiology. The clinical course of infection varies
from case to case, even with the same causative pathogen. Some children may have mild symptoms at onset, only to lapse into a coma and
rapidly die. In others, the illness may be ushered in by high fever, violent convulsions interspersed with bizarre movements, and hallucinations, followed by complete recovery.
The onset of meningoencephalitis is generally acute, although CNS
signs and symptoms are often preceded by a nonspecific febrile illness
of a few days’ duration. The presenting manifestations in older children
include headache and hyperesthesia and, in infants, irritability and
lethargy. Headache is most often frontal or generalized; adolescents
frequently complain of retrobulbar pain. Fever, nausea and vomiting,
photophobia, and pain in the neck, back, and legs are common. With
high fevers, patients may develop altered mental status that progresses
to encephalopathy in combination with uncontrolled body movements
and seizures. Focal neurologic signs may be persistent, fluctuating, or
migratory. WNV and nonpolio enteroviruses, including enterovirus
D68, may cause anterior horn cell injury and acute flaccid paralysis.
Encephalitis is more common than aseptic meningitis in WNV infection, whereas acute flaccid paralysis may be noted in approximately
5% of patients. Loss of bowel and bladder control and unprovoked
emotional outbursts may also occur. Nonetheless, many patients have
a nonspecific febrile illness caused by WNV infection and may never
seek medical attention. Specific conditions associated with CNS viral
infection include Guillain-­Barré syndrome, transverse myelitis, hemiplegia, and cerebellar ataxia.
Exanthems can precede or accompany CNS signs, especially with
enteroviruses, VZV, measles, rubella, and WNV.
During the pandemic caused by SARS-­CoV-­2, neurologic diseases
were uncommonly associated with this infection in children, including
encephalitis, Guillain-­Barré syndrome, and stroke. In addition, in the
multisystem inflammatory syndrome of children (MIS-­C), encephalopathy is often observed, with some case series describing neurologic
symptoms in over 50% of patients with MIS-­C. Similar neurologic conditions have been observed in adults with SARS-­CoV-­2 infection, and
persistent symptoms and impairments can be observed months after
acute infection. It is unclear if the constellation of symptoms are the
result of direct infection of the CNS by SARS-­CoV-­2 or if the inflammatory response to viral infection also contributes to the development
of acute and chronic neurologic symptoms.
A syndrome of mild encephalopathy with a reversible splenial
lesion (of the corpus callosum) has been associated with various
pathogens, including rotavirus, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), salmonella, CMV, adenovirus, and influenza virus.

DIAGNOSIS

CSF findings in viral meningoencephalitis are characterized by a pleocytosis of leukocytes with counts typically <1,000/mm3 (see Table
643.1). In the initial hours of disease, the cells may be polymorphonuclear, whereas mononuclear cells predominate for the remainder of
the illness. CSF protein concentration tends to be elevated, especially
if brain destruction is extensive, as with HSV encephalitis. The glucose
level is typically normal, although hypoglycorrhachia can occur with
certain viruses (e.g., mumps). With parechoviruses, the CSF glucose,
protein, and cell counts may be normal.
Identification of an infectious cause relies on analysis of the CSF for
the presence of pathogens by PCR and serology and, in rare situations,
identification of pathogens in brain biopsy material. CSF metagenomic
sequencing is available in limited centers. A commercial multiplex

3773

PCR assay combines testing for common bacterial and viral pathogens
in CNS infections. However, this assay does exhibit false-­positive and
false-­negative results, so many clinicians still order individual PCR
tests for common viral pathogens. In WNV meningoencephalitis, by
the time patients present for medical care, viral nucleic acid may be
absent in the CSF. Therefore the test of choice for detection of WNV
and other arboviruses is serologic (on both blood and CSF). If initial
CSF PCRs and serology are not diagnostic, serologic testing should
be repeated 2-­3 weeks later. A fourfold increase in titers for a specific
virus or other pathogen would suggest the etiology of the patient’s
presentation.
Viruses detected in blood, nasopharyngeal, stool, and urine specimens can be used to suggest a potential viral etiology. However, caution must be practiced when viruses are detected in locations outside
the CSF, because detection of these viruses may be incidental and not
explain the patient’s CNS symptoms. Other tests of potential value
in the evaluation of patients with suspected viral meningoencephalitis include an electroencephalogram (EEG) and MRI. EEG typically
shows diffuse slow-­wave activity, although focal changes in temporal
regions can be observed in HSV meningoencephalitis. MRI of the
brain may demonstrate focal brain lesions that correlate with clinical disease, including temporal lobe involvement to suggest HSV-­1
disease. Hyperdense lesions may also be identified on T2 and FLAIR
imaging (Fig. 643.1).
A diagnostic approach is noted in Table 643.5.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Meningoencephalitis is not exclusively caused by viruses, as other
pathogens are also associated with this condition (see Table 643.3). The
most important diagnosis to differentiate from meningoencephalitis is
bacterial meningitis, given the consequences if that disease is untreated.
Most children with acute bacterial meningitis are more critically ill than
those with CNS viral infection (with HSV as an exception). Parameningeal bacterial infections, such as brain abscess or subdural or epidural
empyema, may have features similar to viral CNS infections. Infections
caused by M. tuberculosis (see Chapter 261), T. pallidum (syphilis, see
Chapter 264), and B. burgdorferi (Lyme disease, see Chapter 268) may
exhibit more indolent clinical courses. Bartonella henselae is associated
with cat exposure, a papule at the site of inoculation, regional lymphadenopathy, and new-­onset seizures (see Chapter 255). Mycoplasma
pneumoniae has been suggested as a causative pathogen in meningoencephalitis, either as a direct pathogen or a trigger of postinfectious
symptoms (see Chapter 269). However, serologic testing for Mycoplasma can be nonspecific, and IgM titers can be elevated for several
months after infection, leading to incorrect interpretation of a positive
result.
Infections caused by fungi, rickettsiae, protozoa, and other parasites
may also need to be included in the differential diagnosis. Consideration of these agents usually arises as a result of exposure history,
accompanying symptoms, local geographic epidemiology, and host
immune factors.
Nonetheless, a significant proportion of patients will have a presentation and clinical testing that is consistent with a diagnosis of
encephalitis, but despite exhaustive testing for pathogens, including
metagenomic sequencing, no etiology will be identified. In this situation, many clinicians would agree that an infectious cause is less likely
but still cannot be fully ruled out. Various noninfectious disorders
may be associated with CNS inflammation and have manifestations
overlapping with those associated with viral meningoencephalitis.
Some of these disorders include malignancy, autoimmune diseases,
intracranial hemorrhage, and exposure to certain drugs or toxins.
Attention to the history and other organ involvement usually allows
elimination of these diagnostic possibilities. Autoimmune encephalitis
caused by anti–N-­methyl-­d-­aspartate (anti-­NMDA) receptor antibodies is an important cause of noninfectious encephalitis in adolescents
and young adults (see Chapter 638.4). Detection of these antibodies
in the serum and CSF confirms this diagnosis. Anti-­NMDA receptor
encephalitis has also been associated with recent HSV encephalitis, but
a mechanism explaining this posited association is unknown. Acute

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3774 Part XXV u The Nervous System
disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM) may also initially be confused with encephalitis (see Chapter 640).

pathogens are identified and a postinfectious or autoimmune etiology
is suspected, patients are in some cases treated with a combination of
steroids, intravenous immunoglobulin, and plasmapheresis (see Chapters 638 and 640).

TREATMENT

For most causes of viral meningoencephalitis, no effective antiviral
agents exist; therefore treatment is primarily supportive care. Intravenous fluids are typically administered because of poor oral intake.
NSAIDs are often used for symptomatic relief of headache. It is important to monitor patients with severe encephalitis closely for seizures,
cerebral edema, disturbed fluid and electrolyte balance, aspiration,
respiratory failure, and cardiac arrest.
Members of the herpesvirus family can be treated with antivirals,
with acyclovir, ganciclovir, cidofovir, and foscarnet having variable
activities against these viruses (see Chapters 299-­304). Parenteral acyclovir has been specifically shown to dramatically reduce morbidity
and mortality rates in HSV-­associated meningoencephalitis. When no

A

C

H

PROGNOSIS

Supportive and rehabilitative efforts are very important after patients
recover from the acute phase of illness. Motor incoordination, seizures,
total or partial deafness, and behavioral disturbances may follow viral
meningoencephalitis. Visual disturbances from chorioretinopathy and
perceptual amblyopia may also occur. Some sequelae of infection may
be subtle; therefore neurologic, developmental, and audiologic evaluations should be part of the routine follow-­up of children who have
recovered from viral meningoencephalitis.
Recovery from viral infections of the CNS depends on the severity of the clinical illness, the specific causative agent, and the age of

B

D

E

F

G

I

Fig. 643.1 MRI findings in acute encephalitis. Representative images from infectious and autoimmune encephalitides are shown. A, Early herpes

simplex encephalitis; left temporal lobe abnormalities are more clearly seen on diffusion-­weighted imaging (DWI) (right) than fluid-­attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) (left). B, Autoimmune limbic encephalitis; bilateral mesial temporal lobe abnormalities seen on both DWI (right) and FLAIR
(left)—note the symmetric nature of the lesions. C-­E, Arboviral encephalitis; T2-­weighted image of a patient with Japanese encephalitis shows
hyperintensities in bilateral thalamus (C). The hyperintensities are better visualized in FLAIR image (D). T2-­weighted image of patient with (E) Eastern equine encephalitis shows increased signal intensity and swelling in the deep gray matter. F, Neuromyelitis optica; FLAIR image of a patient
who presented with brainstem encephalitis and found to have antibodies to aquaporin-­4. G, Listeria brainstem encephalitis; FLAIR (left) and post-­
gadolinium (right) images show T2 abnormalities similar to neuromyelitis optica (NMO) but also multiple rim-­enhancing brainstem lesions typical
of Listeria. H, In acute disseminated encephalomyelitis, multifocal areas of T2 hyperintensity are seen on FLAIR (left) with characteristic incomplete
rims of enhancement after gadolinium administration (right). I, In myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein encephalomyelitis, multifocal and confluent
lesions can be seen on FLAIR imaging (left), and post-­gadolinium imaging (right) shows patchy areas of enhancement. (A, B, and F-­H, Modified
from Venkatesan A, Michael BD, Probasco JC, et al. Acute encephalitis in immunocompromised adults. Lancet. 2019;393:702–716, Fig. 1, p. 709;
C and D, Modified from Misra UK, Kalita J, Phadke RV, et al. Usefulness of various MRI sequences in the diagnosis of viral encephalitis. Acta Trop.
2010;116[3]:206–211, Fig 1ab; E, From Harvala H, Bremner J, Kealey S, et al. Case report: Eastern equine encephalitis virus imported to the UK. J
Med Virol. 2009;81[2]:305–308; I, Courtesy Dr Michael Levy, Harvard Medical School.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 643 u Central Nervous System Infections

3775

Table 643.5  Laboratory Testing and Neuroimaging Characteristics of Selected Pathogens
LABORATORY TESTING

CHARACTERISTIC BRAIN MRI FINDINGS

CSF PCR (false negative can occur in first 72 hours).
PCR of skin lesions may also be helpful if they occur
in conjunction with neurological disease. Blood PCR
in neonates. In neonatal CNS disease, CSF PCR is
completed near the end of therapy to guide final
treatment duration.

For HSV-­1: Asymmetric abnormalities in mesiotemporal
lobes, orbitofrontal lobes, and insular cortex with edema,
possible restricted diffusion or hemorrhage (late stage)
HSV-­2 in neonates can appear like HSV-­1. In adults,
HSV-­2 meningitis has variable findings (including no
abnormalities) or may mimic HSV-­1 encephalitis.

Varicella-­zoster virus

CSF PCR; skin lesion PCR, biopsy, or DFA for VZV

Could affect temporal lobes, similar to HSV-­1; lesions
can occur in cerebellum and brainstem; ischemic or
hemorrhagic lesions in white matter or gray-­white matter
junction suggest vasculopathy

Enteroviruses

CSF PCR; Blood PCR; nasopharyngeal swabs can be
difficult to interpret as asymptomatic rhino/enterovirus
infections are frequently detected. Stool testing only
recommended for epidemiological tracing, including for
poliovirus or enterovirus D68.

Wide range of findings from normal to diffuse white
matter changes. EV 71 causes lesions in the dorsal
brainstem, dentate nuclei of cerebellum, and anterior
horns of spinal cord. EV D68 often causes lesions of the
brainstem, spinal cord with involvement of the central
gray matter, and of anterior horn cells.

Parechoviruses

CSF PCR; blood PCR

Variable findings from normal to restricted diffusion of
thalami, corpus callosum, subcortical, and periventricular
white matter, predominating in the frontal and parietal
regions.

Measles*

Serum IgG and IgM; PCR of nasopharyngeal, throat, or
urine samples in early infection

Cerebral edema, multifocal lesions, can resemble ADEM
in acute setting

Mumps*

CSF and serum IgM and IgG; PCR from throat swab

Lesions in brainstem, hippocampus, and splenium of
corpus callosum

Influenza virus

PCR or antigen testing of respiratory secretions; CSF PCR
is infrequently positive

Neuroimaging is often normal, although abnormalities
can include reversible splenial lesions, deep gray T2
abnormalities, diffuse edema, and hemorrhagic and
necrotizing lesions of thalami, brainstem, and cerebellum

Arboviruses (many
including alphaviruses
such as eastern
equine encephalitis,
and flaviviruses,
such as Japanese
encephalitis or West
Nile)

CSF and serum IgM and IgG (some viruses will have
serological cross-­reactivity with related viruses and
further confirmation is needed through plaque
reduction neutralization testing); CSF PCR (low
sensitivity because viral nucleic acid is often absent by
the time the patient presents for medical care. Can be
useful in immunocompromised individuals); serum PCR
(Zika); urine PCR (Zika, West Nile virus)

Up to half will have normal brain MRI; abnormalities might
involve deep gray matter (i.e., thalamus, basal ganglia)
and brainstem

Rabies virus*

PCR from saliva; PCR and immunofluorescent staining
from nuchal skin biopsy or brain tissue; serum and CSF
rabies virus neutralizing antibodies

Multifocal abnormalities in temporal cortex, hippocampi,
deep gray nuclei, substantia nigra, brainstem, cerebral
white matter, gray matter >> white matter

Serology (serial EIA and Western blot); VIsE C6 ELISA;
CSF antibody index; and CSF PCR (low sensitivity and
specificity)

Multifocal lesions in subcortical white matter, potentially
mimicking multiple sclerosis

Brucella spp.

Serum and CSF IgG and IgM; CSF culture

Variably enhancing lesions with marked surrounding
edema

Listeria
monocytogenes

Blood and CSF culture

In rhombencephalitis, multiple small rim-­enhancing lesions
with variable restriction of diffusion

Mycobacterium
tuberculosis*

CSF AFB smear, culture, and PCR; sputum and blood
AFB smear, culture, and PCR (in young children gastric
aspirates are obtained instead of sputum). Often
testing needs to be repeated (≥3) from the same site to
enhance sensitivity; Tuberculin skin test or
interferon-­gamma release assay

Basilar meningeal enhancement, hydrocephalus,
rim-­enhancing lesions, and strokes in deep gray matter
or internal capsule

Rickettsia and related
diseases (i.e.,
Anaplasma spp.,
Coxiella burnetti,
Ehrlichia spp., and
Rickettsia spp.)

Serum IgG and IgM; whole blood PCR (useful for Ehrlichia
and Anaplasma); if rash, PCR or immunohistochemical
staining of skin biopsy

Reversible splenial lesions; punctate areas of restricted
diffusion

Treponema pallidum

Diagnosed via combination of serum and CSF treponemal
(e.g., FTA-­ABS) and non-­treponemal (e.g., serum RPR,
CSF VDRL) antibodies, CSF white count, protein

Variable mesial temporal lobe involvement has been
described

VIRUSES
HSV

BACTERIA
Borrelia spp.

Continued
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3776 Part XXV u The Nervous System
Table 643.5  Laboratory Testing and Neuroimaging Characteristics of Selected Pathogens—cont’d
FUNGI
Cryptococcus spp.

Others (Coccidioides
spp., Histoplasma
spp., and
Blastomyces spp.)

LABORATORY TESTING

CHARACTERISTIC BRAIN MRI FINDINGS

CSF and serum cryptococcal antigen, CSF culture and
PCR. Opening pressure from the lumbar puncture may
also be significantly elevated.

Basilar meningeal enhancement and hydrocephalus;
cryptococcomas are T1 hypointense and 12 hyperintense
lesions in basal ganglia and midbrain

CSF and serum serology; large volume CSF culture; serum
and urine antigen

Basilar meningeal enhancement, hydrocephalus, and
rim-­enhancing lesions

PARASITES AND FREE-­LIVING AMEBAE*
Acanthoemeba spp.
Brain histopathology; CSF and brain tissue PCR and
culture; serology

Hemorrhagic and necrotic rim-­enhancing lesions

Balamuthia mandrillaris

Brain histopathology; CSF and brain tissue PCR; serology

Multifocal T2-­weighted hyperintensities with rim
enhancement, surrounding edema, and leptomeningeal
extension

Baylisascaris procyonis

CSF and serum antibodies; peripheral or CSF eosinophilia

Multifocal or confluent white matter abnormalities and
nodular enhancement

Naegleria fowleri

Wet mount preparation of warm CSF; brain
histopathology; CSF and brain PCR and culture

Necrotic and hemorrhagic lesions often in CSF and brain
PCR frontal lobes

*Coordinate testing with local, state, and national health departments.
When serum IgM/IgG testing is performed, acute and convalescent titers are typically obtained 1-­4 weeks apart. Seroconversion and fourfold or greater rise in titer using paired
sera are supportive of infection.
ADEM, Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis; AFB, acid-­fast bacillus; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; DFA, direct fluorescent antibody; EIA, enzyme immunoassay, EV, enterovirus; FTA-­
ABS, fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption; HSV, herpes simplex virus; RPR, rapid plasma reagin; VDRL, venereal disease research laboratory; VZV, varicella-­zoster virus.
Adapted From Venkatesan A, Michael BD, Probasco JC, et al. Acute encephalitis in immunocompromised adults. Lancet. 2019-­393-­702-­716, Table 3, p. 708.

the child. If the clinical illness is severe and substantial parenchymal
involvement is evident, the prognosis is poor, with potential deficits
being intellectual, motor, psychiatric, epileptic, visual, or auditory in
nature. Severe sequelae should also be anticipated in those with infection caused by HSV if it was not diagnosed and treated early in the disease. Overall, several studies have found that most children will have
persistent symptoms years after the diagnosis of meningoencephalitis.
These poor outcomes are likely reflective of a combination of suboptimal diagnostics for identifying pathogens that cause meningoencephalitis and a lack of specific therapies for most viral pathogens.

PREVENTION

For some viruses that cause meningoencephalitis, vaccines are available for prevention. Widespread use of effective viral vaccines for polio,
measles, mumps, rubella, and varicella has almost eliminated CNS
complications from these diseases in the United States. Vaccination
against Japanese encephalitis virus is also available, but because of high
costs, this vaccine has not been widely distributed in Asia. The availability of domestic animal vaccine programs against rabies has reduced
the frequency of rabies encephalitis.
Control of encephalitis caused by arboviruses has been less successful
because specific vaccines are only in various stages of development for
clinical trials. The primary method for reducing arbovirus infections
is vector control, through methods that include insecticides and eradicating insect breeding sites. Furthermore, minimizing mosquito and
tick bites through the application of N,N-­diethyl-­3-­methylbenzamide
(DEET)–containing insect repellents on exposed skin and wearing
long-­sleeved shirts, long pants, and socks when outdoors, especially at
dawn and dusk, reduces risk for arboviral infection.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

643.3 Eosinophilic Meningitis
Andrew B. Janowski and David A. Hunstad
Eosinophilic meningitis is defined as >10 eosinophils/mm3 of CSF or a
finding that at least 10% of leukocytes in the CSF are eosinophils. The
most common cause worldwide of eosinophilic CSF pleocytosis is CNS

infection with helminthic parasites. Nonetheless, the differential diagnosis
of CSF eosinophilic pleocytosis is broad, especially in countries where helminthic infestation is uncommon, such as the United States (Table 643.6).

ETIOLOGY

Although any tissue-­migrating helminth may cause eosinophilic meningitis, the most common worldwide cause is human infection with the
rat lungworm, Angiostrongylus cantonensis (see Chapter 343). Other
parasites that can cause eosinophilic meningitis include Gnathostoma
spinigerum (dog and cat roundworm; see Chapter 343), Baylisascaris
procyonis (raccoon roundworm), Ascaris lumbricoides (human roundworm, see Chapter 337), Toxocara canis (see Chapter 344), Trichinella
spiralis (see Chapter 345), Toxoplasma gondii (see Chapter 336), Paragonimus westermani, Paragonimus kellicotti, Echinococcus granulosus
(see Chapter 350), Schistosoma japonicum (see Chapter 346), Onchocerca volvulus, and Taenia solium (see Chapter 349). Eosinophilic meningitis may also occur as an unusual manifestation of more common
viral, bacterial, or fungal infections of the CNS; for example, coccidioidomycosis has been particularly associated with eosinophilic meningitis. Noninfectious causes of eosinophilic meningitis include multiple
sclerosis, malignancy, hypereosinophilic syndrome, or a reaction to
medications or ventriculoperitoneal shunt materials.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

A. cantonensis is found in Southeast Asia, the South Pacific, Japan, Taiwan,
Egypt, the Ivory Coast, and Cuba. Infection is acquired by eating raw or
undercooked freshwater snails, slugs, prawns, or crabs containing infectious third-­stage larvae. Gnathostoma infections are found in Japan, China,
India, Bangladesh, and Southeast Asia. Gnathostomiasis is acquired by
eating undercooked or raw fish, frog, bird, or snake meat. B. procyonis is
endemic in the United States and is acquired by children playing outdoors
where raccoons may deposit the organisms (raccoon latrines).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Patients with eosinophilic meningitis from helminthic infestation typically become ill 1-­3 weeks after exposure, as this reflects the transit
time for parasites to migrate from the gastrointestinal tract to the CNS.
Concomitant findings include fever, vomiting, abdominal pain, creeping skin eruptions, pleurisy, or peripheral eosinophilia. Neurologic
symptoms may include headache, meningismus, ataxia, cranial nerve

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 643.6  Common Infectious Etiologies of Eosinophilic Meningitis
SOURCE

LOCATION

SYMPTOMS

DIAGNOSIS

TREATMENT

PROGNOSIS

Angiostrongylus
cantonensis
Angiostrongylus
costaricensis

Definitive host:
rats
Intermediate
hosts: mollusks
(snails, slugs)
Paratenic hosts:
crustaceans,
frogs,
vegetables

Thailand, China,
South America,
Caribbean
Islands, United
States (Hawaii,
Louisiana),
Australia, Egypt,
Nigeria, Côte
d’Ivoire

Severe headache
Neck stiffness
Nausea, vomiting
Low-­grade fever
Hyperesthesia,
paresthesia
Rarely have focal
neurologic
deficits
Children: more
systemic
symptoms (fever,
abdominal pain)

CSF: eosinophilia, normal
glucose, elevated
protein, elevated
opening pressure,
symptomatic relief after
lumbar puncture
Peripheral blood
eosinophilia
ELISA (epitopes 29 kDa
and 31 kDa)
CT head: normal
MRI brain:
leptomeningeal
enhancement,
micronodular
enhancement

Supportive
interventions
(repeat lumbar
puncture,
analgesics)
Prednisolone 60
mg/day divided
three times a day
for 2 weeks
Albendazole 15 mg/
kg/day orally in
two divided doses
for 2 weeks

Self-­limiting within 3–6
weeks
Severe disease
can cause coma,
respiratory failure,
and death (case
fatality 5%)
Children and elderly
may have more
severe disease

Gnathostomiasis
(neurognathostomiasis)

Gnathostoma
spinigerum

Definitive host:
dogs, cats,
pigs, fish-­eating
mammals
Intermediate
hosts:
freshwater
crustaceans
Secondary
intermediate
hosts:
freshwater fish,
frogs
Paratenic hosts:
birds, reptiles,
mammals

Southeast Asia
(Thailand), China,
India, Zambia,
Botswana,
Mexico, Central
America, South
America

Prodrome:
abdominal
pain, nausea,
vomiting,
diarrhea,
cutaneous larvae
migrans, fever
Severe headache
Neck stiffness
Radicular pain
Paresis
Paralysis
Cranial nerve
deficits
Seizures

CSF: eosinophilia,
xanthochromia,
elevated protein,
normal glucose
Peripheral blood
eosinophilia
ELISA (24 kDa epitope,
immunoglobulin
subclasses)
CT head: nodular lesions,
hemorrhage
MRI brain: diffuse or
segmental hyperintense
micronodules,
hemorrhagic
tracts, intracerebral
hemorrhage,
subarachnoid
hemorrhage, subdural
hemorrhage

Supportive (repeat
lumbar punctures,
analgesics)
Use of anthelmintics
is controversial
Steroids may help
CNS inflammation
Monitor closely
for intracranial
hemorrhage

Long-­term neurologic
disability 23–46% of
survivors, including
paraplegia, paresis,
radicular pain, cranial
nerve
Case fatality rate
7-­25%

Baylisascaris procyonis

Definitive host:
raccoons,
domesticated
dogs, kinkajou
Paratenic hosts:
small mammals
(rabbits,
rodents), birds

North America

Lethargy
Seizures
Sensory loss
Ataxia
Paralysis
Spasticity
Cranial nerve
deficits
Paresis
Concurrent ocular
involvement
Rarely have fever
More common in
young children

CSF: eosinophilia,
variable protein, normal
glucose
Variable peripheral blood
eosinophilia
ELISA (epitopes 33
kDa, 45 kDa, BpRAG1
protein)
CT head and MRI
brain: parenchyma
inflammation, cerebral
atrophy

Exposure:
albendazole (2550
mg/kg per day
orally for 1020
days)
Treatment:
albendazole
(2550 mg/kg per
day orally for 14
weeks)
Corticosteroids

Fulminant eosinophilic
meningoencephalitis
Severe neurologic
impairment
Case fatality rate 38%

Continued

3777

ETIOLOGIC AGENT

Angiostrongyliasis (rat
lung worm)

Chapter 643 u Central Nervous System Infections

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DISEASE

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DISEASE

ETIOLOGIC AGENT

SOURCE

LOCATION

SYMPTOMS

DIAGNOSIS

CNS coccidioidomycosis
(valley fever)

Coccidioides
immitis , Coccidioides
posadasii

Colonized soil in
southwestern
United States,
Mexico, South
America

Southwestern
United States,
Mexico, South
America

Additional
organ system
involvement
(lungs, skin,
bone, soft
tissue)
Prodrome: febrile
respiratory
infection
Gradual
neurologic
symptom onset
Headache
Vomiting
Lethargy
Fever

CSF: pleocytosis, elevated Lifelong fluconazole
protein, decreased
Ventriculoperitoneal
glucose, elevated
shunt placement
opening pressure,
culture
CSF complement fixation
antibodies

TREATMENT

PROGNOSIS
Long-­term neurologic
sequelae
(hydrocephalus, fatal
without treatment)

CSF, Cerebrospinal fluid; CT, computed tomography; ELISA, enzyme-­linked immunosorbent assay; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging.
From Weatherhead J, Mejia R. Eosinophilic meningitis. In Cherry J, Demmler-­Harrison GJ, Kaplan SL, Steinbach W, Hotez PJ, eds. Feigin and Cherry’s Textbook of Pediatric Infectious Diseases. 8th ed, vol 1, Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019, Table
34.1. pp 350-­351.

3778 Part XXV u The Nervous System

Table 643.6  Common Infectious Etiologies of Eosinophilic Meningitis—cont’d

Chapter 644 u Brain Abscess
palsies, and paresthesias. Paraparesis or incontinence can result from
radiculitis or myelitis.

DIAGNOSIS

The presumptive diagnosis of helminth-­induced eosinophilic meningitis is most often based on travel and exposure history in the presence of typical clinical and laboratory findings. Direct visualization of
helminths in CSF is difficult because there typically is a low burden of
organisms. Serologic assays for helminthic infections are also of limited
utility because they are not readily available commercially and there is
substantial cross-reactivity among different helminth species.

TREATMENT

Treatment is supportive, but anthelmintic drugs with or without
steroids may be indicated (see Table 643.6). Anthelmintic drugs may
provoke an inflammatory response because dying organisms can exacerbate symptoms. However, treatment of B. procyonis should be initiated with albendazole and corticosteroids. Steroids may decrease
the duration of headaches in adults with eosinophilic meningitis.
Analgesics should be given for headache and radiculitis, and CSF
removal or shunting should be performed to relieve hydrocephalus,
if present.

PROGNOSIS

Overall, up to 70% of patients improve significantly within 4 weeks
after the onset of symptoms. The mortality rate associated with eosinophilic meningitis is <5%; untreated Baylisascaris infection may be fatal
or associated with severe sequelae.

Table 644.1  Predisposing Conditions and Microbiology
of Brain Abscess
PREDISPOSING
CONDITION

USUAL MICROBIAL ISOLATES

Otitis media or
mastoiditis

Streptococci, Bacteroides spp., Haemophilus spp.,
Enterobacteriales, Pseudomonas aeruginosa

Sinusitis
(frontoethmoid
or sphenoid)

Streptococci, Bacteroides spp.,
Enterobacterales, Staphylococcus aureus,
Haemophilus spp., Fusobacterium spp.

Dental infection

Streptococci, Fusobacterium spp., Prevotella
spp., Actinomyces spp., Bacteroides spp.,
Haemophilus spp.

Penetrating
trauma or
postneurosurgical

Staphylococcus spp., streptococci,
Enterobacteriaceae, Clostridium spp.,
Cutibacterium spp.

Lung abscess,
empyema,
bronchiectasis

Streptococci, Fusobacterium spp., Actinomyces
spp., Nocardia spp.

Bacterial
endocarditis

Staphylococcus spp., streptococci

Congenital heart
disease

Streptococci, Haemophilus spp.

Neonates

Streptococcus agalactiae and other
streptococci, Enterobacterales including
Citrobacter koserii, Cronobacter sakazakii,
Serratia marcescens, Proteus mirabilis,
Listeria monocytogenes, Candida spp.

Neutropenia
or after
hematopoietic
cell transplant

Streptococci, Enterobacterales, Aspergillus
spp., Mucorales, Candida spp., Nocardia
spp., Cryptococcus neoformans,
Coccidioides immitis, Blastomyces
dermatitidis, dematiaceous fungi and other
mycoses, Toxoplasma gondii, Mycobacterium
tuberculosis

Solid organ
transplantation

Streptococci, Enterobacterales, Aspergillus
spp., Mucorales, Candida spp., Cryptococcus
neoformans, Coccidioides immitis,
Blastomyces dermatitidis, dematiaceous
fungi and other mycoses, Nocardia spp.,
Toxoplasma gondii, Mycobacterium
tuberculosis, Listeria monocytogenes

HIV infection

Toxoplasma gondii, Nocardia spp.,
Mycobacterium spp., Listeria monocytogenes,
Cryptococcus neoformans, Coccidioides
immitis, Blastomyces dermatitidis

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 644

Brain Abscess
Andrew B. Janowski and David A. Hunstad
Annually, approximately 0.3-­1.3 cases of brain abscess per 100,000
people are diagnosed. Development of brain abscess is most often
associated with an underlying etiology, including contiguous spread
from an associated infection (meningitis, otitis media, mastoiditis,
sinusitis, soft tissue infection of the face or scalp, orbital cellulitis,
or dental infections); direct compromise of the blood-­brain barrier
due to penetrating head injuries or surgical procedures; embolic
phenomena (endocarditis); right-­to-­left shunts (congenital heart
disease or pulmonary arteriovenous malformation); immunodeficiency; or infection of foreign material inserted into the central nervous system (CNS), including ventriculoperitoneal shunts
(Table 644.1).

PATHOLOGY

Cerebral abscesses occur in both hemispheres in children, but in
adults, left-­sided abscesses are more common, likely because of penetrating injuries from right-­handed assailants. Nearly 80% of abscesses
occur in the frontal, parietal, and temporal lobes, whereas abscesses in
the occipital lobe, cerebellum, and brainstem account for the remainder of cases. In 18% of cases, multiple brain abscesses are present,
and in nearly 20% of cases, no predisposing risk factor can be identified. Abscesses in the frontal lobe are often caused by extension from
sinusitis or orbital cellulitis, whereas abscesses located in the temporal lobe or cerebellum are frequently associated with otitis media and
mastoiditis.

3779

Adapted from Gea-­Banacloche JC, Tunkel AR. Brain abscess. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R,
Blaser MJ, eds. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett’s Principles and Practice of Infectious
Diseases, 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020: Table 90.1, p. 1249.

ETIOLOGY

The predominant organisms that cause brain abscesses are streptococci, which account for one third of all cases in children, with
members of the Streptococcus anginosus group (S. anginosus, Streptococcus constellatus, and Streptococcus intermedius) being the
most common streptococci. Other important streptococci include
Streptococcus pneumoniae, Enterococcus spp., and other viridans
streptococci. Staphylococcus aureus is the second most common
organism in pediatric brain abscesses, accounting for 11% of cases,
and is most often associated with penetrating injuries. Other bacteria isolated from brain abscesses include gram-­negative bacilli
(Haemophilus spp., Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Proteus
spp., and other Enterobacterales) and anaerobic bacteria (gram-­
positive organisms, Bacteroides spp., Fusobacterium spp., Prevotella
spp., and Actinomyces spp.). In neonates with meningitis, abscess

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3780 Part XXV u The Nervous System
formation is a complication in 13% of cases, with Citrobacter koseri,
Cronobacter sakazakii, Serratia marcescens, and Proteus mirabilis
being special considerations in this age group. In up to 27% of all
cases, more than one organism is isolated on routine bacterial cultures. Metagenomics sequencing has revealed that this percentage
is likely a significant underestimate, as DNA from additional uncultured species has been detected from purulent abscess fluid, including rare case reports of detection of archaea. Abscesses associated
with mucosal infections (sinusitis or dental infections) are more
frequently polymicrobial and include anaerobic pathogens. Atypical bacteria, including Nocardia, Mycobacterium, and Listeria spp.,
and fungi (Aspergillus, Candida, Cryptococcus) are more common
in children with impaired host defenses.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Often the early stages of cerebritis and abscess formation are asymptomatic or are associated with nonspecific symptoms, including low-­
grade fever, headache, and lethargy. As the inflammatory process
proceeds, vomiting, severe headache, seizures, papilledema, focal
neurologic signs (hemiparesis), and coma may develop. The classic triad of headache, fever, and a focal deficit is noted in <50% of
patients. A cerebellar abscess is characterized by nystagmus, ipsilateral ataxia and dysmetria, vomiting, and headache. If an abscess
ruptures into the ventricular cavity, overwhelming shock and death
may occur.

A

B

Fig. 644.1 Brain MRI in a 2-­yr-­old child with an atrial septal defect
and brain abscess caused by MRSA. A, T1 fl2D postcontrast axial image
demonstrating enhancement of the rim of the abscess. B, T2 TSE axial
image showing a large fluid-­filled lesion with surrounding edema.

DIAGNOSIS

The key to diagnosis of brain abscesses is prompt imaging of the
CNS. Brain MRI with contrast is the diagnostic test of choice
because it can aid in differentiating abscesses from cysts and
necrotic tumors (Fig. 644.1). As an alternative, cranial CT can
provide more rapid imaging results but cannot provide the fine
parenchymal detail offered by MRI (Fig. 644.2). Both MRI and
CT scans with contrast can demonstrate a ring-­enhancing abscess
cavity. CT findings of cerebritis are characterized by a parenchymal low-­density lesion, whereas T2-­weighted MRI images feature
increased signal intensity. Other abnormalities in common laboratory tests can be observed in children with brain abscesses. The
peripheral white blood cell count is elevated in 60% of cases, and
blood cultures are positive in 28% of cases. Lumbar puncture is
not routinely recommended in cases of brain abscess, because the
procedure could cause brain herniation from elevated intracranial
pressure. When tested, the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is normal in
16% of cases, 71% of cases exhibit CSF pleocytosis, and 58% will
have an elevated CSF protein level. CSF cultures are positive in only
24% of cases; therefore a culture obtained from the abscess fluid is
essential for identifying bacterial pathogens. In some cases, culture
of the abscess fluid can be sterile, and alternative testing, including
16S ribosomal RNA sequencing, may be used to identify organisms.
An electroencephalogram (EEG) may identify corresponding focal
slowing.

TREATMENT

The initial management of brain abscess includes prompt diagnosis
and initiation of an antibiotic regimen that is based on the most
likely pathogens (Table 644.2). Empiric therapy consists of a combination of a third-­generation cephalosporin and metronidazole;
often, vancomycin is added to provide coverage of methicillin-­
resistant S. aureus and resistant S. pneumoniae. Pharmacokinetics
and penetration of the blood-­brain barrier are essential considerations when using alternative agents. If resistant gram-­negative
organisms are suspected, as in cases of infected ventriculoperitoneal shunts, cefepime or meropenem may be used as the β-­lactam
in the initial regimen. Listeria monocytogenes may cause brain
abscess in the neonate, and if this etiology is suspected, penicillin
G or ampicillin with gentamicin is recommended. In immunocompromised patients, broad-­spectrum antibiotic coverage is used, and

Fig. 644.2 Brain abscess shown on CT with contrast. Note the large,
wall-­enhancing abscess in the left frontal lobe causing a rightward parenchymal shift. The patient had no neurologic signs until just before
the CT scan, likely because the frontal lobe is a relatively “silent” area
of the brain.
amphotericin B or azole therapy should be considered for coverage
of potential fungi.
Neurosurgical procedures for brain abscess have been greatly
enhanced by stereotactic MRI or CT systems, allowing for optimized
approaches to minimize morbidity. Aspiration of the abscess is recommended for diagnostic cultures and decompression unless contraindicated based on its location or the patient’s condition. There are limited
data regarding injection of antibiotics into the abscess cavity, and this
technique is not routinely recommended. Small abscesses (under 2.5
cm in diameter) or multiple abscesses may be treated initially with
antibiotics and without surgical drainage, with follow-­up neuroimaging studies to ensure a decrease in abscess size. Surgical excision
of an abscess is rarely required, because such a procedure may be

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 644 u Brain Abscess

3781

Table 644.2  Antimicrobial Therapy for Brain Abscess
ORGANISM

STANDARD THERAPY

ALTERNATIVE THERAPIES

BACTERIA1,2
Actinomyces spp.

Penicillin G

Ampicillin, ceftriaxone

Bacteroides fragilis

Metronidazole

Meropenem

Enterobacterales

Ceftriaxone or ceftazidime

Cefepime, meropenem, fluoroquinolones

Fusobacterium spp.

Metronidazole

Meropenem

Haemophilus spp.

Ampicillin or ceftriaxone/ceftazidime

Cefepime, meropenem

Listeria monocytogenes

Ampicillin or penicillin G + gentamicin

Trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole,
fluoroquinolones

Mycobacterium tuberculosis

Isoniazid + rifampin + pyrazinamide +
ethionamide or streptomycin

Consultation with an expert at TB Centers
of Excellence is recommended for
drug-­resistant TB

Nocardia spp.

Trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole + imipenem +
amikacin (if involvement outside of the brain)

Minocycline, doxycycline, clarithromycin,
ceftriaxone, linezolid

Prevotella melaninogenica

Metronidazole

Meropenem

Pseudomonas aeruginosa

Ceftazidime or cefepime

Meropenem, ciprofloxacin, aztreonam

Methicillin-­sensitive

Nafcillin or oxacillin

Vancomycin, linezolid

Methicillin-­resistant3

Vancomycin

Linezolid, trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole

Streptococcus anginosus (milleri) group, other
Penicillin G streptococci

Penicillin G or ceftriaxone

Vancomycin

Voriconazole

Liposomal amphotericin B, amphotericin B
lipid complex, amphotericin B deoxycholate,
or salvage therapy4

Candida spp.

Liposomal amphotericin B, amphotericin B
lipid complex, amphotericin B deoxycholate
(recommended in neonates)
+ flucytosine (in non-­neonates)

Fluconazole, voriconazole

Cryptococcus neoformans

Liposomal amphotericin B, amphotericin B
lipid complex, amphotericin B deoxycholate
+ flucytosine

Fluconazole

Mucorales

Liposomal amphotericin B, amphotericin B
lipid complex, amphotericin B deoxycholate

Salvage therapy4

Pyrimethamine + sulfadiazine
with folinic acid

Pyrimethamine + clindamycin;other options:
trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole; atovaquone

Staphylococcus aureus

SELECTED FUNGI
Aspergillus spp.

PROTOZOA
Toxoplasma gondii

1Choice of specific antimicrobial agents for standard therapy, or consideration of alternative therapies, should be based on in vitro susceptibility testing for pathogens for which

testing can be performed.
2Depending on the pathogenesis of bacterial brain abscess (see text), these bacteria may be isolated as part of a mixed infection.
3Other antibiotics with activity against methicillin-­resistant Staphylococcus spp., daptomycin and ceftaroline, have limited data regarding penetration into the central nervous system.

These drugs have been used in cases of salvage therapy.
4There is limited evidence for use of alternative anti-­fungals for the central nervous system (CNS). Isavuconazole may have good CNS penetration but is understudied. Posaconazole

and itraconazole have poor penetration, but successful usage has been reported. Echinocandins, in general, do not penetrate into the CNS.
Adapted from Gea-­Banacloche JC, Tunkel AR. Brain abscess. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett’s Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases,
9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020: Table 90.4, p. 1257

associated with greater morbidity compared with aspiration of a
cavity. Administration of glucocorticoids can reduce edema, though
evidence for improved outcomes with steroids is lacking.
The antibiotic regimen may be narrowed or made more specific once
abscess culture data are available; importantly, most abscesses are polymicrobial, and not all organisms present may be isolated in culture.
The duration of parenteral antibiotic therapy depends on the causative
organism(s) and response to treatment (clinically and by imaging) but
is typically 6 weeks. There has been interest in shorter regimens or use
of oral antibiotics as an alternative to parenteral antibiotics, but clinical
data are currently insufficient to support these alternative approaches.

PROGNOSIS

Mortality rates with contemporary use of CT and MRI, improved
microbiologic techniques, and prompt antibiotic and surgical management are <10%. Factors associated with high mortality rate at the
time of admission include delayed administration of antimicrobials,
age <1 year, multiple abscesses, and coma. Long-­term sequelae occur
in about one third of patients and include hemiparesis, seizures,
hydrocephalus, cranial nerve abnormalities, and behavioral and
learning difficulties.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3782 Part XXV u The Nervous System

Chapter 645

Idiopathic Intracranial
Hypertension
(Pseudotumor Cerebri)
Alasdair P.J. Parker and Pooja D. Harijan
Idiopathic intracranial hypertension (IIH), or pseudotumor cerebri,
is frequently considered a potential cause of headache with papilledema in children with normal findings on standard brain MRI. A
false-­positive diagnosis is common, and strategies are needed to avoid
this. The pathophysiology remains poorly understood, particularly in
children.
IIH is rare, affecting 1 in 100,000-­150,000 children, but accurate
diagnosis is essential because of the risk of loss of vision. Previously,
normal levels of intracranial pressure (ICP) were unclear, leading to
overdiagnosis of IIH. Studies in children with ICP monitoring show
an upper limit of normal as 10 mm Hg (13.5 cm H2O) between the
ages of 2 and 5 years, with the adult level of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
pressure being reached by 8 years of age. Currently, the 90th percentile
of CSF pressure on lumbar puncture (LP) has been reported to be 28
cm CSF (22 mm Hg) in children age 5 to 18 years, without a significant
age effect. Other normal parameters include CSF cell count, protein
content, and ventricular size (although this could be slightly decreased
on brain MRI). Papilledema may be overdiagnosed. With the advent
of orbital coherence tomography (OCT), B-­ultrasound, and MRI/
venography, identification has improved (Figs. 645.1-­645.3). Great care
should be taken before the diagnosis of IIH, as there is a high rate of
misdiagnosis (Fig. 645.4) and management is challenging.

Fig. 645.2 Papilledema. Axial T2-­weighted image with fat saturation

of the orbits shows enlargement of the optic nerve sheaths (long white
arrow), flattening of the posterior sclera (short white arrow), and protrusion of the optic disc head into the globe (black arrow). (Modified
from Guarnizo A, Albreiki D, Cruz JP, et al. Papilledema: a review of the
pathophysiology, imaging findings, and mimics. Can Assoc Radiol J.
2022;73[3]:557–567, Fig. 3a, p.561.)

A

ETIOLOGY

IIH, by definition, will not have an identifiable cause, despite typical
findings. A large proportion of children referred to the pediatrician
with possible/probable IIH after a thorough history, examination, and
careful investigation will have secondary IH with an underlying cause

B
Fig. 645.3 A, Optical coherence tomogram (cross-­sectional image)
through an optic disc with drusen showing the typically irregular tissue
underlying the elevated surface of the disc with no extension of the
subretinal hyporeflective layer (arrows) beyond the optic nerve head.
B, Optical coherence tomogram (cross-­sectional image) of a papilledematous optic disc showing a smoothly elevated disc with underlying
hyporeflective fluid extending beyond the disc into the subretinal space
in a lazy-­V pattern (illustrated by yellow lines). (Courtesy Louise Allen,
MD, FRCOphth, Cambridge, United Kingdom.)

Fig. 645.1 Optic nerve ultrasonography. Left, A sagittal schematic

view of gel applied on top of the closed right eyelid with the orientation of the operator hand and ultrasonography probe to the orbit.
Right, An ultrasonography machine screen showing a coronal section
of the orbit and optic nerve sheath. The distance between the stars
represents the diameter of the optic nerve sheath. (From Koziarz A, Sne
N, Kegel F, et al. Bedside optic verve ultrasonography for diagnosing
increased intracranial pressure. Ann Intern Med. 2019;171[12]:896–905,
Fig. 1, p. 897.)

identified. Table 645.1 lists some of the many disorders that cause IH
with no obstructive lesion on MRI. Research in adults suggests abnormal CSF androgen profiles/endocrine dysfunction leading to abnormal
CSF pressure; glucagon-­like peptide-­1 and 11β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 have been implicated.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

IIH is rare under the age of 10 years. In postpubertal children, there
is a female sex preponderance, and for reasons that are poorly understood, patients are much more likely to be obese. However, most obese
children with headache do not have IH and are at risk of false-­positive

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 645 u Idiopathic Intracranial Hypertension (Pseudotumor Cerebri)

3783

Fig. 645.4 Optic nerve photos of the right and left eyes, respectively, demonstrating grade
5 optic nerve head edema with
characteristics, including (A) total
obscuration of the optic cup, (B)
total obscuration of a segment of
a major blood vessel, (C) total obscuration of the disc margin, and
(D) macular star. (From Vickers AL,
El-­Dairi MA. Subacute vision loss
in young, obese female. J Pediatr.
2013;163:1518–1519, Fig. 1.)

Table 645.1  Secondary Intracranial Hypertension Without an Obstructive Lesion on MRI
HEMATOLOGIC DISORDERS
Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome
Iron-­deficiency anemia
Aplastic anemia
Sickle cell disease
Polycythemia
Bone marrow transplantation and associated treatments
Prothrombotic states
Fanconi anemia
Hemolytic anemia
INFECTIONS
Acute sinusitis
Otitis media (lateral sinus thrombosis)
Mastoiditis
Tonsillitis
Measles
Roseola
Varicella, recurrent varicella-­zoster virus infection
Lyme disease
HIV or associated treatment complications
DRUG-­RELATED CONDITIONS
Tetracyclines
Sulfonamides
Nalidixic acid
Fluoroquinolones
Corticosteroid therapy and withdrawal
Nitrofurantoin
Cytarabine
Cyclosporine
Phenytoin
Mesalamine
Isotretinoin
Amiodarone
Oral contraceptive pills/implants
Valproic acid
RENAL DISORDERS
Nephrotic syndrome
Chronic renal insufficiency
Post–renal transplantation
Peritoneal dialysis

misdiagnosis. The most frequent symptom is chronic (weeks to
months), progressive, frontal headache that may worsen with postural changes or a Valsalva maneuver. The headache phenotype attributed to IIH may mimic and/or coexist with chronic migraine and
chronic tension-­type headache. Calcitonin gene–related peptide has
been implicated in the headache attributed to IIH (and in migraine).
Although vomiting may occur, it is rarely as persistent and insidious as that associated with a posterior fossa tumor. Transient visual

NUTRITIONAL DISORDERS
Hypovitaminosis A
Vitamin A intoxication
Hyperalimentation in malnourished patient
Refeeding syndrome
Vitamin D–dependent rickets
CONNECTIVE TISSUE DISORDERS
Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Behçet disease
ENDOCRINE DISORDERS
Polycystic ovarian syndrome
Hypothyroidism
Hypoparathyroidism/hyperparathyroidism
Pseudohypoparathyroidism
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
Addison disease
Recombinant growth hormone
Menarche
OTHER CONDITIONS
Dural sinus thrombosis
Transverse sinus stenosis
Obesity (in pubertal patients)
Superior vena cava syndrome
Sleep apnea
Guillain-­Barré syndrome
Crohn disease
Ulcerative colitis
Turner syndrome
Galactosemia
Atrial septal defect repair
Moebius syndrome
Sarcoidosis
Hypophosphatasia
Pregnancy

obscuration (TVO) lasting seconds and diplopia (secondary to dysfunction of the abducens nerve) may also occur, as may pulsatile tinnitus. TVO is a transient graying out or vision loss often associated with
postural changes or Valsalva maneuvers. Children are alert and lack
constitutional symptoms. Papilledema with an enlarged blind spot is
the most consistent sign. It is frequently misdiagnosed. Optic nerve
head drusen and/or optic neuritis may be mistaken for papilledema,
and failure/delay on treating the latter can lead to irreversible visual

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3784 Part XXV u The Nervous System

A

B

C

D

Fig. 645.5 Female with idiopathic intracranial hypertension. A, Sagittal T1-­weighted image shows a partially empty sella. The pituitary gland is
flattened against the floor of the sella, and the rest of the sella is filled with CSF (circle). B, Axial T1-­weighted postgadolinium image of the orbits
demonstrates protrusion of the optic disc heads into the vitreous, with associated enhancement (arrows). C, Axial head CT (shows slitlike appearance
of the lateral ventricles (arrows). D, Coronal CE-­MRV MIP image shows focal stenosis at the junction of the transverse and sigmoid venous sinuses
(arrows). (From Guarnizo A, Albreiki D, Cruz JP, et al. Papilledema: a review of the pathophysiology, imaging findings, and mimics. Can Assoc Radiol
J. 2022;73:557–567, Fig. 2, p. 560.)

impairment. OCT (see Fig. 645.3), B-­ultrasound, and autofluorescence
studies are strongly advised in all cases, as these will identify drusen
and image the swelling. Inferior nasal or peripheral visual field defects
may be detected. The presence of other focal neurologic signs prompts
investigations to uncover a process other than IIH. All children should
undergo cranial MRI, which may show any of the following: empty
sella (in postpubertal children), posterior pituitary stalk displacement,
meningoceles, posterior globe flattening, optic nerve head protrusion,
optic nerve enhancement, optic nerve sheath distension, optic nerve
tortuosity, slitlike ventricles, tight subarachnoid spaces, and inferior
position of cerebellar tonsils (Fig. 645.5 and see Fig. 645.2). Absence of
these findings does not rule out the diagnosis.
MR venography is essential, both to exclude venous thromboses/stenoses and to identify the tapering of the transverse sinuses that is commonly
seen in intracranial hypertension (see Fig. 645.5). All children require
measurement of their CSF pressure. Standard opening pressures in cm
H2O using a manometer can be falsely raised when the child is distressed
or overflexed. More accurate recording will be achieved using an electronic transducer (similar equipment routinely attaches onto an arterial
line), which will give a computer-­aided recording with waveform analysis, both on opening and in steady state for 20 minutes (when the child
is relaxed, happy, in the lateral decubitus position, and not held tightly
or in an overflexed position). Cooperation of the child is required and
is helped by the presence of a play specialist or use of nitrous oxide during needle insertion, thereby minimizing factors that may artificially alter
ICP such as pain, crying, Valsalva maneuver, or abnormal respiration.
When LP opening pressure is measured under general anesthesia,
it is important to record a normal end-­tidal partial pressure of carbon
dioxide (ET-­PCo2). Because secondary IH is more common, renal,
liver, thyroid, hematologic, inflammatory, and autoimmune profiles
should be obtained on venous blood testing. CSF infusion studies can
also be helpful, particularly in borderline cases. Sterile fluid is infused
via the spinal needle, and the resultant pressure-­volume data can be
analyzed to give the CSF dynamics and variables such as the pulse
amplitude of ICP, the compensatory reserve, and the magnitude of slow
waves of CSF pressure. Typically in IIH, the CSF pressure is elevated,
the resistance to CSF outflow is low, and there is a depleted compensatory reserve. A summary of diagnostic criteria is noted in Table 645.2.

TREATMENT

Any causes of secondary IH should be treated (e.g., withdrawal of a
drug). There are no randomized clinical trials (RCTs) to guide the
treatment of IIH. The initial diagnostic LP may be therapeutic. The spinal needle produces a small hole in the dura that allows CSF to escape
the subarachnoid space, thus reducing ICP. An additional LP and the
removal of sufficient CSF to reduce the opening pressure by 50% occasionally lead to resolution of the process. Obese children with IIH need
a weight-­loss regimen, but the success rate is low. Medical management may include acetazolamide and topiramate. Acetazolamide (10-­
30 mg/kg/24 hours) has been found effective in adult RCT studies:

Table 645.2  Diagnostic Criteria for Idiopathic Intracranial
Hypertension (IIH)
DIAGNOSIS OF IIH
Diagnosis of IIH is definite if
the patient fulfils A-­E:
A.	Papilledema
B.	Normal neurologic
examination except
for sixth cranial nerve
abnormalities
C.	Neuroimaging: Normal
brain parenchyma
without evidence of
hydrocephalus, mass,
or structural lesion and
no abnormal meningeal
enhancement on MRI,
venous thrombosis
excluded in all (best
done on MRV)
D.	Normal CSF composition
E.	Elevated lumbar
puncture opening
pressure (≥250 mm CSF
in adults; ≥280 in children
or obese adults) in an
appropriately performed
lumbar puncture

DIAGNOSIS OF IIH WITHOUT
PAPILLEDEMA
In the absence of papilledema, a
diagnosis of IIH can be made if
B-­E are satisfied and in addition
the patient has unilateral or
bilateral abducens nerve palsy
In the absence of papilledema or
sixth nerve palsy, a diagnosis
of IIH can be suggested, but
not made, if B-­E are satisfied
and in addition at least three
of the following are present on
neuroimaging:
1.	Empty sella
2.	Flattening of the posterior
aspect of the globe
3.	Distention of the perioptic
subarachnoid space ± a
tortuous optic nerve
4.	Transverse venous sinus
stenosis

From Mollan SP, Davies B, Silver NC, et al. Idiopathic intracranial hypertension:
consensus guidelines on management. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry.
2018;89(10):1088–1100.

some authors have recommended using topiramate, which has the
added benefits of possible migraine prophylaxis and, in obese children,
of being an appetite suppressant. Corticosteroids are not routinely
administered because there is no benefit. When the symptoms such as
headache and, in particular, visual deterioration, do not improve with
an LP and acetazolamide or topiramate, then consideration of surgical
management is necessary. In children first-­line surgical management
is currently CSF diversion (e.g., ventriculoperitoneal [VP] shunt, LP
shunt); risks include obstruction and infection. There is a potential role
for endovascular management of dural sinus stenosis (the technique of
inserting a catheter to direct a self-­expanding stent over a guide wire
across a venous sinus stenosis)—this is increasingly first-­line surgical
treatment in adults; pediatric experience is limited. Repeated LP is
likely to be traumatic for the child and unlikely to produce a longer-­
term solution. The value of optic nerve sheath fenestration (a decompressive procedure) is debated and is rarely performed; risks include
ischemia and hemorrhage.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 646 u Spinal Cord Disorders
Any child whose ICP proves to be refractory to treatment warrants
repeat full investigation. Serial monitoring of visual function (i.e.,
visual acuity, color vision, and visual fields) is required in children old
enough to participate but remains a challenge in younger children.
Serial optic nerve examination is also essential. OCT is useful to serially follow changes in papilledema. Serial visual-­evoked potentials are
useful if the visual acuity cannot be reliably documented.
Multidisciplinary management, including a pediatrician, pediatric
neurologist, ophthalmologist, orthoptist, radiologist, specialist nurses,
and, as needed, dietician, psychologist, interventional radiologist, and
neurosurgeon, is helpful both in diagnosis and ongoing management.
The majority of adults with IIH continue to have headache after normalization of ICP and hence require continued headache management.
Permanent visual function loss in IIH is rare; data from small studies
suggest reduced visual acuity in up to 10% and permanent visual field
defects in less than 17% of children.

3785

the spinal cord in patients who have undergone surgical procedures
that disrupt the pial surface of the spinal cord.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Patients at risk for the subsequent development of tethered cord syndrome can often be identified at birth by the presence of an open
myelomeningocele or by cutaneous manifestations of dysraphism (see
Chapter 631). It is important to examine the back of the newborn for
cutaneous midline lesions (lipoma, dermal sinus, tail, or hairy patch)
that may signal an underlying form of occult dysraphism. Dermal
sinuses are almost always located above the gluteal fold, and dimples
in the gluteal cleft directly overlying the coccyx are generally benign
fibrous tracts called coccygeal pits that are not associated with spinal
tethering. However, cutaneous abnormalities may be absent in patients

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 646

Spinal Cord Disorders
Katie P. Fehnel and Mark R. Proctor
646.1 Tethered Cord
Katie P. Fehnel and Mark R. Proctor
Normally, as the spine flexes and extends, the spinal cord is free to
move up and down within the spinal canal. If the spinal cord is fixed
at any point, its movement is restricted, and the spinal cord and nerve
roots can become stretched. This fixing of the spinal cord, regardless of
the underlying cause, is called a tethered cord. When pain, neurologic
deterioration, or bladder and bowel dysfunction occurs in response to
the fixation, it is called tethered cord syndrome.
By full gestational age, the spinal cord ends, on average, at the lumbar L1-­2 disk space, although there is a normal bell-­shaped distribution from thoracic T12-­L3. Spinal cord tethering cannot be determined
by position of the conus medullaris alone, but a position below L3 is
concerning for tethering, especially when associated with an abnormality that connects the cord to the bones or soft tissues around the
spine. Similarly, the spinal cord can be tethered even if it terminates in
a normal position if a tethering lesion is present. This can occur from
a variety of causes.
In its simplest form, tethered cord syndrome results from a thickened filum terminale, which normally extends as a thin, very mobile
structure from the tip of the conus to the sacrococcygeal region, where
it attaches. When this structure is thickened and/or shortened, the cord
can become tethered. This stretching between two points can cause
symptoms later in life. Fatty infiltration is often seen in the thickened
filum (Fig. 646.1).
Other conditions that are well-­established as causes of symptomatic
tethering include various forms of occult dysraphism, such as lipomyelomeningocele, myelocystocele, and diastematomyelia. These conditions can be associated with cutaneous manifestations such as midline
lipomas, asymmetry of the gluteal fold (Fig. 646.2), dimples, and hairy
patches called hypertrichosis (Fig. 646.3). Probably the most commonly
known type of symptomatic tethered cord involves patients who had
previously undergone closure of an open myelomeningocele and later
become symptomatic with pain or neurologic deterioration. Tethered
cord syndrome can also be iatrogenic and associated with scarring of

Fig. 646.1 Sagittal T1-­weighted MRI showing thickening and fatty infiltration of the filum terminale (arrow) in a patient with a symptomatic
tethered spinal cord.

Fig. 646.2 Child with a lipomyelomeningocele demonstrating an extraspinal mass and an asymmetry of the gluteal fold indicative of underlying occult dysraphism. (Used with permission from Barrow Neurological Institute.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3786 Part XXV u The Nervous System

Fig. 646.4 Example of neuropathic changes to the right foot as a result of spinal cord tethering, with a smaller high-­arched foot and absent
ankle jerk on exam. (Used with permission from Barrow Neurological
Institute.)

Fig. 646.3 Hairy patch or hypertrichosis usually associated with diastematomyelia. (Used with permission from Barrow Neurological Institute.)

with tethered spinal cord, and these patients present later in life with
clinical manifestations.
Patients who become symptomatic later in life generally present with
one of four clinical manifestations, including neurologic, orthopedic,
bowel/bladder, and/or pain symptoms. One orthopedic presentation
is asymmetry of the feet, with a smaller, high-­arched foot with clawing of the toes (Fig. 646.4), sometimes referred to as neuroorthopedic
syndrome. Characteristically, there is no ankle jerk on the involved
side and the calf is atrophied. Scoliosis can also be a presenting sign.
Another clinical presentation is increasing urinary urgency, which may
progress to incontinence. Constipation progressing to incontinence
can affect the gastrointestinal system as well. Finally, severe generalized back pain, often radiating into the lower extremities, can occur,
particularly in older adolescents and adults.

potential need for reoperation and sometimes even multiple reoperations is high. Given the technical challenges and increased neurologic
risk in a patient multiply reoperated on for tethered cord, in adolescent
patients for whom axial growth has completed, spinal column shortening procedures have been proposed as an alternative treatment modality. As opposed to surgery at the site of tethering, the tension is released
by actual shortening of the vertebral column.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

646.2 Diastematomyelia (Split-­Cord
Malformation)
Katie P. Fehnel and Mark R. Proctor

When patients present with symptoms related to tethered cord syndrome, a thorough motor and sensory examination of the patient must
be documented. Assessment of bladder function with an ultrasound
of the bladder and urodynamic studies is useful in analyzing bladder innervation. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the diagnostic
study of choice for the anatomy of the tethering lesion and to provide
information about the risks of surgical intervention.

Diastematomyelia is a relatively rare form of occult dysraphism in
which the spinal cord is divided into two halves and can present as
tethered spinal cord. In type 1 split-­cord malformation, there are two
spinal cords, each in its own dural tube and separated by a spicule of
bone and cartilage (Fig. 646.5). In a type 2 split-­cord malformation,
the two spinal cords are enclosed in a single dural sac with a fibrous
septum between the two spinal segments (Fig. 646.6). In both cases, the
anatomy of the outer half of the spinal cord is essentially normal but
the medial half is extremely underdeveloped. Undeveloped nerve roots
and dentate ligaments terminate medially into the medial dural tube in
type 1 cases and terminate in the membranous septum in type 2 cases.
Both types have an associated defect in the bony spinal segment. In the
case of type 2 lesions, this defect can be quite subtle.

TREATMENT

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

DIAGNOSTIC EVALUATION

There are no nonsurgical options for the management of tethered cord
syndrome. Because the presence of asymptomatic tethering is most
likely to be at least suspected in the newborn, prophylactic surgery to
prevent late deterioration has been advocated by some neurosurgeons.
This strategy remains controversial and depends to some extent on a
careful assessment of the risks compared with the benefits. If surgical intervention is chosen, microsurgical dissection with release of the
spinal cord attachment to the overlying dura and soft tissues is the goal
of treatment.

OUTCOME

The outcome of surgery depends on the complexity of the underlying
lesion and the presenting condition of the child because existing deficits are generally not reversed. Releasing a thickened filum terminale or
detethering of patients with diastematomyelia generally yields a good
outcome, and the chance of recurrent symptoms is quite low. Patients
with symptomatic tethered cord who undergo repair of a myelomeningocele or a lipomyelomeningocele have a significant possibility
of recurrent tethering and recurrent symptoms. In this cohort, the

Patients with both type 1 and type 2 split-­cord malformations will have
presentations similar to other types of spinal tethering lesions. This may
include subtle signs of neurologic involvement, such as unilateral calf
atrophy and a high arch in one or both feet early in life, but they are
more likely to be neurologically normal. These patients are tethered by
the adherence of the spinal cord, so they may develop progressive loss
of bowel and bladder function and sensory and motor difficulties in
the lower extremities. Back pain is a common symptom in adolescents
and adults with split-­cord malformation but is uncommon in small
children.
Cutaneous manifestations of dysraphism are present in 90% of
patients with split-­cord malformations. Large, hairy, midline patches
called hypertrichosis, the most common cutaneous manifestations, are
present in approximately 60% of the cases.

DIAGNOSTIC EVALUATION

MRI, the study of choice, shows the two spinal cords. The frequent
association of bony abnormalities in this condition may require further
evaluation with computed tomography (CT).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 646 u Spinal Cord Disorders

A

B

3787

C

Fig. 646.5 Diastematomyelia type 1. A, Coronal T1-­weighted MRI in a patient with type 1 DSM shows a large ossified spur (arrow) that splits

the thoracic spinal cord. Numerous vertebral segmentation anomalies with posterior rib fusions are present. Sagittal T2-­weighted (B) and axial T1-­
weighted (C) MRI of a different patient shows a type 1 cervical DSM with ossified spur (arrow in B) and two hemicords (arrowheads in C). (From Moore
KR. Congenital abnormalities of the spine. In: Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019: Fig. 43-­12.)

646.3 Syringomyelia
Katie P. Fehnel and Mark R. Proctor

Fig. 646.6 Diastematomyelia type 2. Axial T2-­weighted MRI in a pa-

tient with type 2 DSM shows the spinal cord split into two hemicords
within a single dural tube. No fibrous or osseous septum was identified.
(From Moore KR. Congenital abnormalities of the spine. In: Coley BD,
ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019: Fig. 43-­13.)

TREATMENT

The treatment of split-­cord malformation is surgical. This abnormality is
a form of tethered cord syndrome, and its treatment is to release the spinal cord to move freely with movement of the spine. In type 1 split-­cord
malformations, the two half-­cords are in separate dural sacs with medial
attachment to the dura and bony septum. In this case, the dura needs to
be opened, the bony septum removed, the medial attachments to the dura
lysed, and a single dural tube created. For type 2 lesions, the membranous
septum should be lysed. An attachment of this membrane to the anterior
dura should be explored and lysed as well. Retethering of this type is rare,
as there is no reason to disrupt the pial layer of the spinal cord.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Syringomyelia is a cystic distention of the spinal cord caused by
obstruction of the flow of spinal fluid from within the spinal cord to
its point of absorption. There are three recognized forms of syringomyelia, depending on the underlying cause. Communicating syringomyelia implies that cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) from within the ventricles
communicates with the fluid within the spinal cord and is assumed to
be the source of the CSF that distends the spinal cord. Noncommunicating syringomyelia implies that ventricular CSF does not communicate with the fluid within the spinal cord. It primarily occurs in the
context of intramedullary tumors and obstructive lesions. In the final
form of syringomyelia, that is, posttraumatic syringomyelia, spinal
cord injury results in damage and subsequent softening of the spinal
cord. This softening, combined with the scarring of the surrounding
spinal cord tissue, results in progressive distention of the cyst. Syringomyelia is highly associated with Chiari malformation and can also be
seen after infection or trauma, but many cases seen on imaging are normal anatomic variants unassociated with syndromes or any symptoms.
It is also associated with connective tissue disorders (Ehlers-­Danlos
syndrome).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Signs and symptoms of syringomyelia develop insidiously over years or
decades. The classic presentation is central cord syndrome. Syringomyelia affects the spinal cord beginning from the central region, where
the cervical and thoracic nerve fibers are located, so it less commonly
affects the lumbar and sacral fibers, which are more laterally located in
the spinal cord. Therefore in syringomyelia the patient develops numbness beginning in the shoulder in a capelike distribution followed by
the development of atrophy and weakness in the upper extremities.
Trophic ulcers of the hands are characteristic of advanced cases.
Other forms of presentation include scoliosis that may be rapidly
progressive and often can be presumed from the absence of superficial
abdominal reflexes. Urgency and bladder dysfunction as well as lower
extremity spasticity also may be part of the presentation.
In patients with syringomyelia related to significant prior spinal cord
injury, the presentation is usually severe pain in the area of the spinal
cord distention above the level of the initial injury. There is also an
ascending level of motor and sensory dysfunction.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3788 Part XXV u The Nervous System
DIAGNOSTIC EVALUATION

MRI is the radiologic study of choice (Figs. 646.7 and 646.8). The study
should include the entire spine, and gadolinium-­enhanced sequences
should be a part of it if there is a suspicion for tumor. Specific attention
should be paid to the craniovertebral junction because of the frequent
association of syringomyelia with Chiari malformations. Obstruction
to the flow of CSF from the fourth ventricle can cause syringomyelia;
therefore most patients also should undergo imaging of the brain if a
Chiari malformation is seen on the cervical imaging.

TREATMENT

The treatment of syringomyelia should be tailored to the underlying
cause, and rarely is the syringomyelia addressed directly. If that cause
can be removed or ameliorated, the syrinx should improve. Direct surgery on the syrinx is associated with a much higher surgical risk profile.
Communicating syringomyelia is most frequently seen in the context of abnormalities at the craniovertebral junction, often associated
with Chiari malformations (see Fig. 646.7). In such cases, decompression of the craniovertebral junction is usually effective in the management of the syringomyelia. In the context of Chiari II malformation
associated with spina bifida, syringomyelia usually results from an
insidious failure of the shunt used to treat the hydrocephalus. This distention of the spinal cord results in a rapid development of scoliosis
and occasionally spasticity in the lower extremities. Repair of the shunt
is often effective treatment, and only rarely is surgical decompression at
the craniovertebral junction necessary. Other conditions that can cause
obstruction at the craniocervical junction include inflammatory conditions such as chronic meningitis, as seen in tuberculosis or meningeal
carcinomatosis.
Noncommunicating syringomyelia results from blocking the flow
of spinal cord extracellular fluid or CSF within the central canal by
an intramedullary spinal cord tumor or severe external compression
of the spinal cord. In such cases, management should be directed to
tumor resection or to decompression of constricting elements.
Traumatic syrinxes result from hematomyelia in the substance of
the spinal cord coupled with severe arachnoidal scarring around the
circumference of the spinal cord. When progressive, this form of syringomyelia is treated by exploration and lysis of the adhesions that fix
the spinal cord to the overlying dura. Microscopic lysis of the scar surrounding the spinal cord at the point of injury allows the spinal cord to
collapse and prevents it from being distorted by a hydrostatic column
of spinal fluid pulsations.
In rare cases, direct drainage procedures must be employed and
can result in symptomatic and radiographic improvement. Syrinx-­to-­
subarachnoid or pleural shunting with a small piece of silicone tubing
is the treatment option. These procedures often have short-­lived success because the tubing tends to become obstructed, so they should be
reserved for cases with obstructive symptoms.
In the current era, where many children are undergoing spinal
MRI, some children who demonstrate no neurologic deficits are being
referred to pediatric neurosurgeons with the diagnosis of syringomyelia. Many of these children were scanned because of back pain or
as part of a screening for scoliosis. They are found on MRI to have a
persistent central canal, and the diagnosis of syringomyelia is made.
These syrinxes are 1-­3 mm in diameter and may extend over several
segments (see Fig. 646.8). There is no distortion of the spinal cord in
the region and no change in signal of the surrounding spinal cord.
These syrinxes have been called “idiopathic” syrinxes. Follow-­up of
significant numbers of such children has shown them to be benign in
nature and probably represent a normal variant. There does not seem
to be a need for routine follow-­up imaging without new symptoms.
They need no treatment and do not require limitations of activity.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Fig. 646.7 Sagittal MRI of patient with a Chiari I malformation and a
holocord syrinx. (Used with permission from Barrow Neurological Institute.)

Fig. 646.8 T2-­weighted MRI scan of the cervical and thoracic spinal
cord showing dilation of the central canal (C5-­T1) in the absence of a
Chiari malformation or other pathology.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 646 u Spinal Cord Disorders

3789

646.4 Spinal Cord Tumors
Katie P. Fehnel and Mark R. Proctor
Tumors of the spine and spinal cord are rare in children. Different types
of tumors have different relationships with the spinal cord, meninges,
and bony elements of the spine (Fig. 646.9). Intramedullary spinal cord
tumors arise within the substance of the spinal cord itself (Fig. 646.10).
They represent between 5% and 15% of primary central nervous system tumors. This percentage may well reflect the relative volume of
spinal cord compared with brain. Approximately 10% of intramedullary spinal cord tumors are malignant astrocytic tumors, but most are
World Health Organization grade I or II tumors of glial or ependymal
origin. In children, low-­grade astrocytomas and gangliogliomas represent the most common tumor types, with ependymomas being less
common than in adults.
Except in the context of neurofibromatosis (NF-­1 and NF-­2; see
Chapter 636.1), intradural extramedullary tumors are extremely rare in
children. Most are nerve sheath tumors, either schwannomas or neurofibromas. Intraspinal meningiomas in children are essentially found
only in patients with NF-­2 or those who have undergone prior irradiation for some reason. The intradural extramedullary compartment is
also a site for metastatic tumors from primary cancers such as leukemia
or primitive neuroectodermal tumors. Myxopapillary ependymoma, a
benign subtype found in the filum terminale, is another extramedullary tumor seen in children.
Extradural spinal tumors characteristically begin in the bones of the
spine. Primary tumors in this location include aneurysmal bone cysts,
Langerhans cell histiocytosis (formerly called eosinophilic granuloma),
osteoid osteoma, and giant cell tumors. In infants, the extradural space
is often the site of neuroblastomas or ganglioneuroblastomas, which
tend to extend from a paraspinal location into the epidural space
through the intervertebral foramen. In older patients, the bones of the
spine may be the site of multiple myeloma and metastases from common malignant tumors, such as chordoma and sarcomas.

Dura

Extramedullary,
extradural tumor

Intramedullary
tumor

Extramedullary,
intradural tumor

Fig. 646.9 Diagram of the relationship of various tumors to the spine,

nerve roots, and spinal cord. (Used with permission from Barrow Neurological Institute.)

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

With the exception of the uncommon malignant glial tumors of the
spinal cord, which tend to present precipitously, intramedullary spinal
cord tumors present in a very insidious manner. Back pain related to
the level of the tumor is a common presenting complaint. It is likely that
this pain will awaken the child from sleep and improve as the day progresses. Before the use of MRI became routine, the time from the first
onset of symptoms to diagnosis of the tumor could be very prolonged,
extending years. Weakness, gait disturbance, and sensory deficits are
usually subtle but detectable on formal neurologic examination. Scoliosis, limb asymmetry, and bowel or bladder disturbance may be the presenting complaints associated with intramedullary spinal cord tumors.
Nerve sheath tumors primarily arise from the sensory rootlet of the
exiting spinal nerve. They are very slow-­growing tumors and present
with symptoms and signs relative to the nerve root involved. Pain in
a bandlike distribution around the chest or into an extremity is the
most common presenting complaint. Tumor growth eventually leads to
spinal cord compression and involvement of adjacent nerve roots, but
pain is the more likely presenting symptom.
Extramedullary extradural tumors have a tendency to present more
acutely owing to rapid growth within a confined space. Such children
may present with acute paresis and urinary retention. They can also
present abruptly with severe pain and neurologic deficit at the time of
pathologic fracture of the vertebral body. Benign tumors such as giant
cell tumors and aneurysmal bone cysts present more insidiously as the
tumor slowly grows and begins to compress neural structures. Osteoid
osteomas present with severe pain relieved by nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs.

DIAGNOSTIC EVALUATION

MRI with and without gadolinium enhancement of the spinal cord is
the diagnostic study of choice and is essential in the diagnosis of spinal cord tumors, especially intramedullary spinal cord tumors. Most

Fig. 646.10 T1 weighted MRI scan of a spinal cord tumor (arrow).
The fusiform expansion of the cervical cord enhances after intravenous
gadolinium injection.

astrocytic tumors of the spinal cord and most ependymomas show
diffuse enhancement and will distend the spinal cord focally. These
tumors may involve the entire length of the spinal cord (holocord
astrocytomas), although much of the change might be due to the associated syrinx. Nerve sheath tumors characteristically enhance and are
focal. They may exit through the neural foramen and distend the canal,
as can be seen on MRI. They also may be visualized on plain radiographs of the affected area of the spine because of their chronic effect
on the bones.
Plain radiographs of the spine are helpful in defining the relationship
of extradural tumors to the bony spine and in documenting evidence
of instability in the case of pathologic compression fractures. When a
pathologic fracture occurs, CT is essential to determine the effect of the
tumor on the bone. Because many of these tumors occur as metastatic
lesions, a general staging of the extent of disease is essential. In the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3790 Part XXV u The Nervous System
case of Langerhans cell histiocytosis, a thorough bone survey should
be conducted to look for other lesions. Radionucleotide bone scanning, rapid STIR MRI, or PET MRI scans are useful in determining the
extent of the disease.

TREATMENT

The primary treatment of both intramedullary and extramedullary
intradural tumors is surgical removal. For both low-­grade astrocytomas and ependymomas, microsurgical removal with the intent of
total removal is the treatment of choice. This goal should be attainable in most patients with ependymomas and gangliogliomas and in
many patients with low-­grade astrocytomas. Though the majority of
intramedullary spinal cord tumors are benign, the extent of resection
may be limited in tumors that are diffusely infiltrating midline gliomas
because of tumor invasion and infiltration of gray and white matter
tracts. The invasive nature of these tumors is a leading cause of the poor
prognosis for many of these patients, resulting in symptom progression
and ultimately loss of neurologic function with profound implications
on both quality and extent of life and is one of the most significant
problems in spinal neurooncology. With the advent of routine molecular genetic testing, targetable pathogenic variants have been identified
in some intramedullary spinal cord tumors, which will potentially
expand nonsurgical and chemotherapeutic treatment options in as of
now unresectable spinal cord tumors. Adjunctive treatment is often
unnecessary in patients treated with adequate surgical resection. Likewise, schwannomas should be resectable. Occasionally, however, the
nerve root must be resected. Doing so may be of no consequence in
the thoracic spinal cord, but an attempt to remove the tumor while
salvaging the motor root in the cervical and lumbosacral region is
critical to preserve movement. Malignant astrocytic tumors cannot be
resected without major morbidity and, in any case, carry an extremely
poor prognosis. In the case of grades III and IV astrocytomas of the
spinal cord, decompression and biopsy followed by radiation therapy
and possibly chemotherapy are used.
The diagnosis and treatment of extramedullary spinal cord tumors
must be individualized. Patients with bony involvement may be at risk
of instability, and treatment will therefore involve both tumor resection
and stabilization of the spine. For extramedullary tumors with soft tissue components such as neuroblastomas, treatment is determined by
the nature of the tumor and degree of spinal cord compression and may
require needle biopsy of the lesion to direct treatment. In the absence
of significant neurologic compression, surgical intervention may not
be indicated if adjuvant therapies might be effective.

OUTCOME

The prognosis for patients with benign intramedullary spinal cord
tumors depends, to some extent, on the patient’s condition at the time
of surgical intervention. It is very unlikely that nonambulatory patients
will improve after surgery, and most patients will have at least transient worsening with surgery. If, however, patients are ambulatory at
the time of surgery, they are likely to recover at least to their preoperative level of function. The majority of intramedullary tumors in
children are benign and behave like tumors with the same histologic
findings in the brain. The evidence would point to the fact that intramedullary ependymomas act in a more benign fashion than they do in
the fourth ventricle. Gross total removal without adjuvant treatment is
the preferred method of treatment and carries not only a much longer
progression-­free survival time but an improved quality of life as well.
Malignant spinal cord tumors are usually lethal, with death resulting
from diffuse metastases via the CSF pathways. Successful resection of
nerve sheath tumors should be curative. In the context of neurofibromatosis, however, many more tumors can be found at other levels or
can be expected to develop later in life. Surgical intervention in the
context of neurofibromatoses should be performed only for clearly
symptomatic lesions.
The outcome of treatment of extramedullary tumors depends on the
cell type and, in most cases, on the efficacy of nonsurgical, adjunctive

Fig. 646.11 T2 weighted MRI showing an extensive thoracic spinal
arteriovenous malformation.

therapies. For aneurysmal bone cysts and giant cell tumors, resection
of the tumor and fusion of the spine are the treatments of choice.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

646.5 Spinal Arteriovenous Malformations
Katie P. Fehnel and Mark R. Proctor
Arteriovenous malformations of the spinal cord are rare lesions in children. Only about 60 patients younger than age 18 years are treated in the
United States each year. These lesions are complex, and despite their rarity
there are multiple subtypes, which require different treatment strategies.
Patients commonly present with back or neck pain, depending on the
segments of the spinal cord involved, and they may experience the insidious onset of motor and sensory disturbances. Sudden onset of paraplegia
secondary to hemorrhage has been reported. Occasionally, patients present with subarachnoid hemorrhage without overt neurologic deficits,
similar to the presentation associated with cerebral aneurysms. In some
cases, bruits are audible upon auscultation over the bony spine.

DIAGNOSTIC EVALUATION

When a spinal arteriovenous malformation is suspected, MRI of the
spinal cord is first needed to make the diagnosis and to obtain a general idea of the location of the lesion (Fig. 646.11). MR angiography
or CT angiography may provide further information, but formal catheter angiography of the spinal cord is needed to obtain an adequate
understanding of the complex anatomy of the lesion and to plan the
intervention.

TREATMENT

Open microsurgery had been the mainstay of treatment for spinal cord
arteriovenous fistulas and arteriovenous malformations. With the rapid
development of interventional techniques, the percentage of patients
undergoing microsurgery has decreased from 70% to approximately
30%. Stereotactic radiosurgery may be used adjunctively. Treatment of
these complex lesions requires the commitment of an organized neurovascular treatment program.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

