The Cardiovascular System
Section 1

Developmental Biology
of the Cardiovascular
System
Chapter 469

Cardiac Development
Daniel Bernstein and William R. Goodyer
INTRODUCTION

Cardiac defects have traditionally been grouped by common morphologic patterns: for example, abnormalities of the outflow tracts
(conotruncal lesions such as tetralogy of Fallot and truncus arteriosus)
and abnormalities of atrioventricular septation (primum atrial septal defect, atrioventricular septal defect). These morphologic categories may be revised or eventually supplanted by new categories as our
understanding of the genetic and molecular basis of congenital heart
disease progresses.

469.1 Early Cardiac Morphogenesis
Daniel Bernstein and William R. Goodyer
In the early presomite embryo, the first identifiable cardiac progenitor
cell clusters migrate from the primitive streak and are arranged in the
anterior lateral plate mesoderm on both sides of the embryo’s central
axis in a horseshoe pattern, also known as the cardiac crescent. These
cell clusters are marked by their expression of the basic helix-­loop-­
helix (bHLH) transcription factor mesoderm posterior 1 (MESP1) and
subsequently form paired cardiac tubes by 18 days of gestation. This
cardiac progenitor zone is shaped by a balanced gradient of positive and
negative signals arising from the tissues surrounding the cardiac mesodermal cells, with signals from the surrounding ventral/lateral tissues
promoting cardiogenesis through signaling molecules such as bone
morphogenetic protein (BMP), sonic hedgehog (SHH), and fibroblast
growth factor 8 (FGF8) and signals from dorsal/medial structures
such as members of the canonical Wnt/β-­catenin pathway inhibiting
cardiogenesis. Cardiogenic signals activate the genetic expression of
cardiac-­specific transcription factors (e.g., TBX, GATA, NKX2.5) to
activate developmental cardiac gene expression The paired tubes fuse
in the midline on the ventral surface of the embryo to form the primitive heart tube by 22 days. This straight heart tube is composed of an
outer myocardial layer, an inner endocardium, and a middle layer of
extracellular matrix (ECM) known as the cardiac jelly. There are two
distinct cell lineages: the first heart field (regulated mainly by NKX2.5)
provides precursor cells for the left ventricle and parts of the atria; the
second heart field (regulated mainly by ISL1) provides precursors for
the right ventricle, outflow tracts, and caudal aspects of the atria. Pre-­
myocardial cells, including epicardial cells and cells derived from the
neural crest, continue their migration into the region of the heart tube.

PART

XVIII

Regulation of this early phase of cardiac morphogenesis is controlled
in part by the interaction of specific signaling molecules or ligands,
usually expressed by one cell type, with specific receptors, usually
expressed by another cell type. Positional information is conveyed to
the developing cardiac mesoderm by factors such as retinoids (isoforms
of vitamin A), which bind to specific nuclear receptors and regulate
gene transcription. Migration of epithelial cells into the developing
heart tube is directed by ECM proteins (e.g., fibronectin) that interact
with cell surface receptors (the integrins). The clinical importance of
these signaling pathways is revealed by the spectrum of cardiac teratogenic effects caused by the retinoid-­like drug isotretinoin.
As early as 20-­22 days, before cardiac looping, the embryonic heart
begins to contract and exhibit phases of the cardiac cycle that are surprisingly similar to those in the mature heart. Morphologists initially
identified segments of the heart tube that were believed to correspond
to structures in the mature heart (Fig. 469.1). The sinus venosus (systemic venous system and part of right atrium), primitive atrium (right
and left atria), primitive ventricle (left ventricle), and bulbus cordis that
can be broken down into three sections (the proximal one third, right
ventricle; mid-­third, conus cordis to outflow tracts; and distal third,
truncus arteriosus to aorta and pulmonary artery). However, this
model is oversimplified. Only the trabecular (most heavily muscularized) portions of the left ventricular myocardium are present in the
early cardiac tube; the cells that will become the inlet portion of the
left ventricle migrate into the cardiac tube at a later stage (after looping is initiated). Even later to appear are the primordial cells that give
rise to the great arteries (truncus arteriosus), including cells derived
from the neural crest, which are not present until after cardiac looping
is complete. Chamber-­specific transcription factors participate in the
differentiation of atria from ventricles and in the right and left ventricles. The bHLH transcription factor gene (HAND2) is expressed in
the developing right ventricle. Disruption of this gene or of other transcriptional factors such as MEF2c in mice leads to hypoplasia of the
right ventricle. Other genetic markers of the second heart field (early
right ventricle) cells include IRX4, TBX20, ISL1, TNNT2, MLC2v, and
TBX1. The transcription factor HAND1 is expressed in the developing
left ventricle and conotruncus and is also critical to their development.
Other genetic markers of the first heart field (early left ventricle) cells
include TBX5, NKX2.5, TNNT2, MLC2v, and HCN4.
One mechanism of how regulation of developmentally coordinated groups of genes is achieved is through the expression of small,
noncoding RNAs known as microRNAs, each of which regulates the
expression of multiple target genes. Another is through modifications
in chromatin, the DNA scaffolding that acts as a controller of gene
expression. Chromatin remodeling mediated by genes or enzymes
such as BRG1, CHD7, histone demethylases, and methyltransferases is
associated with cardiac developmental defects, including septal defects,
dilated cardiomyopathy, and double-­outlet right ventricle.

469.2 Cardiac Looping
Daniel Bernstein and William R. Goodyer
At approximately 22-­24 days, the heart tube begins to bend ventrally
and toward the right (see Fig. 469.1). The heart is the first organ to
escape from the bilateral symmetry of the early embryo. An asymmetric signaling program that also affects the position of the lungs,
liver, spleen, and gastrointestinal tract determines the direction of
cardiac looping. During gastrulation, before organ formation begins,
asymmetric expression of SHH and nodal (a member of the transforming growth factor beta [TGF-­β] family) are directed in the lateral

2731
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2732 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Weeks

Days
19

3
20

Vasculogenesis in the cardiac region forms the lateral
endocardial tubes

Embryonic folding brings the endocardial tubes together
in the thoracic region
Bulboventricular sulcus
The endocardial tubes fuse to form the primitive heart tube,
which is divided into incipient chambers by sulci

21

Atrioventricular sulcus

22
The heart begins to beat

Splanchnopleuric mesoderm invests the heart tube and forms
the myocardium and cardiac jelly; migrating mesothelial cells
invest the myocardium and form the epicardium

4
23 The heart begins to fold
The septum primum begins to form
28 Folding is complete
The muscular ventricular
septum begins to form
5
33

The atrioventricular valves begin to form
(complete by 3 mo)

35

Right and left
truncoconal ridges
begin to form

6
Superior and inferior
endocardial cushions fuse
to form the septum
intermedium

42
7

46

Definitive atria and auricles are present
The ostium secundum and foramen ovale
form as the septum primum meets
the septum intermedium

The muscular ventricular
septum ceases to grow

8
56

The coronary sinus is formed

63

The semilunar valves are complete

9

Fig. 469.1 Timeline of cardiac morphogenesis. (From Larsen WJ. Essentials of Human Embryology. New York:
Churchill Livingstone; 1998.)

The aortic and pulmonary
outflow tracts and
the ventricles are fully
separated by growth of
the truncoconal ridges

10

mesoderm. These directionality signals set up a concentration gradient
between the right and left sides of the embryo in the expression of critical signaling molecules. This asymmetric signaling is then amplified
and propagated through the transcription factor gene (PITX2), which
is expressed on the left side of the early heart tube, LEFTY1 and left-­
right Dynein (LRD). Interestingly, mice in which LRD has been inactivated display random left-­right (L-­R) orientation of the heart and
abdominal viscera, with 50% of their hearts looping to the right and
50% looping to the left. Other potential mechanisms of cardiac looping include differential growth rates for myocytes on the convex versus
the concave surface of the curve, differential rates of programmed cell
death (apoptosis), and mechanical forces generated within myocardial
cells at the inner and outer edges of the bending heart tube through
their actin cytoskeleton.
Looping brings the future left ventricle leftward and in continuity with the sinus venosus (future left and right atria), whereas the
future right ventricle is shifted rightward and in continuity with the
truncus arteriosus (future aorta and pulmonary artery). This pattern
of development explains the relatively common occurrence of the

TIMELINE. FORMATION OF THE HEART.

cardiac anomalies double-­outlet right ventricle and double-­inlet
left ventricle and the extreme rarity of double-­outlet left ventricle and
double-­inlet right ventricle (see Chapter 479.5). When cardiac looping is abnormal (situs inversus, heterotaxia), the incidence of serious
cardiac malformations is high, and there are usually associated abnormalities in the L-­R patterning of the lungs and abdominal viscera,
including absence of the spleen (asplenia) or multiple small spleens
(polysplenia).

469.3 Cardiac Septation
Daniel Bernstein and William R. Goodyer
When looping is complete, the external appearance of the heart is
like that of a mature heart; internally, the structure resembles a single
continuous tube, although it now has several bulges resulting in the
appearance of primitive chambers. The common atrium (comprising
both right and left atria) is connected to the primitive ventricle (future

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 469 u Cardiac Development
left ventricle) via the atrioventricular canal. The primitive ventricle is
connected to the bulbus cordis (future right ventricle) via the bulboventricular foramen. The distal portion of the bulbus cordis is connected to
the truncus arteriosus via an outlet segment (the conus).
The heart tube now consists of several layers of myocardium and
a single layer of endocardium separated by cardiac jelly (acellular
ECM secreted by the myocardium). Septation of the heart begins at
approximately day 26 with the ingrowth of large tissue masses, the
endocardial cushions, at both the atrioventricular and conotruncal
junctions (see Fig. 469.1). These cushions consist of protrusions of
ECM (cardiac jelly), which, in addition to their role in development,
also serve a physiologic function as primitive heart valves. Endocardial cells dedifferentiate and migrate into the cardiac jelly in the region
of the endocardial cushions, eventually becoming mesenchymal cells
(endothelial-­mesenchymal transformation) that will form part of the
atrioventricular valves. The endocardium, secondary heart field, and
neural crest all contribute to the formation of the valve leaflets. Besides
direct contribution to valve tissue, these progenitor cells also interact
with each other and with other cells in the heart to orchestrate cardiac
valve development.
Complete septation of the atrioventricular canal occurs with fusion
of the endocardial cushions. Most of the atrioventricular valve tissue is derived from the ventricular myocardium in a process involving undermining of the ventricular walls. Because this process occurs
asymmetrically, the tricuspid valve annulus sits closer to the apex of
the heart than the mitral valve annulus. Physical separation of these
two valves produces the atrioventricular septum, the absence of which
is the primary common defect in patients with atrioventricular canal
defects (see Chapter 475.5). If the process of undermining is incomplete, the right atrioventricular valve may not separate normally from
the ventricular myocardium, a possible cause of Ebstein anomaly (see
Chapter 479.7).
Septation of the atria begins at around 30 days with growth of the
septum primum downward toward the endocardial cushions (see Fig.
469.1). The orifice that remains is the ostium primum. The endocardial
cushions then fuse and, together with the completed septum primum,
divide the atrioventricular canal into right and left segments. A second
opening appears in the posterior portion of the septum primum, the
ostium secundum, and it allows a portion of the fetal venous return to
the right atrium to pass across to the left atrium. Finally, the septum
secundum grows downward, just to the right of the septum primum.
Together with a flap of the septum primum, the ridge of the ostium
secundum forms the foramen ovale, through which fetal blood passes
from the inferior vena cava to the left atrium (see Chapter 470).
Septation of the ventricles begins at about embryonic day 25 with
protrusions of endocardium in both the inlet (primitive ventricle) and
outlet (bulbus cordis) segments of the heart. The inlet protrusions fuse
into the bulboventricular septum and extend posteriorly toward the
inferior endocardial cushion, where they give rise to the inlet and trabecular portions of the interventricular septum. Ventricular septal
defects can occur in any portion of the developing interventricular
septum (see Chapter 475.6). The outlet or conotruncal septum develops from ridges of cardiac jelly, similar to the atrioventricular cushions. These ridges fuse to form a spiral septum that brings the future
pulmonary artery into communication with the anterior and rightward right ventricle and the future aorta into communication with the
posterior and leftward left ventricle. Differences in cell growth of the
outlet septum lead to lengthening of the segment of smooth muscle
beneath the pulmonary valve (conus), a process that separates the tricuspid and pulmonary valves. In contrast, disappearance of the segment beneath the aortic valve leads to fibrous continuity of the mitral
and aortic valves. Within the lumen of distal outflow tract, local tissue swellings (truncal cushions) arise and are later populated by mesenchymal cells originating from the neural crest, participating in the
formation of the semilunar (pulmonary and aortic) valves. Defects
in these processes are responsible for conotruncal and aortic arch
defects (truncus arteriosus, tetralogy of Fallot, pulmonary atresia,
double-­outlet right ventricle, interrupted aortic arch), a group of cardiac anomalies often associated with deletions of the DiGeorge critical

2733

region of chromosome 22q11 (see Chapters 472 and 473). The transcription factor gene (TBX1) has been implicated as a candidate gene,
which may be responsible for DiGeorge syndrome. Several genes have
been implicated in valve formation, including PTPN11, which encodes
the tyrosine phosphatase SHP-­2, and when present in a mutated form,
is one of the genes responsible for Noonan syndrome, associated with
pulmonary valve stenosis, and NOTCH1, a regulator of cell differentiation associated with aortic valve disease.

469.4 Aortic Arch Development
Daniel Bernstein and William R. Goodyer
The aortic arch, head and neck vessels, proximal pulmonary arteries,
and ductus arteriosus develop from the aortic sac, arterial arches, and
dorsal aortae. When the straight heart tube develops, the distal outflow
portion bifurcates into the right and left first aortic arches, which join
the paired dorsal aortae (Fig. 469.2). The dorsal aortae will fuse to form
the descending aorta. The proximal aorta from the aortic valve to the
left carotid artery arises from the aortic sac. The first and second arches
largely regress by about 22 days, with the first aortic arch giving rise to
the maxillary artery and the second to the stapedial and hyoid arteries. The third arches participate in the formation of the innominate
artery and the common and internal carotid arteries. The right fourth
arch gives rise to the innominate and right subclavian arteries, and the
left fourth arch participates in formation of the segment of the aortic
arch between the left carotid artery and the ductus arteriosus. The fifth
arch does not persist as a major structure in the mature circulation.
The sixth arches join the more distal pulmonary arteries, with the right
sixth arch giving rise to a portion of the proximal right pulmonary
artery and the left sixth arch to the proximal left pulmonary artery and
to the ductus arteriosus. The aortic arch between the ductus arteriosus
and left subclavian artery is derived from the left-­sided dorsal aorta,
whereas the aortic arch distal to the left subclavian artery is derived
from the fused right and left dorsal aortae. Abnormalities in development of the paired aortic arches are responsible for right aortic arch,
double aortic arch, and vascular rings (see Chapter 481.1).

469.5 Cardiac Differentiation
Daniel Bernstein and William R. Goodyer
The process by which the totipotential cells of the early embryo become
committed to specific cell lineages is termed differentiation. Precardiac
mesodermal cells differentiate into mature cardiac muscle cells with an
appropriate complement of cardiac-­specific contractile elements, regulatory proteins, receptors, and ion channels. Expression of the contractile protein myosin occurs at an early stage of cardiac development,
even before fusion of the bilateral heart primordia. Differentiation in
these early mesodermal cells is regulated by signals from the anterior
endoderm, a process known as induction. Several putative early signaling molecules include fibroblast growth factor, activin, and insulin.
Signaling molecules interact with receptors on the cell surface; these
receptors activate second messengers, which in turn activate specific
nuclear transcription factor genes (GATA-­4, MEF2, NKX, bHLH, and
retinoic acid receptor family) that induce the expression of specific
gene products to regulate cardiac differentiation. Some of the primary
disorders of cardiac muscle, the cardiomyopathies, may be related to
defects in some of these signaling molecules (see Chapter 488).
Developmental processes are chamber specific. Early in development, ventricular myocytes express both ventricular and atrial isoforms of several proteins, such as atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) and
myosin light chain (MLC). Mature ventricular myocytes do not express
ANP and express only a ventricular-­specific MLC 2v isoform, whereas
mature atrial myocytes express ANP and an atrial-­specific MLC 2a isoform. Heart failure (see Chapter 491), volume overload (see Chapters
475 and 477), and pressure overload hypertrophy (see Chapter 476)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2734 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
3rd aortic
arch

4th aortic
arch

6th aortic
arch

Truncus
arteriosus

4
5 6

Aortic
sac

External carotid artery

Internal carotid
artery

4
Pharyngeal arch
arteries

Left common
carotid artery

External
carotid
arteries

Left dorsal aorta

3

Left subclavian
artery

Aortic sac

5
6

Ductus
arteriosus

Truncus arteriosus
(partly divided into
aortic and pulmonary
arteries)

Arch of aorta

Right pulmonary
artery

Ligamentum
arteriosum

Left dorsal aorta
Pulmonary arteries

Right subclavian artery

Left pulmonary
artery

Ascending aorta
Left subclavian artery
Descending aorta

7th intersegmental artery

A

Dorsal aortae

Internal
carotid
arteries

Left dorsal
aorta

3

Aortic sac

B

C

Fig. 469.2 Schematic drawings illustrating the changes that result during transformation of the truncus arteriosus, aortic sac, aortic arches, and
dorsal aortae into the adult arterial pattern. The vessels that are not shaded or colored are not derived from these structures. A, Aortic arches at
6 weeks; by this stage, the first two pairs of aortic arches have largely disappeared. B, Aortic arches at 7 weeks; the parts of the dorsal aortae and
aortic arches that normally disappear are indicated by broken lines. C, Arterial vessels of 6-­mo-­old infant. (From Moore KL, Persaud TVN, Torchia M.
The Developing Human. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2007.)

are associated with a recapitulation of fetal cell phenotypes in which
mature myocytes re-­express fetal proteins. Because different isoforms
have different contractile behavior (fast vs slow activation, high vs low
adenosine triphosphatase activity), expression of different isoforms
may have important functional consequences.

469.6 Developmental Changes in Cardiac
Function
Daniel Bernstein and William R. Goodyer
During development, the composition of the myocardium undergoes
profound changes that result in an increase in the number and size
of myocytes. During prenatal life, this process involves myocyte division (hyperplasia), whereas after the first few postnatal weeks, subsequent cardiac growth occurs mostly by an increase in myocyte size
(hypertrophy). The myocytes themselves change shape from round to
cylindrical, the proportion of myofibrils (which contain the contractile
apparatus) increases, and the myofibrils become more regular in their
orientation.
The plasma membrane (known as the sarcolemma in myocytes) is the
location of the ion channels and transmembrane receptors that regulate the exchange of chemical information from the cell surface to the
cell interior. Ion fluxes through these channels control the processes of
depolarization and repolarization. Developmental changes have been
described for the sodium-­
potassium pump, the sodium-­
hydrogen
exchanger, and voltage-­dependent calcium channels. As the myocyte
matures, extensions of the sarcolemma develop toward the interior of
the cell (the T-­tubule system), which dramatically increases its surface
area and enhances rapid activation of the myocyte. Regulation of the
membrane’s α-­ and β-­adrenergic receptors with development enhances
the ability of the sympathetic nervous system to control cardiac function as the heart matures.

The sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR), a series of tubules surrounding the myofibrils, is the principal mediator of the intracellular
calcium concentration. Calcium release to the myofibrils for initiation of contraction is mediated by the ryanodine receptor (RYR),
and calcium reuptake for initiation of relaxation is mediated by the
sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium ATPase (SERCA). This SR calcium
transport system is less well developed in immature hearts, which
thus depend more on transport of calcium from outside the cell for
contraction. In a mature heart, the majority of the calcium required
for contraction comes from within the cardiomyocyte via the SR.
This developmental phenomenon may explain the sensitivity of the
infant heart to sarcolemmal calcium channel blockers such as verapamil, which can result in a marked depression in contractility (see
Chapter 484).
The major contractile proteins (myosin, actin, tropomyosin, and
troponin) are organized into the functional unit of cardiac contraction, the sarcomere. Each has several isoforms that are expressed differentially by location (atrium vs ventricle) and by developmental stage
(embryo, fetus, newborn, adult).
Changes in myocardial structure and myocyte biochemistry
result in easily quantifiable differences in cardiac function with
development. Fetal cardiac function is less responsive to changes in
preload (filling volume). Thus the most effective means of increasing cardiac output in the fetus is through increasing the heart rate.
After birth and with further maturation, preload and afterload play
an increasing role in regulating cardiac function. The rate of cardiac
relaxation is also developmentally regulated. The decreased ability
of the immature SR calcium pump (SERCA) to remove calcium
from the contractile apparatus is manifested as a decreased ability
of the fetal heart to enhance relaxation in response to sympathetic
stimulation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 470 u The Fetal to Neonatal Circulatory Transition

Chapter 470

The Fetal to Neonatal
Circulatory Transition
Daniel Bernstein
470.1 The Fetal Circulation
Daniel Bernstein
The transition from the fetal to the postnatal circulation represents one
of the most dramatic circulatory adaptations at any time of life. In the
fetal circulation, the right and left ventricles exist in a parallel circuit,
as opposed to the series circuit of the newborn or adult (Fig. 470.1A).
In the fetus, the placenta provides for gas and metabolite exchange.
Because the lungs do not provide gas exchange, blood is diverted away
from the pulmonary circulation, which is vasoconstricted. Three cardiovascular structures unique to the fetus are important for maintaining this parallel circulation: the ductus venosus, foramen ovale, and
ductus arteriosus.
The placenta is not as efficient an oxygen-­exchange organ as the
lungs, so that umbilical venous partial pressure of oxygen (Po2), the
highest O2 level provided to the fetus, is only 30-­35 mm Hg. Approximately 50% of the umbilical venous blood enters the hepatic circulation, whereas the rest bypasses the liver and joins the inferior vena
cava (IVC) via the ductus venosus, where it partially mixes with poorly
oxygenated IVC blood derived from the lower part of the fetal body.
This combined lower body plus umbilical venous blood flow (Po2 of
26-­28 mm Hg) enters the right atrium and is preferentially directed by
a flap of tissue at the right atrium–IVC junction, the eustachian valve,
across the foramen ovale to the left atrium (see Fig. 470.1B). This is the
major source of left ventricular (LV) blood flow in the fetus, because
pulmonary venous return from the vasoconstricted lungs is minimal.
LV blood is then ejected into the ascending aorta, where it supplies
predominantly the fetal upper body and brain.
Fetal superior vena cava (SVC) blood, which is considerably less
oxygenated (Po2 of 12-­14 mm Hg) than IVC blood, enters the right
atrium and preferentially flows across the tricuspid valve, rather than
the foramen ovale, into the right ventricle. From the right ventricle,
this blood is ejected into the pulmonary artery. Because the pulmonary
arterial circulation is vasoconstricted, only approximately 5% of right
ventricular (RV) outflow enters the lungs. The major portion of this
blood bypasses the lungs and flows right to left through the ductus arteriosus into the descending aorta to perfuse the lower part of the fetal
body, including providing flow to the placenta via the two umbilical
arteries. Thus the upper part of the fetal body (including the coronary
and cerebral arteries and those to the upper extremities) is perfused
exclusively from the left ventricle with blood that has a slightly higher
Po2 than the blood perfusing the lower part of the fetal body, which is
derived mostly from the right ventricle. Only a small volume of blood
from the ascending aorta (10% of fetal cardiac output) flows all the way
around the aortic arch (aortic isthmus) to the descending aorta.
The total fetal cardiac output—the combined output of both the
left and right ventricles—is approximately 450 mL/kg/min. Approximately 65% of descending aortic blood flow returns to the placenta;
the remaining 35% perfuses the fetal organs and tissues. In the human
fetus, RV output is approximately 1.3 times LV flow. Thus during fetal
life the right ventricle is not only pumping against the higher systemic
blood pressure but also performing slightly greater volume work than
the left ventricle. This results in the RV wall being as thick (hypertrophied) as the LV wall during fetal and immediate neonatal life, explaining the unique features of the neonatal electrocardiogram (showing
what would be read as right ventricular hypertrophy in an adult).

2735

Blood flow is believed to be an important determinant of growth of
fetal cardiac chambers, valves, and blood vessels. Thus in the presence
of a narrowing (stenosis) of an upstream structure such as the mitral
valve, flow downstream into the left ventricle is limited and LV growth
may be compromised, which may be one of the mechanisms of hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS; see Chapter 480.10). Similarly,
stenosis of a downstream structure such as the aortic valve can also
disrupt flow into the LV and contribute to HLHS. Fetal cardiac interventional treatments, currently experimental, are aimed at opening
stenotic aortic valves in mid-­gestation fetuses and allowing more normal LV growth. However, the outcome of these procedures does not
enhance LV growth in all patients, suggesting that in the majority of
cases of HLHS there is a different mechanism, suspected to be a defect
in the LV cardiomyocytes themselves (i.e., a cell-­autonomous defect).

470.2 The Transitional Circulation
Daniel Bernstein
At birth, mechanical expansion of the lungs and an increase in arterial
Po2 result in a rapid decrease in pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR).
Concomitantly, removal of the low-­resistance placental circulation
leads to an increase in systemic vascular resistance (SVR). The output
from the right ventricle now flows entirely into the pulmonary circulation, and because PVR becomes lower than SVR, the shunt through
the ductus arteriosus reverses and becomes left to right. Over several
days the high arterial Po2 constricts and eventually closes the ductus
arteriosus, which eventually becomes the ligamentum arteriosum. The
increased volume of pulmonary blood flow returning to the left atrium
from the lungs increases left atrial volume and pressure sufficiently to
close the flap of the foramen ovale functionally, although the foramen
may remain patent on probing with a catheter for several years. A patent foramen ovale can be a source of embolic stroke in later life.
Removal of the placenta from the circulation also results in closure
of the ductus venosus. The left ventricle is now coupled to the high-­
resistance systemic circulation, and its wall thickness and mass begin
to increase. In contrast, the right ventricle is now coupled to the low-­
resistance pulmonary circulation, and its wall thickness and mass
decrease. The left ventricle, which in the fetus pumped blood only
to the upper part of the body and brain, must now deliver the entire
systemic cardiac output (approximately 350 mL/kg/min), an almost
200% increase in output. This marked increase in LV performance is
achieved through a combination of hormonal and metabolic signals,
including an increase in the level of circulating catecholamines and in
the density of myocardial β-­adrenergic receptors, through which catecholamines have their effect.
When superimposed on these dramatic physiologic changes, congenital structural cardiac defects often impede this smooth transition
and greatly increase the burden on the newborn myocardium. Importantly, because the ductus arteriosus and foramen ovale do not close
completely at birth, they can provide a lifesaving pathway for blood to
bypass a congenital defect (the patent ductus arteriosus in tetralogy of
Fallot, pulmonary atresia, coarctation of aorta or HLHS; the foramen
ovale in transposition of the great vessels). Alternatively, persistent
fetal pathways can present an additional stress to the circulation (patent ductus arteriosus in the premature infant). Therapeutic agents can
be used to either maintain these fetal pathways open (e.g., prostaglandin E1) or hasten their closure (e.g., indomethacin). This pharmacology
explains why indomethacin and similar drugs are contraindicated or
used with extreme caution during the third trimester.

470.3 The Neonatal Circulation
Daniel Bernstein
At birth, the fetal circulation must immediately adapt to extrauterine
life as gas exchange is transferred from the placenta to the lungs (see

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2736 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Head
Arm

Ductus arteriosus

Fig. 470.1 A, The human circula-

tion before birth (partly after Dawes).
Lung
Red indicates more highly oxygenated blood, and arrows indicate the
Liver
direction of flow. More highly oxygenated blood from the placenta passes
through the foramen ovale from the
Ductus venosus
right to the left atrium, thus bypassing
the lungs. B, Percentages of combined
ventricular output that return to the
fetal heart, that are ejected by each
Umbilical vein
ventricle, and that flow through the
Gut
main vascular channels. Figures are
those obtained from studies of late-­
gestation fetal lambs. Ao, Aorta; DA,
Placenta
ductus arteriosus; IVC, inferior vena
cava; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle;
PA, pulmonary artery; PV, pulmonary
Umbilical artery
veins; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle; SVC, superior vena cava. (From
Rudolph AM. Congenital Diseases of
A
the Heart. Chicago: Year Book; 1974.)

Chapter 124). Some of these changes are virtually instantaneous with
the first breath, whereas others develop over hours or weeks. With the
onset of breathing and lung ventilation, pulmonary vascular resistance
is greatly decreased because of both active (i.e., Po2-­metabolic-­related)
and passive (i.e., mechanical stretch-­related) pulmonary vasodilation.
In a normal neonate, closure of the ductus arteriosus and the fall in
PVR decreases pulmonary arterial and RV pressures. The largest
decline in PVR from the high fetal levels to the lower “adult” levels in
the human infant usually occurs within 2-­3 days, but may be prolonged
for ≥7 days after birth. However, over the next several weeks of life,
PVR continues to decrease further, now secondary to physical remodeling of the pulmonary vasculature, including thinning of vascular
smooth muscle and recruitment of new vessels. This decrease in PVR
significantly influences the timing of the clinical appearance of many
congenital heart lesions dependent on the relative levels of SVR and
PVR. For example, the left-­to-­right shunt through a large ventricular
septal defect (VSD) may be minimal in the first week after birth, when
PVR is still high. As PVR decreases in the next 1-­2 weeks, the volume
of the left-­to-­right shunt through the VSD increases and eventually
leads to the signs and symptoms of heart failure.
There are several significant differences between the neonatal circulation and that of older infants: (1) right-­to-­left or left-­to-­right shunting may persist across the patent foramen ovale; (2) in the presence
of cardiopulmonary disease, continued patency of the ductus arteriosus may allow left-­to-­right, right-­to-­left, or bidirectional shunting;
(3) the neonatal pulmonary vasculature constricts more vigorously in
response to hypoxemia, hypercapnia, and acidosis; (4) the wall thickness and muscle mass of the neonatal left and right ventricles are
almost equal; and (5) newborn infants at rest have a relatively high oxygen consumption, associated with a relatively high cardiac output. The
newborn cardiac output, indexed to body weight (200 mL/kg/min),
falls in the first 2 months of life to approximately 150 mL/kg/min and
then more gradually to the normal adult cardiac output of 75 mL/kg/
min. Although fetal hemoglobin is beneficial to delivery of oxygen in
the low-­Po2 fetal circulation, the high percentage of fetal hemoglobin
present in the newborn may actually interfere with delivery of oxygen

21

Arm

31
Lung

10
59 DA

66

Foramen
ovale

RV

PA

Ao

3

7

34
LV

66

Kidney
SVC
21

RA

3

69
27
LA

7

PV

69
Legs

IVC

B

to tissues in the high-­systemic Po2 neonatal circulation, and therefore
adult hemoglobin production begins immediately (see Chapter 124).
The foramen ovale is usually functionally closed by the third month
of life, although it is possible to pass a catheter through the overlapping flaps in a large percentage of children and in 15–25% of adults.
Functional closure of the ductus arteriosus is usually complete by 10-­
15 hours of postnatal age in a normal neonate, although the ductus
may remain patent much longer in the presence of congenital heart
disease, especially when associated with cyanosis. In premature newborn infants, a systolic murmur with late accentuation or a continuous
murmur may be audible beneath the left clavicle, and in the context of
respiratory distress syndrome, the presence of a patent ductus arteriosus should be suspected (see Chapter 126.1).
The normal ductus arteriosus differs morphologically from the
adjoining aorta and pulmonary artery in that the ductus has a significant amount of circularly arranged smooth muscle in its medial
layer. During fetal life, patency of the ductus arteriosus appears to be
maintained by the combined relaxant effects of low oxygen tension and
endogenously produced prostaglandins, specifically prostaglandin E2.
In a full-­term neonate, oxygen is the most important factor controlling
ductal closure. When the Po2 of the blood passing through the ductus
reaches about 50 mm Hg, the ductal wall begins to constrict. The effects
of oxygen on ductal smooth muscle may be direct or mediated by its
effects on prostaglandin synthesis. Gestational age also appears to play
an important role; the ductus of a premature infant is less responsive to
oxygen, even though its musculature is well developed.

470.4 Persistent Pulmonary Hypertension
of the Neonate (Persistence of Fetal
Circulatory Pathways)
See Chapter 130.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 471 u History and Physical Examination in Cardiac Evaluation

Section 2

Evaluation of the
Cardiovascular System
and the Child with a
Heart Murmur
Chapter 471

History and Physical
Examination in Cardiac
Evaluation
Daniel Bernstein
One of the most common reasons for cardiac evaluation in young
children is the heart murmur; innocent or functional murmurs (Still
murmurs) may be heard in up to 30% of patients at some time during
childhood. Functional murmurs are usually accentuated by fever and
first noticed during a visit for an intercurrent illness. Thus the general pediatrician must be able to distinguish those murmurs that are
functional from those that are potentially pathologic and refer patients
with pathologic-­sounding murmurs or murmurs of uncertain nature
for evaluation by a pediatric cardiologist.
Patients may require further laboratory evaluation (e.g., electrocardiogram and echocardiogram), or the family may be reassured that no
significant problem exists. Although the ready availability of echocardiography may entice the clinician to skip a good history and physical
exam, an initial evaluation by a skilled cardiologist is preferred for several reasons: (1) a cardiac examination allows the cardiologist to guide
the echocardiographic evaluation toward confirming or eliminating
specific diagnoses, thereby increasing its accuracy; (2) because most
childhood murmurs are innocent, evaluation by a pediatric cardiologist can eliminate unnecessary and expensive laboratory tests; and (3)
the cardiologist’s knowledge and experience are important in reassuring
the patient’s family and preventing unnecessary, and all too common,
restrictions on healthy physical activity. An experienced pediatric cardiologist can differentiate an innocent murmur from serious congenital
heart disease by history and physical examination alone with high sensitivity and specificity.

HISTORY

The evaluation begins with a comprehensive cardiac history because
a diagnosis of a functional murmur can only be made in the absence
of any concerning symptoms, signs, or family history. A comprehensive cardiac history starts with details of the perinatal period, including
the presence of cyanosis, respiratory distress, or prematurity. Maternal
complications such as gestational diabetes, teratogenic medications,
infections, systemic lupus erythematosus, or substance misuse can be
associated with cardiac problems. If cardiac symptoms began during
infancy, the timing of the initial symptoms should be noted to provide
important clues about the specific cardiac condition.
Many of the symptoms of heart failure in infants and children
are age specific. In infants, feeding difficulties are common. Inquiry
should be made about the frequency of feeding and either the volume
of each feeding or the time spent on each breast. An infant with heart
failure often takes less volume per feeding and becomes dyspneic or

2737

diaphoretic while nursing. After falling asleep exhausted, the baby,
inadequately fed, will awaken for the next feeding after a brief time.
This cycle continues around the clock and must be carefully differentiated from colic or other feeding disorders. Additional symptoms and
signs include those of respiratory distress: rapid breathing, nasal flaring,
cyanosis, and chest retractions. In older children, heart failure may be
manifested as exercise intolerance, difficulty keeping up with peers during sports or the need for a nap after coming home from school, poor
growth, or chronic abdominal complaints. Eliciting a history of fatigue
in an older child requires questions about age-­specific activities, including stair climbing, walking, bicycle riding, physical education class, and
competitive sports; information should be obtained regarding more
severe manifestations such as orthopnea and nocturnal dyspnea.
Parents often overlook their baby’s cyanosis at rest; it may be mistaken for a normal individual variation in color. Cyanosis during crying or exercise, however, is more often noted as abnormal by observant
parents. Many infants and toddlers turn “blue around the lips” when
crying vigorously or during breath-­holding spells; this condition must
be carefully differentiated from cyanotic heart disease by inquiring
about inciting factors, the length of episodes, and whether the tongue
and mucous membranes also appear cyanotic. Newborns often have
cyanosis of their extremities (acrocyanosis) when undressed and cold;
this response to cold must be carefully differentiated from true cyanosis, where the mucous membranes are also blue.
Chest pain is an unusual manifestation of cardiac disease in pediatric patients, although it is a frequent cause for referral to a pediatric
cardiologist, especially in adolescents. Nonetheless, a careful history,
physical examination, and, if indicated, laboratory or imaging tests will
assist in identifying the cause of chest pain (Table 471.1). For patients
with some forms of repaired congenital heart disease (CHD), for example, those with surgery on the aortic root or those with a history of
Kawasaki disease (see Chapter 493.1), chest pain should be evaluated
carefully for a coronary etiology.
Cardiac disease may be a manifestation of a known congenital
malformation syndrome with typical physical findings (Table 471.2)
or a manifestation of a generalized disorder affecting the heart and
other organ systems (Table 471.3). Extracardiac malformations may
be noted in 20–45% of infants with CHD. Between 5% and 10% of
patients have a known chromosomal abnormality. Specific gene or
whole exome sequencing can enhance the diagnostic approach to
CHD (Fig. 471.1).
A careful family history may also reveal early (at age <50 years) coronary artery disease or stroke (suggestive of familial hypercholesterolemia or thrombophilia), sudden death (suggestive of cardiomyopathy
or familial arrhythmic disorder), generalized muscle disease (suggestive of one of the muscular dystrophies, dermatomyositis, or familial or
metabolic cardiomyopathy), or first-­degree relatives with CHD.

GENERAL PHYSICAL EXAMINATION

In the evaluation of a child with a heart murmur, a general physical
examination is always performed, with specific attention directed
toward the presence of cyanosis, abnormalities in growth, chest wall
abnormalities, and any evidence of respiratory distress. Although the
murmur may be the most prominent part of the overall examination,
any murmur must be placed in context of other physical findings.
Associated findings such as quality of the pulses, presence of a ventricular heave or thrill, or splitting of the second heart sound provide
important clues to a specific cardiac diagnosis.
Accurate measurement of height and weight and plotting on a standard growth chart are important because both cardiac failure and
chronic cyanosis can result in failure to thrive. Growth failure is manifested predominantly by poor weight gain; if length and especially head
circumference is also affected, additional congenital malformations or
metabolic disorders should be suspected.
Mild cyanosis may be too subtle for early detection, and clubbing of
the fingers and toes is not usually manifested until late in the first year of
life, even in the presence of severe arterial oxygen desaturation. Cyanosis is best observed over the nail beds, lips, tongue, and mucous membranes. Delayed recognition of cyanosis in infants with darker skin color

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2738 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 471.1  Differential Diagnosis of Chest Pain in
Pediatric Patients
MUSCULOSKELETAL (COMMON)
Trauma (accidental, abuse)
Exercise, overuse injury (strain, bursitis)
Costochondritis
Tietze syndrome
Herpes zoster (cutaneous or without rash)
Pleurodynia
Fibrositis
Slipping rib
Rib fracture
Precordial catch
Sickle cell anemia vasoocclusive crisis
Osteomyelitis (rare)
Primary or metastatic tumor (rare)
Fibromyalgia
Nerve entrapment, radiculopathy
PULMONARY (COMMON)
Pneumonia
Pleurisy
Pleurodynia
Asthma
Chronic cough
Pneumothorax
Infarction (sickle cell anemia)
Foreign body
Embolism (rare)
Pulmonary hypertension (rare)
Tumor (rare)
Bronchiectasis
GASTROINTESTINAL (LESS COMMON)
Esophagitis (gastroesophageal reflux, infectious, pill)
Esophageal foreign body
Esophageal spasm
Cholecystitis
Subdiaphragmatic abscess
Perihepatitis (Fitz-­Hugh-­Curtis syndrome)
Peptic ulcer disease
Pancreatitis
Splenic rupture
CARDIAC (LESS COMMON)
Pericarditis
Postpericardiotomy syndrome
Endocarditis
Myocarditis
Cardiomyopathy
Mitral valve prolapse
Aortic or subaortic stenosis
Arrhythmias (supraventricular, ventricular, tachycardias)
Marfan syndrome (dissecting aortic aneurysm)
Kawasaki disease
Cocaine, sympathomimetic ingestion
Ischemia (familial hypercholesterolemia, anomalous coronary artery,
post-­repair of congenital heart disease involving reimplantation of
the coronary arteries [e.g., d-­transposition of the great arteries])
Takotsubo cardiomyopathy (primary or secondary)
IDIOPATHIC (COMMON)
Anxiety, hyperventilation
Panic disorder
OTHER (LESS COMMON)
Spinal cord or nerve root compression
Breast-­related pathologic condition (mastalgia)
Castleman disease (lymph node neoplasm)

can lead to delayed treatment and poorer outcomes. Careful observation of the color of the tongue, mucous membranes, and nail beds,
where cyanosis is most noticeable, is critical in recognizing cyanosis in
these patients. Confirmation with pulse oximetry is easily performed.
Differential cyanosis, manifested as blue lower extremities and pink
upper extremities (usually the right arm), is seen with right-­to-­left

shunting across a ductus arteriosus in the presence of coarctation or
an interrupted aortic arch. Circumoral cyanosis or blueness around
the forehead may be the result of prominent venous plexuses in these
areas, rather than decreased arterial oxygen saturation. The extremities of infants often turn blue when the infant is unwrapped and cold
(acrocyanosis), and this condition can be distinguished from central
cyanosis by examination of the tongue and mucous membranes.
Heart failure in infants and children usually results in some degree
of hepatomegaly and occasionally splenomegaly. The sites of peripheral edema are age dependent. In infants, edema is usually seen around
the eyes and over the flanks, especially on initially waking. Older children and teenagers manifest both periorbital edema and pedal edema.
An initial complaint in these older patients may be that their clothes
are now too tight.
The heart rate of newborn infants is rapid and subject to wide fluctuations (Table 471.4). The average rate ranges from 120 to 140 beats/min
and may increase to 170+ beats/min during crying and activity or drop to
70-­90 beats/min during sleep. As the child grows older, the average pulse
rate decreases and may be as low as 40 beats/min at rest in very athletic
adolescents. Persistent tachycardia (>200 beats/min in neonates, 150
beats/min in infants, or 120 beats/min in older children), bradycardia, or
an irregular heartbeat other than sinus arrhythmia requires investigation
to exclude pathologic arrhythmias (see Chapter 484). Sinus arrhythmia
can usually be distinguished by the rhythmic nature of the heart rate
variations, occurring in concert with the respiratory cycle, with a P wave
before every QRS complex, and a normal p-­wave axis.
Careful evaluation of the character of the pulses is an important
early step in the physical diagnosis of CHD. A wide pulse pressure with
bounding pulses may suggest an aortic runoff lesion such as patent
ductus arteriosus (PDA), aortic insufficiency, an arteriovenous communication, or increased cardiac output secondary to anemia, anxiety, or conditions associated with increased catecholamine or thyroid
hormone secretion. The presence of diminished pulses in all extremities is associated with pericardial tamponade, left ventricular outflow
obstruction, or cardiomyopathy. The radial and femoral pulses should
always be palpated simultaneously. Normally, the femoral pulse should
be appreciated immediately before the radial pulse. In infants with
coarctation of the aorta, the femoral pulses may be decreased. However, in older children with coarctation of the aorta, blood flow to the
descending aorta may channel through collateral vessels and results in
the femoral pulse being palpable but delayed until after the radial pulse
(radial-­femoral delay).
Blood pressure (BP) should be measured in either leg and in the
right arm to be certain that coarctation of the aorta is not overlooked.
Palpation of the femoral or dorsalis pedis pulse, or both, is not reliable alone to exclude coarctation because collaterals may have developed. Most commonly, BP is measured using an automated oscillatory
device, but it is often necessary for the physician to manually recheck
BP by auscultation. In older children, a cuff that covers approximately
two thirds of the upper part of the arm or leg should be used for BP
measurement. A cuff that is too small results in falsely high readings,
whereas a cuff that is too large records slightly decreased BP. Pediatric
clinical facilities should be equipped with 3-­, 5-­, 7-­, 12-­, and 18-­cm cuffs
to accommodate the large spectrum of pediatric patient sizes. When
auscultating blood pressure directly, the first Korotkoff sounds indicate
systolic pressure. As cuff pressure is slowly decreased, the sounds usually become muffled before they disappear. Diastolic pressure may be
recorded when the sounds become muffled (preferred) or when they
disappear altogether; the former is usually slightly higher and the latter slightly lower than true diastolic pressure. For lower-­extremity BP
determination, the stethoscope is placed over the popliteal artery. Typically, the BP recorded in the legs with the cuff technique is approximately 10 mm Hg higher than that in the arms. In infants, BP can be
determined by auscultation or palpation.
BP varies with the age of the child and is closely correlated to height
and weight. Significant increases occur during adolescence, and many
temporary variations take place before the more stable levels of adult
life are attained. Exercise, excitement, coughing, crying, and struggling may raise the systolic BP of infants and children as much as 40-­50
mm Hg greater than their usual levels. Variability in BP in children of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 471 u History and Physical Examination in Cardiac Evaluation

2739

Table 471.2  Congenital Malformation Syndromes Associated with Congenital Heart Disease
SYNDROME

FEATURES

CHROMOSOMAL DISORDERS
Trisomy 21 (Down syndrome)

Endocardial cushion defect, VSD, ASD

Trisomy 21p (cat-­eye syndrome)

Miscellaneous, total anomalous pulmonary venous return

Trisomy 18

VSD, ASD, PDA, TOF, coarctation of aorta, bicuspid aortic or
pulmonary valve

Trisomy 13

VSD, ASD, PDA, coarctation of aorta, bicuspid aortic or pulmonary
valve

Trisomy 9

Miscellaneous, VSD

XXXXY

PDA, ASD

Penta X

PDA, VSD

Triploidy

VSD, ASD, PDA

XO (Turner syndrome)

Bicuspid aortic valve, coarctation of aorta

Fragile X

Mitral valve prolapse, aortic root dilatation

Duplication 3q2

Miscellaneous

Deletion 4p

VSD, PDA, aortic stenosis

Deletion 9p

Miscellaneous

Deletion 5p (cri du chat syndrome)

VSD, PDA, ASD, TOF

Deletion 10q

VSD, TOF, conotruncal lesions*

Deletion 13q

VSD

Deletion 18q

VSD

Deletion 1p36

ASD, VSD, PDA, TOF, cardiomyopathy

Deletion/duplication 1q21.1

ASD, VSD, PS

Deletion 17q11 (William syndrome)

Supravalvar AS, branch PS

Deletion 11q 24-­25 (Jacobsen syndrome)

VSD, left sided lesions

SYNDROME COMPLEXES
CHARGE association (coloboma, heart, atresia choanae, retardation,
genital, and ear anomalies)

VSD, ASD, PDA, TOF, endocardial cushion defect

DiGeorge sequence, CATCH 22 (cardiac defects, abnormal facies,
thymic aplasia, cleft palate, hypocalcemia, and deletion 22q11)

Aortic arch anomalies, conotruncal anomalies

Alagille syndrome (arteriohepatic dysplasia)

Peripheral pulmonic stenosis, PS, TOF

VATER association (vertebral, anal, tracheoesophageal, radial, and
renal anomalies)

VSD, TOF, ASD, PDA

FAVS (facioauriculovertebral spectrum)

TOF, VSD

CHILD (congenital hemidysplasia with ichthyosiform erythroderma,
limb defects)

Miscellaneous

Mulibrey nanism (muscle, liver, brain, eye)

Pericardial thickening, constrictive pericarditis

Asplenia syndrome

Complex cyanotic heart lesions with decreased pulmonary blood flow,
transposition of great arteries, anomalous pulmonary venous return,
dextrocardia, single ventricle, single atrioventricular valve

Polysplenia syndrome

Acyanotic lesions with increased pulmonary blood flow, azygos
continuation of inferior vena cava, partial anomalous pulmonary
venous return, dextrocardia, single ventricle, common atrioventricular
valve

PHACE syndrome (posterior brain fossa anomalies, facial
hemangiomas, arterial anomalies, cardiac anomalies and aortic
coarctation, eye anomalies)

VSD, PDA, coarctation of aorta, arterial aneurysms

TERATOGENIC AGENTS
Congenital rubella

PDA, peripheral pulmonic stenosis

Fetal hydantoin syndrome

VSD, ASD, coarctation of aorta, PDA

Fetal alcohol syndrome

ASD, VSD
Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2740 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 471.2  Congenital Malformation Syndromes Associated with Congenital Heart Disease—cont’d
SYNDROME

FEATURES

Fetal valproate effects

Coarctation of aorta, hypoplastic left side of heart, aortic stenosis,
pulmonary atresia, VSD

Maternal phenylketonuria

VSD, ASD, PDA, coarctation of aorta

Retinoic acid embryopathy

Conotruncal anomalies

OTHERS
Apert syndrome

VSD

Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease

Mitral valve prolapse

Carpenter syndrome

PDA

Conradi syndrome

VSD, PDA

Crouzon disease

PDA, coarctation of aorta

Cutis laxa

Pulmonary hypertension, pulmonic stenosis

De Lange syndrome

VSD

Ellis–van Creveld syndrome

Single atrium, VSD

Holt-­Oram syndrome

ASD, VSD, first-­degree heart block

Infant of diabetic mother

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, VSD, conotruncal anomalies

Kartagener syndrome

Dextrocardia

Meckel-­Gruber syndrome

ASD, VSD

Noonan syndrome

Pulmonic stenosis, ASD, cardiomyopathy

Pallister-­Hall syndrome

Endocardial cushion defect

Primary ciliary dyskinesia

Heterotaxia disorders

Rubinstein-­Taybi syndrome

VSD

Scimitar syndrome

Hypoplasia of right lung, anomalous pulmonary venous return to
inferior vena cava

Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz syndrome

VSD, PDA

TAR syndrome (thrombocytopenia and absent radius)

ASD, TOF

Treacher Collins syndrome

VSD, ASD, PDA

*Conotruncal includes TOF, pulmonary atresia, truncus arteriosus, and transposition of great arteries.
ASD, Atrial septal defect; AV, aortic valve; PDA, patent ductus arteriosus; PS, pulmonary stenosis; TOF, tetralogy of Fallot; VSD, ventricular septal defect.

approximately the same age and body build should be expected, and at
least three serial measurements on different dates should be obtained
when confirming the diagnosis of hypertension (Figs. 471.2 and 471.3).
Although of little use in infants, in cooperative older children,
inspection of the jugular venous pulse wave provides information
about central venous and right atrial pressure. The neck veins should be
inspected with the patient sitting at a 90-­degree angle. The external jugular vein should not be visible above the clavicles unless central venous
pressure is elevated. Increased venous pressure transmitted to the internal jugular vein may appear as venous pulsations without visible distention; such pulsation is not seen in normal children reclining at an angle
of 45 degrees. Because the great veins are in direct communication with
the right atrium, changes in pressure and the volume of this chamber
are also transmitted to the veins. The one exception occurs in superior
vena cava obstruction, in which venous pulsatility is lost.

CARDIAC EXAMINATION

The heart should be examined in a systematic manner, starting with
inspection and palpation. Any abnormalities on inspection and/or palpation strongly suggest a pathologic rather than a functional etiology
of any heart murmur. A precordial bulge to the left of the sternum
with or without increased precordial activity suggests cardiac enlargement, especially in younger children where the chest wall is still relatively flexible; such bulges can often best be appreciated by having the
child lay supine with the examiner looking up from the child’s feet.

A substernal heave indicates the presence of right ventricular hypertrophy or enlargement, whereas an apical heave is noted with left
ventricular hypertrophy or enlargement. An overall hyperdynamic
precordium suggests a volume load such as that found with a large
left-­to-­right shunt, although it may be normal in a thin patient. An
overly silent precordium with a barely detectable apical impulse suggests a large pericardial effusion or severe cardiomyopathy but may be
normal in an obese patient.
The relationship of the apical impulse to the midclavicular line is
also helpful in the estimation of cardiac size: the apical impulse shifts
laterally and inferiorly with enlargement of the left ventricle. Right-­
sided apical impulses signify dextrocardia, tension pneumothorax, or
left-­sided thoracic space-­occupying lesions (e.g., diaphragmatic hernia).
Thrills are the palpable equivalent of murmurs and correlate with
the area of maximal auscultatory intensity of the murmur. It is important to palpate the suprasternal notch and neck for aortic bruits, which
may indicate the presence of aortic stenosis. Right lower sternal border
and apical systolic thrills are characteristic of ventricular septal defect
(VSD) and mitral insufficiency, respectively. Diastolic thrills are occasionally palpable in the presence of atrioventricular valve stenosis. The
timing and localization of thrills should be carefully noted. Although
the presence of a thrill is usually linked to a murmur of grade IV or
greater, after a patient has had cardiac surgery, the presence of scar
within the chest may eliminate the ability to feel a thrill even with a
very loud murmur.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 471 u History and Physical Examination in Cardiac Evaluation

2741

Table 471.3  Cardiac Manifestations of Systemic Diseases
SYSTEMIC DISEASE
INFLAMMATORY DISORDERS
Sepsis

CARDIAC COMPLICATIONS
Hypotension, myocardial dysfunction, pericardial effusion, pulmonary
hypertension

COVID-­19

Myocarditis, multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-­C)

Juvenile idiopathic arthritis

Pericarditis, rarely myocarditis

Systemic lupus erythematosus

Pericarditis, Libman-­Sacks endocarditis, coronary arteritis, coronary
atherosclerosis (with steroids), congenital heart block

Scleroderma

Pulmonary hypertension, myocardial fibrosis, cardiomyopathy

Dermatomyositis

Cardiomyopathy, arrhythmias, heart block

Kawasaki disease

Coronary artery aneurysm and thrombosis, myocardial infarction,
myocarditis, valvular insufficiency

Sarcoidosis

Granuloma, fibrosis, amyloidosis, biventricular hypertrophy, arrhythmias

Lyme disease

Arrhythmias, myocarditis

Löffler hypereosinophilic syndrome

Endomyocardial disease

INBORN ERRORS OF METABOLISM
Refsum disease

Arrhythmia, sudden death

Hunter or Hurler syndrome

Valvular insufficiency, heart failure, hypertension

Fabry disease

Mitral insufficiency, coronary artery disease with myocardial infarction

Glycogen storage disease IIa (Pompe disease)

Short P-­R interval, cardiomegaly, heart failure, arrhythmias

Carnitine deficiency

Heart failure, cardiomyopathy

Gaucher disease

Pericarditis

Homocystinuria

Coronary thrombosis

Alkaptonuria

Atherosclerosis, valvular disease

Morquio-­Ullrich syndrome

Aortic incompetence

Scheie syndrome

Aortic incompetence

CONNECTIVE TISSUE DISORDERS
Arterial calcification of infancy

Calcinosis of coronary arteries, aorta, heart failure, hypertension

Marfan syndrome

Aortic and mitral insufficiency, dissecting aortic aneurysm, mitral valve
prolapse

Congenital contractural arachnodactyly

Mitral insufficiency or prolapse

Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome

Mitral valve prolapse, dilatated aortic root

Osteogenesis imperfecta

Aortic incompetence

Pseudoxanthoma elasticum

Peripheral arterial disease

NEUROMUSCULAR DISORDERS
Friedreich ataxia

Cardiomyopathy

Duchenne dystrophy

Cardiomyopathy, heart failure

Tuberous sclerosis

Cardiac rhabdomyoma

Familial deafness

Occasionally arrhythmia, sudden death

Neurofibromatosis

Pulmonic stenosis, pheochromocytoma, coarctation of aorta

Riley-­Day syndrome

Episodic hypertension, postural hypotension

Von Hippel-­Lindau disease

Hemangiomas, pheochromocytomas

ENDOCRINE-­METABOLIC DISORDERS
Graves disease

Tachycardia, arrhythmias, heart failure

Hypothyroidism

Bradycardia, pericardial effusion, cardiomyopathy, low-­voltage
electrocardiogram

Pheochromocytoma

Hypertension, myocardial ischemia, myocardial fibrosis,
cardiomyopathy

Carcinoid

Right-­sided endocardial fibrosis
Continued
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2742 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 471.3  Cardiac Manifestations of Systemic Diseases—cont’d
SYSTEMIC DISEASE

CARDIAC COMPLICATIONS

HEMATOLOGIC DISORDERS
Sickle cell anemia

High-­output heart failure, cardiomyopathy, pulmonary hypertension

Thalassemia major

High-­output heart failure, hemochromatosis

Hemochromatosis (first or second degree)

Cardiomyopathy

OTHERS
Appetite suppressants (fenfluramine and dexfenfluramine)

Cardiac valvulopathy, pulmonary hypertension

Cockayne syndrome

Atherosclerosis

Jervell and Lange-­Nielsen syndrome

Prolonged Q-­T interval, sudden death

Kearns-­Sayre syndrome

Heart block

LEOPARD syndrome (lentiginosis)

Pulmonic stenosis, prolonged Q-­T interval

Progeria

Accelerated atherosclerosis

Osler-­Weber-­Rendu disease

Arteriovenous fistula (lung, liver, mucous membrane)

Romano-­Ward syndrome

Prolonged Q-­T interval, sudden death

Weill-­Marchesani syndrome

Patent ductus arteriosus

Werner syndrome

Vascular sclerosis, cardiomyopathy

LEOPARD, Multiple lentigines, electrocardiographic conduction abnormalities, ocular hypertelorism, pulmonary stenosis, abnormal genitals, retardation of growth, sensorineural
deafness.

Possible
pathogenic
variant

Cardiac and extracardiac phenotype, family history,
Previous genetic testing (including prenatal)

Test parents
Suspect aneuploidy
(trisomy 13, 18, 21,
Turner)

High suspicion for
DiGeorge, William

Severe CHD, or CHD
+ extracardiac
abnormality

High clinical suspicion of
CHD as part of a defined
syndrome

Karyotype
(or FISH if
emergent)

FISH

Chromosomal
microarray

(Targeted
sequencing)

If negative:

Test and counsel
other family
members

Known
pathogenic variant

If negative:

WES

Variant of
unknown
significance

Fig. 471.1 Genetics screening algorithm for congenital heart disease (CHD) patients. FISH, Fluorescence in situ hybridization; WES, whole exome

sequencing. (From Simmons MA, Brueckner M. The genetics of congenital heart disease . . . understanding and improving long-­term outcomes in
congenital heart disease: a review for the general cardiologist and primary care physician. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2017;29:520–528, Fig 2.)

Auscultation is an art that improves with practice. The diaphragm of
the stethoscope is placed firmly on the chest for high-­pitched sounds;
a lightly placed bell is optimal for low-­pitched sounds. The physician
should initially move the stethoscope across the chest, concentrating
on the characteristics of the heart sounds; their variation with respiration; and the presence of clicks, rubs, or gallops. Repeat the process,
concentrating on murmurs, their maximum location, and their radiation. In some CHDs, such as atrial septal defect (ASD), the murmur
is nonspecific and sounds identical to many functional murmurs; it

is the abnormality of the second heart sound that points to a pathologic condition. The patient should ideally be supine, lying quietly, and
breathing normally. The first heart sound (S1) is best heard at the apex,
whereas the second heart sound (S2) should be evaluated at the upper
left and right sternal borders. S1 is caused by closure of the atrioventricular valves (mitral and tricuspid) and can be either single or split.
S2 is caused by closure of the semilunar valves (aortic and pulmonary)
(Fig. 471.4). During inspiration, the decrease in intrathoracic pressure
results in increased filling of the right side of the heart, which leads to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 471 u History and Physical Examination in Cardiac Evaluation

2743

Table 471.4  Pulse Rates at Rest
AGE

LOWER LIMITS OF NORMAL
(beats/min)

AVERAGE (beats/min)

UPPER LIMITS OF NORMAL
(beats/min)

Newborn

70

125

190

1-­11 mo

80

120

160

2 yr

80

110

130

4 yr

80

100

120

6 yr

75

100

115

8 yr

70

90

110

10 yr

70

90

110

FEMALES

MALES

FEMALES

MALES

FEMALES

MALES

12 yr

70

65

90

85

110

105

14 yr

65

60

85

80

105

100

16 yr

60

55

80

75

100

95

18 yr

55

50

75

70

95

90

an increased right ventricular ejection time and thus delayed closure of
the pulmonary valve; inspiration decreases pulmonary venous return,
decreasing filling of the left ventricle and moving closure of the aortic
valve earlier. Consequently, splitting of the second heart sound widens during inspiration and narrows during expiration.
S2 can appear to be single during expiration, because we can only hear
two sounds if they are separated by 20-­30 msec. The presence of a normally split S2 is strong evidence against the diagnosis of ASD, defects
associated with pulmonary arterial hypertension, severe pulmonary
valve stenosis, aortic and pulmonary atresia, and truncus arteriosus.
Wide S2 splitting is noted in ASD, pulmonary stenosis (where the pulmonary second sound is soft), Ebstein anomaly, total anomalous pulmonary venous return, and right bundle branch block. An accentuated
pulmonic component of S2 with narrow splitting is a sign of pulmonary
hypertension. A single S2 occurs in pulmonary or aortic atresia or severe
stenosis, truncus arteriosus, and, often, transposition of the great arteries.
A third heart sound (S3) is best heard with the bell at the apex in
mid-­diastole, during passive ventricular filling. An S3 can be pathologic
but may be normal in children, often accentuated in patients with fever
and tachycardia. A fourth heart sound (S4), occurring in conjunction with atrial systole and the final stages of ventricular filling, may
be heard just before the S1 in late diastole. An S4 is always pathologic
and an indication of decreased ventricular compliance, as occurs in
patients with ventricular dysfunction (e.g., in dilated cardiomyopathy).
An S3 may merge with an S4, a finding known as a summation gallop.
Ejection clicks, which are heard in early systole, are usually caused
by a mildly to moderately stenotic aortic or pulmonary valve or to a
dilated ascending aorta or pulmonary artery. They are heard so close
to S1 that they may be mistaken for a split S1. However, ejection clicks
are heard at the upper left or right sternal borders, whereas a split S1
is heard at the lower left sternal border or apex. Aortic ejection clicks
are best heard at the left middle to right upper sternal border and are
constant in intensity. They occur in conditions where the aortic valve
(mild to moderate aortic stenosis) is stenotic or the aorta is dilated
(e.g., tetralogy of Fallot, truncus arteriosus). Pulmonary ejection clicks
are associated with mild to moderate pulmonary stenosis and are best
heard at the left middle to upper sternal border and vary with respiration, often disappearing with inspiration. A good place to hear ejection
clicks is right over the sternum, since bone conducts high-­frequency
sound much better than the muscle of the intercostal spaces. A midsystolic click heard at the apex, often preceding a late systolic murmur,
suggests mitral valve prolapse.
Murmurs should be described according to their intensity, pitch,
timing (systolic or diastolic), variation in intensity, time to peak
intensity, location of maximal intensity, and radiation to other areas.

Auscultation for murmurs should be carried out starting at the upper
right sternal border then moving slowly across the upper precordium,
down the left and right sternal borders, and out to the apex and to the
left axilla. Auscultation should also always be performed in the right
axilla and over both sides of the back, as many CHD murmurs radiate to these locations. Systolic murmurs are classified as ejection, holosystolic or pansystolic, or late systolic according to the timing of the
murmur in relation to S1 and S2. The intensity of systolic murmurs is
graded from I to VI: I, barely audible; II, medium intensity; III, loud
but no thrill; IV, loud with a thrill; V, very loud but still requiring positioning of the stethoscope at least partly on the chest; and VI, so loud
that the murmur can be heard with the stethoscope off the chest. In
patients who have undergone prior heart surgery, a murmur of grade
IV or greater may be heard in the absence of a thrill because of scar tissue, which does not transmit vibrations well, within the chest.
Systolic ejection murmurs start a short time after a well-­heard S1,
increase in intensity, peak, and then decrease in intensity; they usually
end before S2. In patients with severe pulmonary stenosis, however, the
murmur may extend beyond the first component of S2, thus obscuring it. Pansystolic or holosystolic murmurs begin simultaneously with
S1 and continue throughout systole, on occasion becoming gradually
decrescendo. It is important to remember that after closure of the atrioventricular valves (S1), a brief period occurs during which ventricular
pressure increases but the semilunar valves remain closed (isovolumic
contraction; see Fig. 471.4). Thus holosystolic murmurs (heard during
both isovolumic contraction and the ejection phases of systole) cannot be caused by flow across the semilunar valves because these valves
are closed during isovolumic contraction! Holosystolic murmurs must
therefore be related to blood exiting the contracting ventricle via either
an abnormal opening (VSD) or atrioventricular (mitral or tricuspid)
valve insufficiency. Systolic ejection murmurs usually imply increased
flow or stenosis across one of the ventricular outflow tracts (aortic or
pulmonic). In infants with rapid heart rates, it is often difficult to distinguish between ejection and pansystolic murmurs. If a clear and distinct
S1 can be appreciated, the murmur is most likely ejection in nature.
A continuous murmur is a murmur that continues from systole
into diastole and indicates continuous flow, such as in the presence of
a PDA or other aortopulmonary communication. This murmur should
be differentiated from a to-­and-­fro murmur, where the systolic component of the murmur ends at or before S2 and the diastolic murmur
begins after S2 with semilunar valve closure (aortic stenosis and insufficiency; pulmonary stenosis and insufficiency). A late systolic murmur
begins well beyond S1 and continues until the end of systole and is usually heard after a midsystolic click in patients with mitral valve prolapse
and insufficiency.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

115
110
105
100
95
90
85
80
75
70
65

75th
50th

0

1

2

3

4

5

75
Diastolic BP (K4)

Systolic BP

95th
90th

6 7
Mo

8

70

90th

65

75th
50th

1

2

3

4

5

6 7
Mo

8

3

4

5

6 7
Mo

8

9 10 11 12

95th
90th

65

75th

60
55

9 10 11 12

87 101 106 106 106 105 105 105 105 105 105 105 105
68 65 63 63 63 65 66 67 68 68 69 69 69
51 59 63 66 68 70 72 73 74 76 77 78 80
4
4
5
5
6
7
8
9
9 10 10 11 11

B

90th
Perc
Sys BP
Dias BP
Ht cm
Wt kg

50th

0

1

2

3

4

5

6 7
Mo

8

9 10 11 12

76
68
54
4

98 101 104 105 106 106 106 106 106 106 105 105
65 64 64 65 65 66 66 66 67 67 67 67
55 56 58 61 63 66 68 70 72 74 75 77
4
4
5
5
6
7
8
9
9 10 10 11

95th
90th

130

125

125

95th
90th

120

75th

120

75th

115

Systolic BP

Systolic BP

2

45
0

130

50th

110
105

115
105
100

95

95
90
2

3

4

5

6

85

7
Yr

8

9

80

95th
90th

75

75th

70

1

10 11 12 13

50th

65

2

3

4

5

6

85
Diastolic BP (K4)

1

60

7
Yr

8

9

10 11 12 13
95th
90th

80

75th

75
70

50th

65
60
55

55

50

50
90th
Perc
Sys BP
Dias BP
Ht cm
Wt kg

50th

110

100
90

Diastolic BP (K4)

1

50

45

C

50th

70

50

A

75th

75

60

90th
Perc
Sys BP
Dias BP
Ht cm
Wt kg

95th
90th

0

95th

55

115
110
105
100
95
90
85
80
75
70
65

9 10 11 12

Diastolic BP (K4)

Systolic BP

2744 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

1

2

3

4

5

6

7
Yr

8

9

10 11 12 13

105 106 107 108 109 111 112 114 115 117 119 121 124
69 68 68 69 69 70 71 73 74 75 76 77 79
80 91 100 108 115 122 129 135 141 147 153 159 165
11 14 16 18 22 25 29 34 39 44 50 55 62

D

90th
Perc
Sys BP
Dias BP
Ht cm
Wt kg

1

2

3

4

5

6

7
Yr

8

9

10 11 12 13

105 105 106 107 109 111 112 114 115 117 119 122 124
67 69 69 69 69 70 71 72 74 75 77 78 80
77 89 98 107 115 122 129 135 142 148 154 160 165
11 13 15 18 22 25 30 35 40 45 51 58 63

Fig. 471.2 Age-­specific percentiles of blood pressure (BP) measurements: birth to 13 yr. A, Males from birth to 12 mo of age. B, Females from birth

to 12 mo of age. C, Males 1-­13 yr of age. D, Females 1-­13 yr of age. Korotkoff phase IV (K4) used for diastolic BP. Dias, Diastolic; Ht, height; Perc,
percentile; Sys, systolic; Wt, weight. (From Report of the Second Task Force on Blood Pressure Control in Children—1987. National Heart, Lung, and
Blood Institute, Bethesda, MD. Pediatrics. 1987;79:1–25. Copyright 1987 by the American Academy of Pediatrics.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 471 u History and Physical Examination in Cardiac Evaluation
95th
90th

Systolic BP

135

75th

130
125

50th

120
115

140
135
Systolic BP

140

110
13

14

15

16

17

Years

125

75th

120
115

50th

105

18

13

14

15

16

17

18

Years

90

85

85

95th

80

75th

80

90th

75

75th

75
50th

70
65
60

13
124
77
165
62

14
126
78
172
68

15
129
79
178
74

Years

16
131
81
182
80

17
134
83
184
84

Diastolic BP (K5)

95th
90th

90
Diastolic BP (K5)

95th
90th

130

110

105

90th
Perc
Sys BP
Dias BP
Ht cm
Wt kg

2745

A

90th
Perc
Sys BP
Dias BP
Ht cm
Wt kg

50th

65
60

18
136
84
184
86

70

13

14

15

124
78
165
63

126
81
168
67

126
82
169
70

Years

16

17

18

127
81
170
72

127
80
170
73

127
80
170
74

B

Fig. 471.3 Age-­specific percentiles of blood pressure (BP) measurements: age 13-­18 yr. A, Males 13-­18 yr of age. B, Females 13-­18 yr of age.
Korotkoff phase V (K5) used for diastolic BP. Dias, Diastolic; Ht, height; Perc, percentile; Sys, systolic; Wt, weight. (From Report of the Second Task
Force on Blood Pressure Control in Children—1987, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, Bethesda, MD. Pediatrics. 1987;79:1–25. Copyright
1987 by the American Academy of Pediatrics.)

Several types of diastolic murmurs (graded I-­IV) can be identified. A decrescendo diastolic murmur is a blowing murmur usually
along the left sternal border that begins with S2 and diminishes toward
mid-­diastole. When louder and high-­pitched, this murmur is usually
associated with aortic valve insufficiency or pulmonary insufficiency
related to pulmonary hypertension. When softer and low-­pitched, this
murmur is usually associated with pulmonary valve insufficiency in the
absence of pulmonary hypertension. A to-­and-­fro murmur is typically
noted after surgical repair of the pulmonary outflow tract in patients
with tetralogy of Fallot. A rumbling mid-­diastolic murmur at the left
mid and lower sternal border may be caused by increased blood flow
across the tricuspid valve, such as occurs with ASD or, much less often,
because of actual stenosis of this valve. When this murmur is heard at
the apex, it is caused by increased flow across the mitral valve, such as
occurs with large left-­to-­right shunts at the ventricular level (VSDs), at
the great vessel level (PDA, aortopulmonary shunts), or with increased
flow because of mitral insufficiency. When an apical diastolic rumbling
murmur is longer and is accentuated at the end of diastole (presystolic),
it usually indicates anatomic mitral valve stenosis.
The absence of a precordial murmur does not rule out significant
congenital or acquired heart disease. Congenital heart defects, some
of which are ductal dependent, may not demonstrate a murmur if
the ductus arteriosus closes. These lesions include pulmonary or tricuspid valve atresia and transposition of the great arteries. Murmurs
may seem insignificant in patients with ASDs, anomalous pulmonary
venous return, some forms of atrioventricular septal defects, coarctation of the aorta, or anomalous origin of a coronary artery. Careful
attention to other components of the physical examination (growth
failure, cyanosis, peripheral pulses, precordial impulse, heart sounds)
increases the index of suspicion of congenital heart defects in these
patients. In contrast, loud murmurs may be present in the absence of

structural heart disease, for example, in patients with a large noncardiac arteriovenous malformation, mitral regurgitation caused by left
ventricular dilation associated with myocarditis or cardiomyopathy,
and severe anemia.
Many murmurs are not associated with significant hemodynamic
abnormalities. These murmurs are referred to as functional, normal,
insignificant, or innocent. During routine random auscultation, >30%
of children may have an innocent murmur at some time in their lives;
this percentage increases when auscultation is done under nonbasal
circumstances (high cardiac output because of fever, infection, or
anxiety). The most common innocent murmur is a medium-­loud,
medium-­pitched, vibratory or “musical,” relatively short systolic ejection murmur, which is heard best along the left sternal border and has
no significant radiation to the apex, base, or back. It is heard most
frequently in children between 3 and 7 years of age. The intensity of
the murmur often changes with respiration and position and may be
attenuated or even disappear in the sitting or prone position. Innocent
pulmonic murmurs are also common in children and adolescents and
originate from normal turbulence during ejection into the pulmonary
artery. These are higher pitched, brief, early systolic murmurs of grades
I-­II in intensity and are best heard in the second left parasternal space
with the patient in the supine position. Features suggestive of heart disease include murmurs that are holosystolic, grade III or higher, harsh,
located at the left upper sternal border, and associated with an early or
midsystolic click or an abnormal S2.
A venous hum is another example of a common innocent murmur
heard during childhood. Venous hums are produced by turbulence of
blood in the jugular venous system; they have no pathologic significance and may be heard in the neck or anterior portion of the upper
part of the chest. Appreciated as a soft humming sound heard in both
systole and diastole, it can be exaggerated or made to disappear by

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Blood flow (L/min)

4

Isovolumic
Relaxation
Rapid Filling
of Ventricle

Reduced Ejection

Rapid Ejection

Reduced Filling
of Ventricle
(Diastasis)

472.1 Radiologic Cardiac Assessment

P

Aortic closure
Pulmonic closure
Opening snap

QS

20

1

Left
atrial
pressure

Mitral
valve closes

4

3

2

Daniel Bernstein

Mitral valve
opens

10

100

8

90

6
4

Volume

Flow

80
70

2

60

0

50

25
Right heart
pressure mm Hg

Left ventricular
pressure

T

P
Atrial
sound

Daniel Bernstein

Aortic
pressure
R

60

0

Laboratory Cardiac
Evaluation

Aortic valve closes
Aortic valve
opens

80

40

Chapter 472

20
15
10
5

Pulmonic
valve
opens

Ventricular
volume (mL)

Left heart pressure mm Hg

100

Isovolumic Contraction

Atrial
Systole

2746 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

Pulmonic valve closes

Right
ventricular
pressure
a

c

v

0

Pulmonary
arterial
pressure

Tricuspid valve opens
Right atrial
(venous) pressure

Tricuspid
valve closes
0

0.2
0.1

0.4
0.3

0.6
0.5

0.8
0.7

Time (sec)

Fig. 471.4 Idealized diagram of the temporal events of a cardiac cycle (the Wiggers diagram).

varying the position of the head, or it can be decreased by lightly compressing the jugular venous system in the neck. These simple maneuvers are sufficient to differentiate a venous hum from the murmurs
produced by organic cardiovascular disease, particularly a PDA.
The lack of significance of an innocent murmur should be discussed with the child’s parents. It is important to offer complete
reassurance because lingering doubts about the importance of a
cardiac murmur may have profound effects on child-­rearing practices, most often in the form of overprotectiveness. An underlying
fear that a cardiac abnormality is present may negatively affect a
child’s self-­image and development. The physician should explain
that an innocent murmur is simply a “noise” and does not indicate
the presence of a cardiac defect. When asked, “Will it go away?”
the best response is to state that because the murmur has no clinical significance, it does not matter whether it “goes away.” Parents
should be warned that the intensity of the murmur might increase
during febrile illnesses, a time when, typically, another physician
may examine the child (e.g., in the emergency department). With
growth, however, innocent murmurs are less well heard and often
disappear completely. If there is a suspicion of structural heart
disease, additional studies are indicated to rule out a congenital
heart defect. However, “routine” electrocardiographic, chest radiographic, and echocardiographic examinations should be avoided in
well children with a clearly innocent murmur.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Despite the widespread easy access to advanced imaging techniques, such
as echocardiography, computed tomography (CT) scan, and magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI), the chest x-­ray film remains a highly valuable
diagnostic tool and is often the first imaging study performed in a child
suspected of having a cardiac defect. It can provide important information about cardiac size and shape, pulmonary blood flow (vascularity),
pulmonary edema, and associated lung and thoracic anomalies that may
be associated with congenital syndromes (e.g., skeletal dysplasias, extra
or deficient number of ribs, abnormal vertebrae, diaphragmatic hernia,
previous cardiac surgery). Combined with a careful physical examination, the chest radiograph can help the clinician to establish a diagnosis
of congenital heart disease (CHD), as opposed to pulmonary disease,
and to narrow the differential diagnosis to specific categories of CHD
(e.g., left-­to-­right shunt lesions vs obstructive lesions).
The most frequently used measurement of cardiac size is the maximal width of the cardiac shadow in a posteroanterior (PA) chest film
taken mid-­inspiration. A vertical line is drawn down the middle of
the sternal shadow, and perpendicular lines are drawn from the sternal line to the extreme right and left borders of the heart; the sum of
the lengths of these lines is the maximal cardiac width. The maximal
chest width is obtained by drawing a horizontal line between the right
and left inner borders of the rib cage at the level of the top of the right
diaphragm. When the maximal cardiac width is more than half the
maximal chest width (cardiothoracic ratio >50%), the heart is usually
enlarged. Cardiac size should be evaluated only when the film is taken
during inspiration with the patient in an upright position, which can be
difficult to achieve in younger patients. A diagnosis of “cardiac enlargement” on expiratory or prone films is a common cause of unnecessary
referrals and laboratory studies.
The cardiothoracic ratio is a less useful index of cardiac enlargement in infants than in older children because the horizontal position
of the heart may increase the ratio to about 60% in the absence of true
enlargement. Furthermore, the thymus may overlap not only the base
of the heart but also virtually the entire mediastinum, thus obscuring
the true cardiac silhouette.
A lateral chest radiograph may be helpful in infants and in older
children with pectus excavatum or other conditions that result in a narrow anteroposterior (AP) chest dimension. The heart may appear small
in the lateral view and suggest that the apparent enlargement in the
PA projection was caused by either the thymus (anterior mediastinum
only) or flattening of the cardiac chambers as a result of a structural
chest abnormality.
In the PA view, the left border of the cardiac shadow consists of three
convex shadows produced, from above downward, by the aortic knob,
the main and left pulmonary arteries, and the left ventricle (Fig. 472.1).
In cases of moderate to marked left atrial enlargement, the atrium may
be visualized between the pulmonary artery and the left ventricle. The
right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) does not contribute to the shadows formed by the left border of the heart. The aortic knob is not as
easily seen in infants and children as in adults. The side of the aortic
arch (left or right) can often be inferred as being opposite the side of
the midline from which the air-­filled trachea is visualized. This observation is important because a right-­sided aortic arch is often present in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 472 u Laboratory Cardiac Evaluation
Branches of
aorta
Pulmonary
veins
LA

rt
Ao

a

S
V RPA LPA
PA
C

LV

RA

Outflow
tract

RV

Left heart

Right heart
PA view

Aorta
L
PA S

PA

V
RA C

RV

LA

I
V
C

LV

Left heart

Right heart
Lateral view

Fig. 472.1 Idealized diagrams showing normal position of the cardiac

chambers and great blood vessels. IVC, Inferior vena cava; LA, left atrium; LPA, left pulmonary artery; LV, left ventricle; PA, pulmonary artery;
RA, right atrium; RPA, right pulmonary artery; RV, right ventricle; SVC,
superior vena cava. (Adapted and redrawn from Dotter CT, Steinberg I.
Angiocardiographic interpretation. Radiology. 1949;153:513.)

cyanotic CHD, particularly in tetralogy of Fallot. Three structures contribute to the right border of the cardiac silhouette. In the view from
above, they are the superior vena cava, the ascending aorta, and the
right atrium.
Enlargement of cardiac chambers (i.e., increased chamber volume) or
major arteries and veins results in prominence of the areas in which these
structures are normally outlined on the chest radiograph. In contrast, the
electrocardiogram is a more sensitive and accurate index of ventricular
hypertrophy, which is a thickening of the ventricular wall and may or
may not be associated with dilation of the affected cardiac chamber.
The chest radiograph is also an important tool for assessing the
degree of pulmonary vascularity. Pulmonary overcirculation is usually associated with left-­to-­right shunt lesions, whereas pulmonary
undercirculation is associated with obstruction of the RVOT in cyanotic lesions. The esophagus is closely related to the great vessels, and a
barium esophagogram can help delineate these structures in the initial
evaluation of suspected vascular rings, although this has largely been
supplanted by CT.
Echocardiographic examination best defines the morphologic features of intracardiac chambers, cardiac valves, and intracardiac shunts.
CT is used as an adjunct to echocardiogram to evaluate extracardiac
vascular morphology. MRI is used most often to provide a more quantitative assessment of inflammation as well as ventricular volumes, cardiac function, and shunt and regurgitant fractions than is possible with
echocardiogram.

472.2 Electrocardiography
Daniel Bernstein

DEVELOPMENTAL CHANGES

The marked changes that occur in cardiac physiology and chamber dominance during the perinatal transition (see Chapter 470) are

2747

reflected in the evolution of the electrocardiogram (ECG) during the
neonatal period. Because vascular resistance in the pulmonary and
systemic circulations is nearly equal in a term fetus, the intrauterine
work of the heart results in an equal mass of both the right and left ventricles. After birth, systemic vascular resistance (SVR) rises when the
placental circulation is eliminated, and pulmonary vascular resistance
(PVR) falls when the lungs expand. These changes are reflected in the
ECG over the first few weeks of life as the right ventricular (RV) wall
begins to thin.
The ECG demonstrates these anatomic and hemodynamic features
principally by changes in QRS and T-­wave morphologic features. Typically, pediatric ECGs include several additional leads rarely used in
adults, such as V3R and V4R, which are mirror images of leads V3 and
V4 and are important in the evaluation of right ventricular hypertrophy (RVH). On occasion, lead V1 is inappropriately positioned too
far leftward to reflect RV forces accurately. This problem is present
particularly in premature infants, in whom the electrocardiographic
electrode gel may produce contact among all the precordial leads. An
additional lead used in children is V7, located more laterally than V6
and useful for assessing left-­sided forces.
During the first postnatal days of life, right axis deviation, large R
waves, and upright T waves in the right precordial leads (V3R or V4R
and V1) are the norm (Fig. 472.2). As PVR decreases in the first few
days after birth, the right precordial T waves become negative. In the
great majority of cases, this change occurs within the first 48 hours of
postnatal life. Upright T waves that persist in leads V3R, V4R, or V1
beyond 1 week of life are an abnormal finding indicating RVH or RV
strain, even in the absence of QRS voltage criteria. The T wave in V1
should never be positive before 6 years of age; however, it may remain
negative into adolescence or early adulthood. This finding represents
one of the most important yet subtle differences between pediatric and
adult ECGs and is a common source of error when adult cardiologists
interpret pediatric ECGs.
In a newborn the mean QRS frontal-­plane axis normally lies in
the range of +110 to +180 degrees, reflecting the codominance of the
fetal right and left ventricles. The right-­sided chest leads reveal a larger
positive (R) than negative (S) wave and may do so for months because
the right ventricle remains relatively thick throughout early infancy.
Left-­sided leads (V5 and V6) also reflect right-­sided dominance in the
early neonatal period, when the R:S ratio in these leads may be <1. A
dominant R wave in V5 and V6, reflecting left ventricular (LV) forces,
quickly becomes evident within the first few days of life (Fig. 472.3). As
the child matures, the QRS axis gradually shifts leftward and the RV
forces slowly regress. Leads V1, V3R, and V4R display a prominent R
wave until 6 months to 8 years of age. Most children have an R:S ratio
>1 in lead V4R until age 4 years. The T waves are inverted in leads V4R,
V1, V2, and V3 during infancy and may remain so into the middle of the
second decade of life and beyond. The processes of RV thinning and LV
growth are best reflected in the QRS-­T pattern over the right precordial
leads. The diagnosis of RVH or left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) in a
pediatric patient can be made only with an understanding of the normal developmental physiology of these chambers at various ages until
adulthood is reached. As the left ventricle becomes dominant, the ECG
evolves to the characteristic pattern of older children (Fig. 472.4) and
adults (Fig. 472.5).
Ventricular hypertrophy usually results in increased voltage in
the R and S waves in the chest leads. The height of these deflections
is governed by the proximity of the specific electrode to the surface
of the heart; by the sequence of electrical activation through the ventricles, which can result in variable degrees of cancellation of right vs
left forces; and by hypertrophy of the myocardium.
The diagnosis of pathologic RVH is difficult in the first week of postnatal life because physiologic RVH is a normal finding. Serial tracings
are often necessary to determine whether marked right axis deviation
and potentially abnormal right precordial forces or T waves, or both,
will persist beyond the neonatal period (Fig. 472.6). In contrast, an
adult ECG pattern (see Fig. 472.5) seen in a neonate suggests LVH. The
exception is a premature infant, who may display a more “mature” ECG
than a full-­term infant (Fig. 472.7) as a result of lower PVR secondary

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2748 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

I

aVR

V1

V4

II

aVL

V2

V5

III

aVF

V3

V6

Fig. 472.2 Normal ECG from a 5-­day-­old, term-­gestation infant. The frontal plane QRS axis is 150 degrees. There is prominent voltage in the

precordial leads and a suggestion of right ventricular preponderance but not right ventricular hypertrophy. The QRS duration is 60 ms. (From Gering
LE, Knilans TK, Surawicz B, et al. Normal electrocardiograms in the fetus, infants, and children. In: Surawicz B, Knilans TK. Chou’s Electrocardiography
in Clinical Practice, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2008: Fig. 28.2, p. 651).

I

aVR

V1

V4

II

aVL

V2

V5

III

aVF

V3

V6

Fig. 472.3 Normal ECG from a healthy 8-­mo-­old infant. The frontal plane QRS axis is 60 degrees. There is less evidence of right ventricular preponderance than in the newborn tracing, with a smaller R wave in lead V1 and smaller S wave in lead V6. (From Gering LE, Knilans TK, Surawicz B,
et al. Normal electrocardiograms in the fetus, infants, and children. In: Surawicz B, Knilans TK. Chou’s Electrocardiography in Clinical Practice, 6th
ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2008: Fig. 28.3, p. 652).

to underdevelopment of the medial muscular layer of the pulmonary
arterioles. Some premature infants display a pattern of generalized low
voltage across the precordium.
The ECG should always be evaluated systematically to avoid overlooking a minor but important abnormality. One approach is to begin
with an assessment of rate and rhythm, followed by a calculation of
the mean frontal-­plane QRS axis, measurements of segment intervals, assessment of voltages, and lastly assessment of ST and T-­wave
abnormalities.

normally in the chest, the P-­wave axis should be oriented downward
and to the left (i.e., should be upright in leads I and aVF and inverted
in lead aVR). With atrial inversion (situs inversus), the P wave may be
inverted in lead I. Inverted P waves in leads II and aVF are seen in low
atrial, nodal, or junctional rhythms. The absence of P waves indicates
a rhythm originating more distally in the conduction system. In this
case, the morphologic features of the QRS complexes are important in
differentiating a junctional (usually a narrow QRS complex) from a
ventricular (usually a wide QRS complex) rhythm.

RATE AND RHYTHM

P WAVES

A brief rhythm strip should be examined to assess whether a P wave
always precedes each QRS complex. Using the full 12-­lead ECG, the
P-­wave axis should then be estimated as an indication of whether the
rhythm is originating from the sinus node. If the atria are situated

Tall (>2.5 mm), narrow, and spiked P waves are indicative of right
atrial enlargement and are seen in pulmonary stenosis, Ebstein
anomaly of the tricuspid valve, tricuspid atresia, and sometimes cor
pulmonale. These abnormal waves are most obvious in leads II, V3R,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 472 u Laboratory Cardiac Evaluation

I

aVR

V1

V4

II

aVL

V2

V5

III

aVF

V3

V6

2749

Fig. 472.4 Normal ECG from a healthy 3-­yr-­old child. The frontal plane QRS axis is 60 degrees. The R/S ratio in lead V1 is less than 1, and there is

no appreciable S wave in lead V6. The R wave in lead V6 is more prominent than that of the infant, suggesting more left ventricular preponderance
but not left ventricular hypertrophy. (From Gering LE, Knilans TK, Surawicz B, et al. Normal electrocardiograms in the fetus, infants, and children. In:
Surawicz B, Knilans TK. Chou’s Electrocardiography in Clinical Practice, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2008: Fig. 28.4, p. 652).

I

aVR

V1

V4

II

aVL

V2

V5

III

aVF

V3

V6

VI

II

V5

Fig. 472.5 Electrocardiogram of a normal 17-­yr-­old, a member of the school’s track team. At this age the ECG should be similar to that in a normal

adult: the dominant wave in V1 should be the S wave and there is a normal R-­wave progression, growing taller across the precordium from right to
left. The heart rate is slow at 43 bpm (sinus bradycardia), which can be typical of a performance athlete. Note that all precordial lead T waves are
positive, except for V1. This R-­wave progression pattern in a young infant, where there should be right ventricular dominance, would indicate the
presence of left ventricular hypertrophy.

and V1 (Fig. 472.8A). Similar waves are sometimes seen in thyrotoxicosis. Broad P waves, commonly bifid and sometimes biphasic, are
indicative of left atrial enlargement (Fig. 472.8B). They are seen in
some patients with large left-­to-­right shunts (ventricular septal defect
[VSD], patent ductus arteriosus) and with severe mitral stenosis or
mitral regurgitation. Left atrial enlargement, however, is one of the
most common false-­positive readings generated by computerized
ECG machines. Flat P waves may be encountered in patients with
hyperkalemia.

QRS COMPLEX
Right Ventricular Hypertrophy

For the most accurate assessment of ventricular hypertrophy, pediatric ECGs should include the right precordial leads V3R and V4R.
The diagnosis of RVH depends on demonstration of the following
changes (see Fig. 472.6): (1) a qR pattern in the RV surface leads;
(2) a positive T wave in leads V3R-­V4R and V1-­V3 between ages 6
days and 6 years; (3) a monophasic R wave in V3R, V4R, or V1; (4)
an rsR′ pattern in the right precordial leads with the second R wave

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2750 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

I

aVR

V1

V4

II

aVL

V2

V5

III

aVF

V3

V6

Fig. 472.6 Electrocardiogram of an infant with right ventricular hypertrophy (tetralogy of Fallot). Note the tall R waves in the right precordial leads
(V1-­V2) and deep S waves in V6. The R-­wave progression (taller in the right precordial leads vs the left) is counter to the normal pattern.

I

aVR

V1

V4

V3R

II

aVL

V2

V5

V4R

III

aVF

V3

V6

Fig. 472.7 Normal ECG from an 8-­day-­old, 28-­wk-­gestation premature infant. The frontal plane QRS axis is 150 degrees, there is a monophasic R
wave in lead V1, and the R/S ratio is less than 1 in lead V6. This illustrates relative right ventricular preponderance without right ventricular hypertrophy. The QRS duration is less than 40 ms. (From Gering LE, Knilans TK, Surawicz B, Tavel ME. Normal electrocardiograms in the fetus, infants, and
children. In: Surawicz B, Knilans TK. Chou’s Electrocardiography in Clinical Practice, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2008: Fig. 28.1, p. 650).

taller than the first; (5) age-­corrected increased voltage of the R wave
in leads V3R-­V4R or the S wave in leads V6-­V7, or both; (6) marked
right axis deviation (>120 degrees in patients beyond the newborn
period); and (7) complete reversal of the normal adult precordial RS
pattern. At least two of these changes should be present to support a
diagnosis of RVH.
Abnormal ventricular loading can be characterized as either pressure
overload (as a result of RVOT obstruction, as in pulmonic stenosis) or
volume overload (as a result of a left-­to-­right shunt as in atrial septal
defect [ASD], semilunar valve regurgitation, or dilated cardiomyopathy). These two types of abnormal loads result in distinct electrocardiographic patterns. The pressure overload pattern is characterized by
tall, pure R waves in the right precordial leads. In older children, the
T waves in these leads are initially upright and later become inverted.
In infants and children <6 years, the T waves in V3R-­V4R and V1 are

abnormally upright. The volume overload pattern (typically seen in
patients with ASD) is characterized by an rsR′ pattern (Fig. 472.9) and
a slightly increased QRS duration (which is known as a minor right
ventricular conduction delay rather than a true bundle branch block).
Patients with mild to moderate pulmonary stenosis may also exhibit an
rsR′ pattern in the right precordial leads.

Left Ventricular Hypertrophy

The following features indicate the presence of LVH (Fig. 472.10): (1)
increased voltage (for age) of the S wave in V3R and V1 or the R wave
in V6-­V7, or both. In older children and adults, the criteria for LVH
(Sokolow index) is a combination of S wave in V1 or V2 plus R wave
in V5 or V6 ≥35 mm and (2) a deep Q wave in the left precordial leads.
Remember that an infant with an ECG that would be considered “normal” for an older child may in fact have LVH; therefore reference to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 472 u Laboratory Cardiac Evaluation

II

II

A

2751

VI

RAE
B

LAE

Fig. 472.8 Atrial enlargement. A, Peaked narrow P waves in lead II characteristic of right atrial enlargement (RAE). B, Wide, bifid, M-­shaped P
waves in lead II and biphasic p waves in lead V1 typical of left atrial enlargement (LAE).

I

aVR

V1

V4

II

aVL

V2

V5

III

aVF

V3

V6

V3R

Fig. 472.9 Electrocardiogram showing a minor right ventricular conduction delay characterized by an RsR′ pattern in V1. Note that the QRS duration is not prolonged (60 msec) as it would be if this were a right bundle branch block (RBBB).

I

aVR

V1

V4

II

aVL

V2

V5

III

aVF

V3

V6

II

Fig. 472.10 Electrocardiogram showing left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) in a 12-­yr-­old child with aortic stenosis. Note the deep S waves in V1-­V3
and tall R in V5-­V6. In addition, T-­wave inversion is present in lead V6, a sign of left ventricular strain.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2752 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
standard voltages for age is always important. Further evidence for
LVH includes depression of the ST segments and inversion of the T
waves in the left precordial leads (V5, V6, and V7), known as a left ventricular strain pattern—these findings suggest the presence of more
severe hypertrophy.

Bundle Branch Block

A complete right bundle branch block (RBBB; prolonged QRS complex, which is usually upright with an rSR′ in lead V1; wide S wave
in lead V6) may be congenital or may be acquired after surgery for
CHD, especially when a right ventriculotomy has been performed, as
in repair of the tetralogy of Fallot. Left bundle branch block (LBBB;
prolonged QRS complex, which is usually upright with an rSR′ in lead
V6; wide S wave in lead V1) is less common in children; this pattern is
often seen in adults with cardiomyopathy, but much less in children
with cardiomyopathy. LBBB may be seen after surgery on the aortic
or mitral valve caused by surgical injury to one of the left-­sided conduction bundles. Alternatively, a bundle branch block pattern may be
indicative of a bypass tract associated with one of the preexcitation syndromes (see Chapter 484).

P-­R AND Q-­T INTERVALS

The duration of the P-­R interval shortens with increasing heart rate;
assessment of this interval should be based on age-­and rate-­corrected
nomograms. A long P-­R interval is diagnostic of a first-­degree heart
block, the cause of which may be congenital, postoperative (after open
heart surgery), inflammatory (myocarditis, pericarditis, Lyme disease, rheumatic fever), or pharmacologic (digitalis, calcium channel
blockers).
The duration of the Q-­T interval varies with the cardiac rate; a corrected Q-­T interval (Q-­Tc) can be calculated by dividing the measured
Q-­T interval by the square root of the preceding R-­R interval. A normal Q-­Tc should be <0.45. It is often lengthened with hypokalemia and
hypocalcemia; in the former, a U wave may be noted at the end of the
T wave (Fig. 472.11). A significant number of medications can also
lengthen the Q-­T interval, so a careful history of medication exposure
is important in evaluating a patient with a borderline or long QT interval. A congenitally prolonged Q-­T interval may also be seen in children
with one of the long QT syndromes (Fig. 472.12). These patients are
at high risk for ventricular arrhythmias, including a dangerous form
of ventricular tachycardia known as torsades de pointes, and sudden
death (see Chapter 484.5).
Lead 1

ST SEGMENT AND T-­WAVE ABNORMALITIES

Coronary ischemia, leading to typical ST and T-­wave abnormalities
seen in adults, is rare in children. A slight elevation of the ST segment
is often seen in normal teenagers, especially males, and is attributed to
early repolarization of the heart (Fig. 472.13). It can sometimes be difficult to distinguish between ischemic ST segment changes and benign
early repolarization; however, the following characteristics suggest
early repolarization: (1) ST elevation limited to the lateral leads (V5-­
V6), (2) a characteristic notch at the J point (junction between the end
of the QRS and the beginning of the ST segment), and (3) a concave
rather than convex ST segment. Lack of any concerning symptoms is
also critical. Early repolarization often resolves with exercise-­induced
tachycardia. In pericarditis, irritation of the epicardium may cause
elevation of the ST segment, followed by abnormal T-­wave inversion
as healing progresses.
Depression of the ST segment may also occur in coronary ischemia
or in any condition that produces myocardial injury, including severe
anemia, carbon monoxide poisoning, glycogen storage disease of the
heart, myocardial tumors, and mucopolysaccharidoses. An aberrant
origin of the left coronary artery from the pulmonary artery may lead
to changes indistinguishable from those of acute myocardial infarction in adults. ECG findings of ischemia may be seen in patients with
Kawasaki disease who have developed coronary artery aneurysms (see
Chapters 208 and 493.1). Similar changes may occur in patients with
other rare abnormalities of the coronary arteries and in those with cardiomyopathy, even in the presence of normal coronary arteries. These
patterns are often misread in young infants because of the unfamiliarity of pediatricians with this “infarct” pattern, and thus a high index of
suspicion must be maintained in infants with dilated cardiomyopathy
or with symptoms compatible with coronary ischemia (e.g., inconsolable crying).

Fig. 472.12 Prolonged Q-­T interval in a patient with long QT syndrome.

Lead 2

Lead 3

AVR

AVL

V4R

V1

V3 1/2

V6

AVF

Fig. 472.11 Electrocardiogram in hypokalemia. Serum potassium, 2.7 mEq/L; serum calcium, 4.8 mEq/L at the time of the tracing. Note the widened TU wave and depression of the ST segment in V4R, V1, and V6.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 472 u Laboratory Cardiac Evaluation

I

aVR

V1

V4

II

aVL

V2

V5

III

aVF

V3

V6

2753

VI

Fig. 472.13 Early repolarization seen in the mid-­precordial to lateral leads (V2-­V5) in a teenage boy. These minor ST segment elevations, with typical concave slope and combined with a high J point, suggest this is a benign variant and not true ischemia.

I

2

3

AVR

AVL

V4R

V1

V3

V6

AVF

Fig. 472.14 Electrocardiogram in hyperkalemia. Serum potassium, 6.5 mEq/L. Note the tall, tent-­shaped T waves, especially in leads 1, 2, and V6.

T-­wave inversion may occur in myocarditis and pericarditis, or it
may be a sign of either RVH or LVH and ventricular strain. Hypothyroidism may produce flat or inverted T waves in association with generalized low voltage. In hyperkalemia, the T waves are usually of high

voltage and are tent shaped (Fig. 472.14), although tall T waves can be
an early sign of myocardial infarction.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2754 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

472.3 Hematologic Data in Cardiovascular
Evaluation
Daniel Bernstein
In acyanotic infants with large left-­to-­right shunts, the onset of heart
failure often coincides with the nadir of the normal physiologic anemia
of infancy. Increasing the hematocrit in these patients to >40% may
decrease shunt volume and result in an improvement in symptoms;
however, this form of treatment is generally reserved for infants who
are not otherwise surgical candidates (extremely premature infants or
others in whom surgery is delayed for other reasons). In these select
infants, regular evaluation of the hematocrit and booster transfusions
when appropriate may be helpful in improving growth.
Polycythemia is frequently noted in chronically cyanotic patients
with right-­to-­left shunts. Patients with severe polycythemia, rarely seen
in this age of early surgical repair, are in a delicate balance between the
risks of intravascular thrombosis and a bleeding diathesis. The preparation of cyanotic, polycythemic patients for elective noncardiac surgery,
such as dental extraction, includes evaluation and treatment of abnormal coagulation.
Because of the high viscosity of polycythemic blood (hematocrit
>65%), patients with unrepaired cyanotic CHD are at risk for the development of vascular thromboses, especially of cerebral veins. Dehydration increases the risk of thrombosis, and thus adequate fluid intake
must be maintained during hot weather or intercurrent gastrointestinal
illnesses. Diuretics should be used with caution in these patients and
may need to be decreased if fluid intake is a concern. Polycythemic
infants with concomitant iron deficiency are at even greater risk for
cerebrovascular accidents, thought to be the result of the decreased
deformability of microcytic red blood cells. Iron therapy may reduce
this risk, but surgical repair of the cardiac anomaly is the best therapy.
Severely cyanotic patients who are inoperable should have periodic
determinations of hemoglobin and hematocrit. Increasing polycythemia is often associated with headache, fatigue, dyspnea, or a combination of these conditions. Partial exchange transfusion may be required
to treat symptomatic (most often headache or chest pain) individuals
whose hematocrit has risen to the 65–70% level. This procedure is not
without risk, especially in patients with an extreme elevation in pulmonary vascular resistance. Because these patients do not tolerate wide
fluctuations in circulating blood volume, blood should be replaced
with fresh-­frozen plasma or albumin.

M-­MODE ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY

M-­mode echocardiography displays a one-­dimensional slice of cardiac structure varying over time (Fig. 472.15). It is used mostly for the
measurement of cardiac dimensions (wall thickness and chamber size)
and cardiac function (fractional shortening, wall thickening). M-­mode
echocardiography is also useful for assessing the motion of intracardiac structures: the opening and closing of valves and movement of
free walls and septa (Fig. 472.16). The most frequently used index of
cardiac function in children is percent fractional shortening (%FS),
which contrasts to adults, where ejection fraction is the most common
functional measurement. %FS is calculated as (LVED − LVES)/LVED,
where LVED is left ventricular dimension at end diastole and LVES is
left ventricular dimension at end systole. Normal fractional shortening is approximately 28–42%. Other M-­mode indices of cardiac function include the mean velocity of fiber shortening (mean VCF), systolic
time intervals (LVPEP = LV preejection period, LVET = LV ejection
time), and isovolemic contraction time. M-­mode assessments of cardiac function are more susceptible to errors because of differences in
wall motion between different segments of the heart (more frequently
seen in adults with ischemic heart disease, but which can be seen in

LV

PPM

AMC

3

Aorta
LA

PMC

Dec. aorta

A

472.4 Echocardiography

CW

Daniel Bernstein
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) has replaced cardiac catheterization for the diagnosis of most forms of CHD. The echocardiographic
examination can be used to evaluate cardiac structures in congenital
heart lesions using two-­dimensional (2D) and three-­dimensional (3D)
imaging, estimate intracardiac pressures and gradients across stenotic
valves and vessels using echo-­Doppler and color flow Doppler, quantitate cardiac contractile function (both systolic and diastolic), determine the direction of flow across a defect, examine the integrity of the
coronary arteries, and detect the presence of vegetations from endocarditis, pericardial fluid, cardiac tumors, and chamber thrombi.
Echocardiography may also be used to assist in the performance of
interventional procedures, including pericardiocentesis, balloon atrial
septostomy (see Chapter 480.2), ASD or VSD closure, transcatheter
valve implantation, and endocardial biopsy. Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) is used routinely to monitor ventricular function
in patients during surgical procedures and can provide an immediate
assessment of the results of surgical repair of congenital heart lesions. A
complete TTE examination usually entails a combination of M-­mode
and 2D and 3D imaging, as well as pulsed, continuous, and color Doppler flow studies. Doppler tissue imaging provides a more quantitative
assessment of ventricular systolic and diastolic function.

RV
Sept
um
APM
1 2

RVED
S
Dd
LVED

B

Ds

1

Fig. 472.15 M-­mode echocardiogram. A, Diagram of a sagittal sec-

tion of a heart showing the structures traversed by the echo beam as
it is moved superiorly to positions (1), (2), and (3). B, Echocardiogram
from transducer position (1); this view is the best one for measuring
cardiac dimensions and fractional shortening. Fractional shortening is
calculated as (LVED − LVES)/LVED. AMC, Anterior mitral cusp; APM,
anterior papillary muscle; Dec. aorta, descending aorta; LA, left atrium;
LV, left ventricle; PMC, posterior mitral cusp; PPM, posterior papillary
muscle; RV, right ventricle. CW, Chest wall; Ds, LV dimension in systole;
LVED, LV dimension at end diastole (Dd); RVED, RV dimension at end
diastole.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 472 u Laboratory Cardiac Evaluation

2755

PV

RV
TV
RA
RV
IVS
LV

AV

MPA

RPA

LPA

A

A

RV

LV
RV
Ao

B

LA

B

Fig. 472.16 M-­mode echocardiograms. The small figure at the top of

each panel shows the 2D parasternal short-­axis echocardiogram image
from which the M-­modes are derived. The cursor can be seen midway
through the image, indicating the one-­dimensional line through which
the M-­mode is being sampled. A, M-­mode echocardiogram of a normal
mitral valve. Arrow shows the opening of the anterior leaflet in early
diastole (see ECG tracing earlier for reference). B, M-­mode echocardiogram of a normal aortic valve. The opening and closing of the aortic
leaflets in systole are outlined by the two arrows. Ao, Aorta; IVS, interventricular septum; LV, left ventricle; RV, right ventricle.

Fig. 472.18 Normal parasternal short-­axis echocardiographic win-

dows. A, With the transducer angled superiorly and rightward, the aortic valve (AV) is imaged, surrounded by both inflow and outflow portions of the right ventricle (RV). B, With the transducer angled inferiorly
and leftward, the left ventricular chamber is imaged along with a cross-­
sectional view of the mitral valve (arrows). LPA, Left pulmonary artery;
MPA, main pulmonary artery; PV, pulmonary valve; RA, right atrium;
RPA, right pulmonary artery; TV, tricuspid valve. LV, left ventricle; RV,
right ventricle.

LA

RA

RV
Ao

RV

LV

LV

LA

Fig. 472.17 Normal parasternal long-­axis echocardiographic win-

dow. The transducer is angulated slightly posteriorly, imaging the left-­
sided cardiac structures. If the transducer were to be angulated more
anteriorly, the right ventricular structures would be imaged. The mitral
valve leaflets can be seen in the partially open position in early diastole
(arrows). The closed aortic valve leaflets can be seen just below the
label Ao (aorta). LA, Left atrium; LV, left ventricle; RV, right ventricle.

children with congenital and acquired heart disease, especially after
surgical repair).

TWO-­DIMENSIONAL ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY

Two-­dimensional echocardiography provides a real-­time image of
cardiac structures. The contracting heart is imaged using several
standard views, including parasternal long axis (Fig. 472.17), parasternal short axis (Fig. 472.18), apical four-­chamber (Fig. 472.19),
subcostal (Fig. 472.20), and suprasternal (Fig. 472.21), each of which
emphasizes specific structures. Two-­dimensional echocardiography

Fig. 472.19 Normal apical four-­chamber echocardiographic window
showing all four cardiac chambers and both atrioventricular valves
opened in diastole. LA, Left atrium; LV, left ventricle; RA, right atrium;
RV, right ventricle.

has replaced cardiac angiography for the preoperative diagnosis and
follow-­up of the vast majority of congenital heart lesions. However,
when information from the cardiac examination or other studies is
not consistent with the echocardiogram, or in very complex defects,
cardiac catheterization remains an important tool to confirm the anatomic diagnosis and evaluate the degree of physiologic derangement.
MRI is an extremely valuable adjunct to provide a better quantification of ventricular size and function. Cardiac CT is another modality
that is valuable to assess cardiac and adjacent vascular structures.

DOPPLER ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY

Doppler echocardiography displays blood flow based on the
change in frequency imparted to sound waves by the movement of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2756 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

SVC
Ao
MPA
LV
RA
AO

RV

LPA
RPA

A
Fig. 472.20 Normal subcostal echocardiographic window showing

the left ventricular outflow tract. The right-­sided structures are not fully
imaged in this view. Ao, Ascending aorta; LV, left ventricle; RA, right
atrium; RV, right ventricle; SVC, superior vena cava.

BrA
LCA

AsAo

LSCA

B
Fig. 472.22 Color and pulsed Doppler evaluation of pulmonary

DescAo

arterial flow. A, Color Doppler evaluation of a parasternal short-­axis
view showing normal flow through the pulmonary valve to the main
and branch pulmonary arteries. The color of the Doppler flow is blue,
indicating that the flow is moving away from the transducer (which is
located at the top of the figure, at the apex of the triangular ultrasound
window). Note that the color assigned to the Doppler signal does not
indicate the oxygen saturation of the blood. B, Pulsed-­wave Doppler
flow pattern through the pulmonary valve showing a low velocity of
flow (<1.5 m/sec), indicating the absence of a pressure gradient across
the valve. The envelope of the flow signal is below the line, indicating
that the flow is moving away from the transducer. AO, Aorta; LPA, left
pulmonary artery; MPA, main pulmonary artery; RPA, right pulmonary
artery.

A

Ao
LA
RLPV

LLPV

B
Fig. 472.21 A, Normal suprasternal echocardiographic window

showing the aortic arch and its major branches. B, Normal high parasternal window showing color Doppler imaging of normal pulmonary
venous return to the left atrium (LA) of both right (RLPV) and left (LLPV)
lower pulmonary veins. AsAo, Ascending aorta; BrA, brachiocephalic
artery; DescAo, descending aorta; LCA, left carotid artery; LSCA, left
subclavian artery.

erythrocytes. The speed and direction of blood flow in the line of
the echo beam change the transducer’s reference frequency. This
frequency change can be translated into volumetric flow (L/min)
data for estimating systemic or pulmonary blood flow and into
pressure (mm Hg) data for estimating gradients across valves or
across septal defects or vascular communications such as shunts.
Color Doppler permits highly accurate assessment of the presence
and direction of intracardiac shunts and allows identification of
small or multiple left-­to-­right or right-­to-­left shunts (Fig. 472.22).
The severity of valvular insufficiency can be evaluated qualitatively

Fig. 472.23 Doppler evaluation of a patient who had previously

undergone repair of tetralogy of Fallot and who has mild pulmonary
stenosis and moderate pulmonary regurgitation. The tracing shows the
to-­and-­fro flow across the pulmonary valve, with the signal below the
line representing forward flow in systole (see ECG tracing for reference)
and the signal above the line representing regurgitation during diastole.

with both pulsed and color Doppler (Fig. 472.23). Alterations in
venous Doppler flow patterns can be used to detect abnormalities
of systemic and pulmonary veins, and alterations of atrioventricular valve Doppler flow patterns can be used to assess ventricular

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 472 u Laboratory Cardiac Evaluation
diastolic functional abnormalities, particularly the E/A ratio, the
ratio of peak velocity flow in diastole (i.e., the ratio of the early
diastole E wave to the peak velocity flow in late diastole caused by
atrial contraction).
M-­mode, 2D, and Doppler echocardiographic methods of assessing LV systolic and diastolic function (e.g., end-­systolic wall stress,
dobutamine stress echocardiography, Doppler tissue imaging) have
proved useful in the serial assessment of patients at risk for the
development of both systolic and diastolic ventricular dysfunction
and ventricular dyssynchrony (where the coordination of left and
right ventricular contraction is abnormal). Such patients include
those with cardiomyopathies, those receiving anthracycline drugs
for cancer chemotherapy, those at risk for iron overload, and those
being monitored for rejection or coronary artery disease after heart
transplantation.

2757

RA
LA
RV
LV

THREE-­DIMENSIONAL ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY

Real-­time 3D echocardiographic reconstruction is most valuable for
the detailed assessment of cardiac morphology (Fig. 472.24). Details
of valve structure, the size and location of septal defects, abnormalities of the ventricular myocardium, and details of the great vessels,
which may not be as readily apparent using 2D imaging, can often
be appreciated on 3D echocardiography. Reconstruction of the view
that the surgeon will encounter in the operating room makes this
technique a valuable adjunct for preoperative imaging.

TRANSESOPHAGEAL ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY

TEE is a sensitive imaging technique that produces a clearer view
of smaller lesions such as vegetations in endocarditis, especially in
larger patients. It is useful in visualizing posteriorly located structures such as the atria, aortic root, and atrioventricular valves.
TEE is useful as an intraoperative technique for monitoring cardiac function during both cardiac and noncardiac surgery and for
screening for residual cardiac defects after the patient is initially
weaned from cardiopulmonary bypass but before being disconnected from the bypass circuit. This technique has been especially
helpful in evaluating the degree of residual regurgitation or stenosis
after valve repairs and in searching for small muscular VSDs that
may have been missed during the closure of larger defects. It is
always preferable to make the diagnosis of excessive valve regurgitation while the patient is still in the operating room, so that the
repair can be revised or the valve replaced, rather than after surgery,
when the patient is already in the postoperative care unit. However,
hemodynamic measurements made while the chest is open and the
patient is still under anesthesia may be different from those made
under more normal conditions, as when the patient is ready to be
discharged from the hospital.

MV

AV

Fig. 472.24 Three-­dimensional echocardiogram showing a short-­axis

view of the left ventricle. AV, Aortic valve; MV, mitral valve. (Courtesy Dr.
Norman Silverman, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.)

Fig. 472.25 Normal four-­chamber view echocardiogram on a fetus at

20 wk of gestation. The foramen ovale (arrow) can be seen between the
right and left atria. LA, Left atrium; LV, left ventricle; RA, right atrium;
RV, right ventricle.

FETAL ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY

Fetal echocardiography can be used to evaluate cardiac structures
and function or disturbances in cardiac rhythm (Fig. 472.25). Obstetricians may detect a possible heart defect when screening during
routine obstetric ultrasonography (e.g., cardiac four-­chamber view)
or may refer the patient because of unexplained hydrops fetalis, a
family history of CHD, or a maternal condition associated with fetal
cardiac pathology, such as gestational diabetes, drug use, or infection. Fetal echocardiography can diagnose most significant congenital heart lesions as early as 17-­19 weeks of gestation; accuracy at
this early stage is limited, however, and families should understand
that these studies cannot totally eliminate the possibility of CHD.
Serial fetal echocardiograms have also demonstrated the importance of flow disturbance in the pathogenesis of CHD; such studies
can show the intrauterine progression of a moderate lesion, such as
aortic stenosis, into a more severe lesion, such as hypoplastic left
heart syndrome (HLHS). M-­mode echocardiography can diagnose
rhythm disturbances in the fetus and can determine the success of
antiarrhythmic therapy administered to the mother. A screening
fetal echocardiogram is recommended for women with a previous
child or first-­degree relative with CHD, for those who are at higher
risk of having a child with cardiac disease (e.g., insulin-­dependent
diabetes, women exposed to teratogenic drugs during early pregnancy), and in any fetus in whom a chromosomal abnormality is
suspected or confirmed.
Early detection provides the opportunity to counsel and educate
the parents about the severity of the cardiac lesion and potential
therapeutic or palliative care options. Referral to a high-­risk perinatal service is then performed for further ultrasound screening for
associated anomalies of other organs and potential amniocentesis
or sequencing of cell-­free DNA in maternal blood for karyotyping.
For fetuses with ductal dependent lesions, delivery can be planned
at a tertiary care center, enhancing safety by avoiding the requirement for postnatal transport of an unstable infant. For fetuses with
complex CHD at high risk for complications immediately at birth
(e.g., HLHS with intact atrial septum), delivery can be arranged
with an operating room and surgeon standing by. In utero treatment of CHD is an experimental procedure, with the most common
procedure being aortic balloon valvuloplasty for HLHS.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2758 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

472.5 Exercise Testing
Daniel Bernstein
The normal cardiorespiratory system adapts to the extensive
demands of exercise with a several-­fold increase in oxygen consumption and cardiac output. Because of the large reserve capacity
for exercise, significant abnormalities in cardiovascular performance may be present without symptoms at rest or during ordinary
activities. When patients are evaluated in a resting state, significant abnormalities in cardiac function may not be appreciated, or
if detected, their implications for quality of life may not be recognized. Permission for children with cardiovascular disease to participate in various forms of physical activity is frequently based on
totally subjective criteria. As the importance of aerobic exercise is
increasingly recognized, even for children with complex congenital
heart lesions, exercise testing can provide a quantitative evaluation
of the child’s ability to participate safely in both competitive and
noncompetitive sports. Exercise testing can also play an important
role in evaluating symptoms and quantitating the severity of cardiac abnormalities. In children with coronary artery abnormalities
(e.g., Kawasaki disease or COVID-­19 with coronary aneurysms),
exercise testing can detect ischemia that might otherwise be
overlooked.
In older children, exercise studies are generally performed on a
graded treadmill apparatus with timed intervals of increasing grade
and speed. In younger children, exercise studies are often performed on a bicycle ergometer. Many laboratories have the capacity to measure both cardiac and pulmonary function noninvasively
during exercise. This allows measurement of both resting and maximal oxygen consumption (Vo2max) and the point at which anaerobic
threshold is reached, which are important indicators of cardiovascular fitness.
As a child grows, the capacity for muscle work is enhanced with
increased body size and skeletal muscle mass. All indices of cardiopulmonary function do not increase in a uniform manner. A major
response to exercise is an increase in cardiac output, principally
achieved through an increase in heart rate, but stroke volume (SV),
systemic venous return, and pulse pressure are also increased. SVR
is greatly decreased as the blood vessels in working muscle dilate in
response to increasing metabolic demands. As the child becomes
older and larger, the response of the heart rate to exercise remains
prominent, but cardiac output increases because of growing cardiac volume capacity and thus SV. Responses to dynamic exercise
are not dependent solely on age. For any given body surface area,
boys have a larger SV than size-­matched girls. This increase is also
mediated by posture. Augmentation of SV with upright, dynamic
exercise is facilitated by the pumping action of working muscles,
which overcomes the static effect of gravity and increases systemic
venous return.
Dynamic exercise testing defines not only endurance and exercise capacity but also the effect of such exercise on myocardial
blood flow and cardiac rhythm. Significant ST segment depression
or elevation reflects abnormalities in myocardial perfusion, such as
might occur during exercise in children with extremely hypertrophied left ventricles. The exercise ECG is considered abnormal if
the ST segment depression is >2 mm and extends for at least 0.06
seconds after the J point (onset of the ST segment) in conjunction
with a horizontal-­, upward-­, or downward-­sloping ST segment. A
decrease in blood pressure before maximal exercise is reached is
regarded as a risk indicator in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Provocation of rhythm disturbances during an exercise
study is an important method of evaluating select patients with
known or suspected rhythm disorders. The effect of pharmacologic
management can also be tested in this manner.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

472.6 Cardiac Imaging Studies
Daniel Bernstein
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) are extremely helpful in the diagnosis and management
of patients with CHD and inflammatory lesions (Table 472.1). These
techniques produce tomographic images of the heart in any projection
(Fig. 472.26 and Fig. 472.27), with excellent contrast resolution of fat, myocardium, and lung, as well as moving blood from blood vessel walls. MRI
is useful in evaluating areas that are less well visualized by echocardiography, such as distal branch pulmonary artery anatomy and anomalies in
systemic and pulmonary venous return.
MRA allows the acquisition of images in several tomographic
planes. Within each plane, images are obtained at different phases of
the cardiac cycle. Thus when displayed in a dynamic “cine” format,
changes in wall thickening, chamber volume, and valve function can
be displayed and analyzed. Blood flow velocity and blood flow volume can be calculated. MRA is an excellent technique for following
patients serially after repair of complex CHD, such as tetralogy of
Fallot. In these patients, MRA can be used to assess RV volume and
mass and to quantify the amount of regurgitation through either
the pulmonary or tricuspid valve. Other MRI techniques, such as
myocardial delayed enhancement and tissue T1 weighting, can be
used to quantify areas of myocardial scar in patients with cardiomyopathy or in patients after CHD repair, especially tetralogy of Fallot.
Magnetic resonance spectroscopy, predominantly a research tool
at present, provides a means of demonstrating relative concentrations of high-­energy metabolites (adenosine triphosphate, adenosine diphosphate, inorganic phosphate, and phosphocreatine) within
regions of the working myocardium.
Computer processing of MRA images allows the noninvasive visualization of the cardiovascular system from inside of the heart or vessels, a technique known as fly-­through imaging. These images allow the
cardiologist to image the interiors of various cardiovascular structures
(Fig. 472.28). These techniques are especially helpful in imaging complex peripheral arterial stenoses.
CT scanning can be used to perform rapid, respiration-­gated cardiac
imaging in children with resolutions down to 0.5 mm. Three-­dimensional
reconstruction of CT images is especially useful in evaluating branch pulmonary arteries, anomalies in systemic and pulmonary venous return,
and great vessel anomalies such as coarctation of the aorta (Fig. 472.29).
Radionuclide angiography may be used to detect and quantify
shunts and to analyze the distribution of blood flow to each lung.
This technique is particularly useful in quantifying the volume
of blood flow distribution between the two lungs in patients with
abnormalities of the pulmonary vascular tree or to quantify the success of balloon angioplasty and intravascular stenting procedures.
Gated blood pool scanning can be used to calculate hemodynamic
measurements, quantify valvular regurgitation, and detect regional
wall motion abnormalities. Thallium imaging can be performed to
evaluate cardiac muscle perfusion. These methods can be used at
the bedside of seriously ill children and can be performed serially,
with minimal discomfort and low radiation exposure.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

472.7 Diagnostic and Interventional Cardiac
Catheterization
Daniel Bernstein
The catheterization laboratory, once the site for initial diagnosis of
CHD, has become the center of high-­technology interventional procedures, allowing for the nonsurgical repair or palliation of heart defects
that once required open heart surgery. Some centers have developed

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 472 u Laboratory Cardiac Evaluation

2759

Table 472.1  Cardiac MRI Assessment of Myocardial Inflammation
CAUSE

SPECIFIC CAUSE OF MECHANISM

KEY MRI FINDING

Infection

Infectious agents can induce cardiac injury by directly
infecting cardiomyocytes or through cellular or
humoral immune activation
Viral: Enteroviruses, coronaviruses, adenoviruses,
parvovirus B19, Herpesviridae 6, CMV, EBV, HIV,
influenza; SARS-­CoV-­2 can infect cardiomyocytes
by binding to the ACE2 receptor, although immune
dysregulation is likely a more prominent mechanism
of myocardial injury
Bacterial: Borrelia burgdorferi (Lyme disease),
Treponema pallidum, group A streptococcus (likely
postinfectious)
Protozoal: Trypanosoma cruzi (Chagas disease),
Toxoplasma gondii
Parasitic: Echinococcus granulosus, Trichinella spiralis

Viral myocarditis: Linear subepicardial or midwall LGE, commonly
involving the basal inferolateral wall, basal anterior septum,
mid-­inferolateral wall, and basal to mid-­inferior wall, with
corresponding T2 hyperintensity or high T2
Chagas disease: LGE present in up to 70% of patients, most
commonly at the left ventricular apex, apical inferior and lateral
wall, and basal to mid-­inferolateral wall; LGE is usually midwall or
subepicardial and, less commonly, subendocardial or transmural
with apical aneurysms
Bacterial and parasitic myocarditis: Limited data on MRI findings
with no specific pattern
COVID-­19: Findings may be similar to non-­COVID viral
myocarditis, although some studies have indicated a higher
prevalence of diffuse myocardial edema, with global elevation of
T1 and T2 mapping values

Postvaccination

mRNA COVID-­19 vaccines: Proposed mechanisms
include immune activation and dysregulation and
molecular mimicry between viral spike protein and
an unknown cardiac protein

mRNA COVID-­19 vaccination: There are currently limited MRI
data, mostly from case series to date; MRI findings appear
to be typical for viral myocarditis, although the severity and
extent of MRI abnormalities reported have been relatively mild;
axillary lymphadenopathy ipsilateral to the vaccination site may
be present and may be a useful clue, particularly if a history of
recent vaccine administration is not provided

Systemic disease

Several systemic diseases are associated with
myocardial inflammation:
Vasculitides: EGPA, Kawasaki disease
Connective tissue disorders: Systemic sclerosis, SLE,
rheumatoid arthritis, dermatomyositis
Granulomatous disease: Sarcoidosis

EGPA: MRI findings include patchy midwall and subepicardial LGE
with corresponding T2 hyperintensity and subendocardial apical
LGE with or without apical thrombus; concomitant pulmonary
opacities might be present
SLE: Patchy or linear midwall and subepicardial LGE in one
third of patients; elevated T1 and T2 value decrease after
antiinflammatory treatment; higher prevalence of pericardial
and pleural effusion and thickening than in other causes of
myocarditis
Sarcoidosis: Patchy and nodular LGE with associated high T2,
most common at the basal septum and basal inferolateral
segment; associated findings include mediastinal and hilar
lymphadenopathy and pulmonary opacities

Drug related

Hypersensitivity reactions: Penicillin, cephalosporins,
benzodiazepines, tricyclic antidepressants
Toxic reactions: Anthracyclines, amphetamines,
cyclophosphamide
Immune activation or dysregulation: ICI-­related
myocarditis

ICI-­related myocarditis: Diffusely elevated T1 and T2 values in
78% and 43% of patients, respectively; in one study, only 48% of
patients met both T1 and T2 modified Lake Louise criteria; LGE
present in 48% of patients, most commonly subepicardial or
midmyocardial, and predominating in the basal and mid-­inferior
and inferolateral segments

Other

Hypereosinophilic syndrome, cocaine, postradiation
injury, thyrotoxicosis, giant cell myocarditis

Hypereosinophilic syndrome: Similar MRI findings to EGPA, with
higher prevalence of subendocardial LGE
Giant cell myocarditis: MRI appearance is similar to cardiac
sarcoidosis, although LGE tends to be more extensive and right
ventricular involvement more common

ACE2, Angiotensin-­converting enzyme 2; CMV, cytomegalovirus; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; EGPA, eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis; ICI, immune checkpoint inhibitor; LGE,
late gadolinium enhancement; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus.
From Sanchez Tijmes F, Thavendiranathan P, Udell JA, et al. Cardiac MRI assessment of nonischemic myocardial inflammation: state of the art review and update on myocarditis
associated with COVID-­19 vaccination. Radiol Cardiothorac Imaging. 2021;3(6):e210252, Table 1.

hybrid catheterization laboratories, combining standard fluoroscopic
imaging with an operating suite, allowing combined approaches to
treat complex congenital heart lesions.

DIAGNOSTIC CARDIAC CATHETERIZATION

Diagnostic catheterization is still performed (1) to assist in the initial
diagnosis of some complex congenital heart lesions (e.g., tetralogy of
Fallot with pulmonary atresia and major aortopulmonary collateral
arteries, pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum and coronary sinusoids, HLHS with mitral stenosis); (2) in cases in which other
imaging studies are equivocal; (3) in patients for whom hemodynamic
assessment is critical (to determine the size of a left-­to-­right shunt in
borderline cases or to determine the presence or absence of pulmonary vascular disease in an older patient with a left-­to-­right shunt);
(4) between stages of repair of complex CHD (e.g., hypoplastic left or
right heart syndromes); (5) for long-­term surveillance of patients with

complex CHD (e.g., after Fontan palliation for single ventricles); (6) for
myocardial biopsy in the diagnosis of cardiomyopathy or in screening
for cardiac rejection after cardiac transplantation; and (7) for electrophysiologic study in the evaluation of cardiac arrhythmias (see Chapter
484).
Cardiac catheterization should be performed with the patient in as
close to a basal state as possible. Conscious sedation or low-­level anesthesia is routine. If a deeper level of general anesthesia is required, careful choice of an anesthetic agent is warranted to avoid depression of
cardiovascular function and subsequent distortion of the calculations
of cardiac output, PVR and SVR, and shunt ratios.
Cardiac catheterization in critically ill infants with CHD should be
performed in a center where a pediatric cardiovascular surgical team
is available in the event that an operation is required immediately
afterward. The complication rate of cardiac catheterization is greatest in critically ill infants; they must be studied in a thermally neutral

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2760 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
environment and monitored closely for hypothermia, hypoglycemia,
acidosis, or excessive blood loss.
Catheterization may be limited to the right-­sided cardiac structures, the left-­sided structures, or both the right and left sides of the
heart. The catheter is passed into the heart under fluoroscopic guidance through a percutaneous entry point in a femoral or jugular vein.
In infants and in a number of older children, the left side of the heart
can be accessed by passing the catheter across a patent foramen ovale
to the left atrium and left ventricle. If the foramen is closed, the left

side of the heart can be catheterized by passing the catheter retrograde
via a percutaneous entry site in the femoral artery or, if necessary, via
a transatrial septal puncture. The catheter can also be manipulated
through abnormal intracardiac defects (ASD, VSD). Blood samples are
obtained for measuring oxygen saturation in each cardiac chamber or
blood vessel, allowing the calculation of shunt volumes. Pressures are
measured for gradients across septal defects or valves and for calculating valve areas. Radiopaque contrast is injected to delineate cardiac and
vascular structures. A catheter with a thermosensor tip (Swan-­Ganz
catheter) can be used to measure cardiac output by thermodilution.
Specialized catheters can be used to measure more sophisticated indices of cardiac function; those with pressure-­transducer tips can measure the first derivative of LV pressure (dP/dt). Conductance catheters
can be used to generate pressure-­volume loops, from which indices
of both contractility (end-­systolic elastance) and relaxation can be

LCA
BV
MPA

AO

LV
RV

LA

Fig. 472.26 Normal sagittal MRI. AO, Aorta; BV, brachiocephalic
vein; LA, left atrium; LCA, left coronary artery; LV, left ventricle; MPA,
main pulmonary artery; RV, right ventricle. (From Bisset GS III. Cardiac
and great vessel anatomy. In: El-­Khoury GY, Bergman RA, Montgomery
WJ, eds. Sectional Anatomy by MRI/CT. New York: Churchill Livingstone; 1990.)

Fig. 472.28 Fly-­through CT imaging in a patient with an aberrant

right subclavian artery. Compression of the trachea by the aberrant artery can be visualized.

Fig 472.27 Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMRI) findings in a patient with mRNA vaccine-associated myocarditis. Patient presented to
hospital 2 days after the second COVID-19 mRNA vaccine with chest pain. Troponin T was elevated at 105 ng/L (normal < 15 ng/L). A, CMRI demonstrated normal left ventricular function. B, T1 mapping suggested myocardial edema in the inferoseptum and inferior segments (arrows) with corresponding nonischemic scar on late gadolinium enhancement imaging (C, arrows). (From Crosier R, Kafil TS, Paterson DI. Imaging for Cardiovascular
Complications of COVID-19: Cardiac Manifestations in Context. Can J Cardiol. 2023;39:779–792. Fig. 7.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 472 u Laboratory Cardiac Evaluation

THERMODILUTION MEASUREMENT OF CARDIAC
OUTPUT

AAo

MPA

The thermodilution method for measuring cardiac output is performed with a flow-­directed, thermistor-­tipped Swan-­Ganz catheter.
A known change in the heat content of the blood is induced at one
point in the circulation (usually the right atrium or inferior vena
cava) by injecting room-­temperature saline, and the resultant change
in temperature is detected at a point downstream (usually the pulmonary artery). This method is used to measure cardiac output in
the catheterization laboratory in patients without shunts. Monitoring cardiac output by the thermodilution method can occasionally be
useful in managing critically ill infants and children in an intensive
care setting after cardiac surgery or in the presence of shock. In this
case, a triple-­lumen catheter is used for both cardiac output determination and measurement of pulmonary artery and pulmonary capillary wedge pressures.

RAA

RPA
LA
DAo

Fig. 472.29 Three-­dimensional reconstruction of CT images from a

neonate with severe coarctation of the aorta. The patent ductus arteriosus can be seen toward the left leading from the main pulmonary artery
to the descending aorta. The tortuous and narrow coarctated segment
is just to the right of the ductus. The transverse aorta is hypoplastic as
well. AAo, Ascending aorta; DAo, descending aorta; LA, left atrium;
MPA, main pulmonary artery; RAA, right atrial appendage; RPA, right
pulmonary artery. (Courtesy Dr. Paul Pitlick, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.)
O2 consumption 160 mL/min
O2 consumption 200 mL/min/M2
O2 capacity
200 mL/L
O2 % saturation
O2 content
mL/L

Pressures
(mm Hg)

(

Left Side
Pressures
(mm Hg)

(

Right Side

Vena cava

Pulmonary vein
95%

75%

Atrium

Atrium

M3

M8

95%

75%

Ventricle

Ventricle

25
3
Pulmonary artery
25
10
M  16

75%

95%

75%

95%

2761

100
8
Aorta
100
60
M  83

“Pulmonary capillaries”

ANGIOCARDIOGRAPHY

The major blood vessels and individual cardiac chambers may be
visualized by selective injection of contrast material into specific
chambers or great vessels. Fluoroscopy is used to visualize the
catheter as it passes through the various heart chambers. After the
cardiac catheter is properly placed in the chamber to be studied,
contrast medium is injected with a power injector and cineangiograms are exposed. Modern catheterization labs use digital imaging
technology, allowing for a significant reduction in radiation exposure. Biplane cineangiocardiography allows detailed evaluation of
specific cardiac chambers and blood vessels in two planes simultaneously with the injection of a single bolus of contrast material.
Various angled views (e.g., left anterior oblique, cranial angulation)
are used to display specific anatomic features optimally in individual lesions.
Rapid injection of contrast medium under pressure into the circulation is not without risk, and each injection should be carefully
planned. Contrast agents consist of hypertonic solutions, with some
containing organic iodides, which can cause complications, including nausea, a generalized burning sensation, central nervous system
symptoms, renal insufficiency, and allergic reactions. For patients
with known renal insufficiency who require angiography, there
are protocols to protect the kidneys involving prehydration and
medications. Hypertonicity of the contrast medium may result in
transient myocardial depression and a drop in blood pressure, followed soon afterward by tachycardia, an increase in cardiac output,
and a shift of interstitial fluid into the circulation. This shift can
transiently increase the symptoms of heart failure in critically ill
patients.

INTERVENTIONAL CARDIAC CATHETERIZATION

M8
B.S.A. – 0.8 m2
Pulmonary flow
L/min/M2

5

5

Pulmonary resistance
mm Hg/L/min/M2

2

16

Shunt
L/min/M2

Systemic flow
L/min/M2
Systemic resistance
mm Hg/L/min/M2

L

R

0

R

L

0

Fig. 472.30 Diagram of normal circulatory dynamics with pressure
readings, oxygen content, and percent saturation. B.S.A., body surface
area. (Modified from Nadas AS, Fyler DC. Pediatric Cardiology, 3rd ed.
Philadelphia: Saunders; 1972.)

derived, although these are almost exclusively used in research studies.
Complete hemodynamics can be calculated, including cardiac output,
intracardiac left-­to-­right and right-­to-­left shunts, and SVR and PVR.
Figure 472.30 depicts normal circulatory dynamics.

Catheter treatment is the standard of practice for most cases of isolated pulmonary or aortic valve stenosis and for recoarctation of the
aorta. A special catheter with a sausage-­shaped balloon at the distal
end is passed through the obstructed valve. Rapid filling of the balloon with a mixture of contrast material and saline solution results
in tearing of the stenotic valve tissue, usually at the site of inappropriately fused raphe. Valvular pulmonary stenosis can be treated
successfully by balloon angioplasty; in most patients, angioplasty
has replaced surgical repair as the initial procedure of choice. The
clinical results of this procedure are similar to those obtained by
open heart surgery, but without the need for sternotomy or prolonged hospitalization. Balloon valvuloplasty for aortic stenosis
has also yielded excellent results, although, as with surgery, aortic
stenosis often recurs as the child grows, and multiple procedures
may thus be required. One complication of both valvuloplasty and
surgery is the creation of valvular insufficiency. This complication
has more serious implications when it occurs on the aortic vs the
pulmonary side of the circulation because regurgitation is less well
tolerated at systemic arterial pressures.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2762 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

Stent

Fig. 472.32 Illustration of implantation of a Melody stent-­valve delivered to the pulmonary position by a catheter inserted into the right
femoral vein. (Copyright Medtronic 2017, used with permission.)

Fig. 472.31 Descending aortic angiogram showing intravascular
stent placed in the descending aorta for treatment of recurrent coarctation of the aorta.

Balloon angioplasty is the procedure of choice for patients
with restenosis of coarctation of the aorta after earlier surgery. It
remains controversial whether angioplasty is the best procedure for
native (unoperated) coarctation of the aorta in the infant because of
greater recurrence risk and reports of late aneurysm formation, and
most centers still refer primary coarctation in infants and young
children for surgical repair. However, in older patients with previously undiagnosed coarctation, especially those with decreased LV
function, primary angioplasty with stent placement may be considered. Other applications of the balloon angioplasty technique
include amelioration of mitral stenosis, dilation of surgical conduits
(e.g., RV-­PA conduits), relief of branch pulmonary artery (PA) narrowing, dilation of systemic or pulmonary venous obstructions, and
the pioneering balloon atrial septostomy (Rashkind procedure) for
transposition of the great arteries (see Chapter 480.2).
Interventional catheterization techniques are being adapted for
use in the fetus with lesions such as aortic stenosis to prevent their
progression to more complex lesions such as HLHS. In these procedures, after administration of appropriate anesthesia, a needle is
passed through the maternal abdominal wall, the uterine wall, and
the fetal chest wall and directly into the fetal left ventricle (see Fig.
480.13). A coronary angioplasty balloon catheter is passed through
the needle and across the stenotic aortic valve, which is then dilated.
With the restoration of normal LV blood flow, it is hoped that normal LV growth potential is restored. Midterm results with this
technique in a growing number of patients continue to show mixed
results, with good ventricular growth leading to a two-­ventricle circulation in approximately 25% of highly preselected patients.
In patients with branch pulmonary artery stenoses, intravascular
stents are delivered over a balloon catheter and expanded within the
vessel lumen (Fig. 472.31). Once placed, the stents can often be dilated
to successively greater sizes as the patient grows, although their use
in younger infants and children is limited by the extent they can be
further expanded.

Closure of a small patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) is routinely
achieved with catheter-­delivered coils (see Fig. 475.11), whereas a
larger PDA can be closed with a variety of sandwich-­type devices.
Closure of anomalous vascular connections (coronary fistulas, venovenous collaterals in cyanotic heart lesions) can also be
achieved using coils. Secundum ASDs are now routinely closed
with a double disk occluder (e.g., Amplatzer) device (see Fig.
475.3). Versions of these devices are currently in clinical trials for
closure of surgically difficult-­to-­reach muscular VSDs and for the
more common perimembranous VSD. Catheter-­delivered devices
may also be used as an adjunct to complex surgical repairs (e.g.,
dilation or stenting of branch pulmonary artery or pulmonary vein
stenosis). High-­risk patients undergoing the Fontan operation (see
Fig. 479.9) often have a small fenestration created between the right
and left sides of the circulation to serve as a “pop-­off valve” for high
right-­sided pressure in the early surgical period. Patients with these
“fenestrated Fontans” are usually candidates for subsequent closure
of the fenestration with a catheter-­delivered device.
One of the greatest advances in interventional catheterization
over the past decade has been transcatheter valve implantation.
Typically, a porcine valve is sewn into an expandable stent (commercially available), which is then collapsed around a balloon catheter.
The device is positioned across a stenotic or insufficient pulmonary
or aortic valve and the balloon inflated, expanding both the stent
and the tissue valve. The balloon catheter is then removed, leaving
the new valve in place, well anchored by the stent to the walls of
the main pulmonary artery or aorta. At this time, the most common application in children is replacement of the pulmonary valve
(Melody or Harmony Valve) in patients who have had prior surgery
for tetralogy of Fallot (usually because of residual pulmonary insufficiency) (Fig. 472.32). In older adults, the most common application is replacement of a stenotic aortic valve (transcatheter aortic
valve replacement or TAVR). Stent valves have even been placed in
the tricuspid position in children with tricuspid insufficiency. For
older patients with mitral and tricuspid valve insufficiency, a clip
device (Mitraclip) can be delivered by catheter to create a double-­
orifice valve, reducing the amount of insufficiency.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 473 u Epidemiology and Genetic Basis of Congenital Heart Disease

Section 3

Congenital Heart
Disease
Chapter 473

Epidemiology and Genetic
Basis of Congenital Heart
Disease
Daniel Bernstein
Congenital heart disease (CHD) occurs in approximately 0.6–1.3%
of live births. The incidence is higher in stillborns (3–4%), spontaneous abortuses (10–25%), and premature infants (approximately 2%,
excluding patent ductus arteriosus [PDA]). This overall incidence does
not include mitral valve prolapse, PDA of preterm infants, and bicuspid aortic valve (present in 1–2% of adults). Congenital cardiac defects
have a wide spectrum of severity in infants: approximately 2-­3 in 1,000
newborn infants will be symptomatic with heart disease in the first
year of life. The diagnosis is established by 1 week of age in 40–50% of
patients with CHD and by 1 month of age in 50–60%. Approximately
13% of infants with CHD have associated extracardiac malformations.
With advances in both corrective and palliative surgery, 90% of children with CHD survive to adulthood, and in the United States, there
are more adults living with CHD than there are children with CHD.
Despite these advances, CHD remains the leading cause of death in
children with congenital malformations. When patients with repaired
or palliated CHD reach older adulthood, the risk of morbidity and
mortality begins to increase (see Chapter 483.1). Table 473.1 summarizes the relative frequency of the most common congenital cardiac
lesions.
Most congenital defects are well tolerated in the fetus because of
the parallel nature of the fetal circulation. Even the most severe cardiac defects, such as hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS), can
usually be well compensated for by the fetal circulation. In HLHS the
entire fetal cardiac output is ejected by the right ventricle via the ductus
arteriosus into both the descending and ascending aortae (the latter
filling in a retrograde fashion), so that fetal organ blood flow is minimally perturbed. Because the placenta provides for gas exchange and
the normal fetal circulation has mixing between more highly and more
poorly oxygenated blood at the foramen ovale and ductus arteriosus,
fetal organ oxygen delivery is also not dramatically affected. It is only
after birth, when the fetal pathways begin to close and the umbilical
cord is cut, that the full hemodynamic impact of an anatomic abnormality becomes apparent. One notable exception is the case of severe
regurgitant lesions, most frequently of the tricuspid valve. In these
lesions, such as Ebstein anomaly of the tricuspid valve or severe right
ventricular outflow obstruction (see Chapter 479.7), the parallel fetal
circulation cannot compensate for the severe volume or pressure load
imposed on the right side of the heart. In utero heart failure, often with
fetal pleural and pericardial effusions, and generalized ascites (nonimmune hydrops fetalis) may occur.
Although the most significant transitions in the circulation occur in
the immediate perinatal period, the circulation continues to undergo
changes after birth, and these later changes may also have a hemodynamic impact on cardiac lesions and their apparent incidence. When
pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) falls in the first several weeks of
life, left-­to-­right shunting through intracardiac defects increases and

2763

symptoms and signs become more apparent. Thus in patients with a
ventricular septal defect (VSD), heart failure is often first noticed
between 1 and 3 months of age (see Chapter 475.6) and not in the
immediate newborn period. The severity of various defects can also
change dramatically with growth; some VSDs may become smaller and
even close as the child ages. Alternatively, stenosis of the aortic or pulmonary valve, which may be only moderate in the newborn period,
may become worse if valve orifice growth does not keep pace with
patient growth (see Chapter 476.5). The physician should always be
alert for associated noncardiac congenital malformations, which can
adversely affect the patient’s prognosis (Tables 473.2 and 473.3). Developmental delay of various degrees is also a concern in many patients
with CHD and may have its origins in alterations in fetal blood flow
patterns caused by the heart defect, postnatal hypoxemia, and the
effects of cardiopulmonary bypass during open heart surgery.

ETIOLOGY

The cause of most congenital heart defects is still unknown. Many
cases of CHD are multifactorial and may result from a combination of
genetic predisposition and an as-­yet-­to-­be-­determined environmental stimulus. Overall, variants in approximately 400 genes have been
identified as potentially causative of CHD. Despite these advances,
half of cases still lack a known genetic cause. A small percentage of
congenital heart lesions are related to known chromosomal abnormalities, in particular, trisomies 21, 13, and 18 and Turner syndrome; heart
disease is found in >90% of patients with trisomy 18, 50% of patients
with trisomy 21, and 40% of those with Turner syndrome (see Table
473.3). Ethnic factors may have a role in CHD; certain types of VSDs
(supracristal) are more common in Asian children. There are also
male:female differences for many common forms of CHD. The risk of
CHD increases if a first-­degree relative (parent or sibling) is affected,
again emphasizing the role of genetics, even if the individual genes
have not yet been identified.
A growing list of congenital heart lesions has been associated with
specific chromosomal abnormalities, and several have even been linked
to specific gene defects (see Table 473.3 and Table 473.4). Fluorescence
Table 473.1  Relative Frequency of Major Congenital
Heart Lesions*
LESION

% OF ALL LESIONS

Ventricular septal defect

35–30

Atrial septal defect (secundum)

6–8

Patent ductus arteriosus

6–8

Coarctation of aorta

5–7

Tetralogy of Fallot

5–7

Pulmonary valve stenosis

5–7

Aortic valve stenosis

4–7

d-­Transposition of great arteries

3–5

Hypoplastic left ventricle

1–3

Hypoplastic right ventricle

1–3

Truncus arteriosus

1–2

Total anomalous pulmonary
venous return

1–2

Tricuspid atresia

1–2

Single ventricle

1–2

Double-­outlet right ventricle

1–2

Others

5–10

*Excluding patent ductus arteriosus in preterm neonates, bicuspid aortic valve,
physiologic peripheral pulmonic stenosis, and mitral valve prolapse.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2764 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 473.2  Genes and Loci Associated with Congenital Heart Disease
SYNDROME

GENE(S)

LOCI

CARDIAC DISEASE

CONGENITAL
HD (%)

Alagille

JAG 1
NOTCH2

20p12.2
1p12-­p11

PPS, TOF, PA

>90

Bile duct paucity, posterior
embryotoxon, butterfly
vertebrae, renal defects

CFC

BRAF
KRAS
MAP2K1
MAP2K2

7q34
12p12.1
15q22.31
19p13.3

PVS, ASD, HCM

75

Curly hair, sparse eyebrows,
feeding problems,
developmental delay,
intellectual disability

Cantu

ABCC9

12p12.1

PDA, BAV, HCM, CoA,
PE, AS

75

Hypertrichosis at birth,
macrocephaly, narrow thorax,
coarse facies, macroglossia,
broad hands, advanced bone
age

Char

TFAP2B

6p12.3

PDA, VSD

58

Wide-­set eyes, down-­slanting
palpebral fissures, thick lips,
hand anomalies

CHARGE

CHD7

8q12

TOF, PDA, DORV,
AVSD, VSD

75–85

Coloboma, choanal atresia,
genital hypoplasia, ear
anomalies, hearing loss,
developmental delay, poor
growth, intellectual disability

Costello

HRAS

11p15.5

PVS, ASD, VSD, HCM,
arrhythmias

44–52

Short stature, feeding problems,
broad facies, bitemporal
narrowing, redundant skin,
intellectual disability

22q11.2DS

TBX1

22q11.2
deletion

Conotruncal defects,
VSD, IAA, ASD, VR

74–85

Cleft palate, bifid uvula,
velopharyngeal insufficiency,
microcephaly, hypocalcemia,
immune deficit, psychiatric
disorder, learning disability

Ellis-­van Creveld

EVC
EVC2

4p16.2
4p16.2

Common atrium

60

Skeletal dysplasia, short limbs,
polydactyly, short ribs,
dysplastic nails, respiratory
insufficiency

Holt-­Oram

TBX5

12q24.1

VSD, ASD, AVSD,
conduction defects

50

Absent, hypoplastic, or
triphalangeal thumbs;
phocomelia; defects of radius;
limb defects more prominent
on left

Kabuki

KMT2D
KDM6A

12q13
Xp11.3

CoA, BAV, VSD, TOF,
TGA, HLHS

50

Growth deficiency, wide
palpebral fissures, large
protuberant ears, fetal finger
pads, intellectual disability,
clinodactyly

Noonan

PTPN11
SOS1
RAF1
KRAS
NRAS
RIT1
SHOC2
SOS2
BRAF

12q24.13
2p22.1
3p25.2
12p12.1
1p13.2
1q22
10q25.2
14q21.3
7q34

Dysplastic PVS, ASD,
TOF, AVSD, HCM,
VSD, PDA

75

Short stature, hypertelorism,
down-­slanting palpebral
fissures, ptosis, low posterior
hairline, pectus deformity,
bleeding disorder, chylothorax,
cryptorchidism

VACTERL
association

Unknown

VSD, ASD, HLHS, PDA,
TGA, TOF, TA

53–80

Vertebral anomalies, anal
atresia, tracheoesophageal
fistula, renal anomalies, radial
dysplasia, thumb hypoplasia,
single umbilical artery

Williams-­Beuren

7q11.23
deletion (ELN)

7q11.23

SVAS, PAS, VSD, ASD

80

Unusual facies, thick lips,
strabismus, stellate iris pattern,
intellectual disability

Carpenter

RAB23

6p11.2

VSD, ASD, PDA, PS,
TOF, TGA

50

Craniosynostosis, brachydactyly,
syndactyly, polydactyly, obesity

OTHER CLINICAL FINDINGS

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 473 u Epidemiology and Genetic Basis of Congenital Heart Disease

2765

Table 473.2  Genes and Loci Associated with Congenital Heart Disease—cont’d
CONGENITAL
HD (%)

SYNDROME

GENE(S)

LOCI

CARDIAC DISEASE

Coffin-­Siris

ARID1B
SMARCB1
ARID1A
SMARCB1
SMARCA4
SMARCE1

6q25
22q11
1p36.1
22q11.23
19p13.2
17q21.2

ASD, AVSD, VSD, MR,
PDA, PS, DEX, AS

20–44

OTHER CLINICAL FINDINGS
Developmental delay, coarse
facies, hypoplastic distal
phalanges, short stature,
intellectual disability

Cornelia de
Lange

NIPBL
SMC1L1
SMC3

5p13
Xp11.22
10q25

PVS, VSD, ASD, PDA

33

Microbrachycephaly, synophrys,
arching eyebrows, growth
retardation, intellectual
disability, micromelia

Goldenhar

Unknown

VSD, PDA, TOF, CoA,
conotruncal defects

32

Hemifacial microsomia,
epibulbar dermoids, microtia,
hemivertebrae

Mowat-­Wilson

ZEB2

2q22.3

VSD, CoA, ASD, PDA,
PAS

54

Short stature, microcephaly,
Hirschsprung disease,
intellectual disability, seizures

Rubinstein-­Taybi

CBP
EP300

16p13.3
22q13.2

PDA, VSD, ASD, HLHS,
BAV

33

Microcephaly, growth
retardation, down-­slanting
palpebral fissures, low-­set
malformed ears, prominent
or beaked nose, intellectual
disability, broad thumbs and
toes

Smith-­Lemli-­
Opitz

DHCR7

11q12-­13

AVSD, HLHS, ASD,
PDA, VSD

50

Microcephaly, ptosis, genital
anomalies, renal anomalies,
broad nasal tip with anteverted
nostrils, intellectual disability,
syndactyly

Adams-­Oliver

ARHGAP31
DOCK6
RBPJ
EOGT
NOTCH1
DLL4

3q13
19p13.2
4p15.2
3p14.1
9q34.3
15q15.1

ASD, VSD, CoA, HLHS,
DORV

20

Aplasia cutis congenita, terminal
transverse defects of hands,
fingers, toes, feet

Baller-­Gerold

RECQL4

8q24.3

VSD, TOF, subaortic
disease

25

Craniosynostosis, micrognathia,
small mouth, radial aplasia/
hypoplasia, imperforate anus,
renal anomalies

Beckwith-­
Wiedemann

CDKNIC

11p15.4

VSD, HLHS, PS

6.5

Macrosomia, macroglossia,
omphalocele, risk of
malignancy

Coffin-­Lowry

RSK2

Xp22.2

LVNC, MVP, AVA

5–14

Growth deficiency, coarse facies,
everted lower lip, hypodontia,
intellectual disability

Duane-­radial ray
(Okihiro)

SALL4

20q13.2

ASD, PVS, VSD

<10

Unilateral or bilateral Duane
anomaly, hypoplasia of
thumbs, hypoplastic radius and
ulna, renal malformations, ear
anomalies

Fragile X

FMR1

Xq27.3

MVP, aortic dilation

<10

Macrocephaly, intellectual
disability, hand flapping,
speech abnormality,
autism spectrum disorder,
macroorchidism, seizures,
prominent forehead, large ears

Nance-­Horan

NHS

Xp22.13

TOF, VSD, PDA

<10

Congenital cataracts,
strabismus, peg-­shaped
supernumerary teeth, other
dental anomalies, prominent
ears, brachymetacarpalia
Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2766 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 473.2  Genes and Loci Associated with Congenital Heart Disease—cont’d
CONGENITAL
HD (%)

SYNDROME

GENE(S)

LOCI

CARDIAC DISEASE

OTHER CLINICAL FINDINGS

Peter’s Plus

B3GALTL

13q12.3

ASD, VSD, PVS, BPV,
subvalvular AS

<30

Short limb growth deficiency,
intellectual disability, autism
spectrum disorder, prominent
forehead, cupid’s bow upper
lip, cleft lip ± cleft palate,
Peter’s anomaly, cataracts,
hydronephrosis

Roberts

ESC02

8p21.1

ASD, AS

<20

Growth deficiency of prenatal
onset, cleft lip ± cleft palate,
hypertelorism, sparse hair,
hypomelia with variable
limb reduction defects,
cryptorchidism

Robinow

RDR2 (AR)
WNT5A (AD)

9q22

RVOTO

29 AD
13 AR

Macrocephaly, frontal bossing,
prominent eyes, small
upturned nose, short forearms,
hemivertebrae, hypoplastic
phalanges of hands and toes,
hypoplastic genitalia

Saethre-­Chotzen

TWIST

7p21p22

VSD

<10

Craniosynostosis, brachycephaly,
high flat forehead,
hypertelorism, ptosis, partial
cutaneous syndactyly, broad
great toes, strabismus

Short rib
polydactyly
type I

DYNC2H1

11q22.3

TGA, DORV, DOLV,
AVSD, HRH

<25

Short stature, postaxial
polydactyly of hands or feet,
short horizontal ribs, small
iliac bones, polycystic kidneys,
early death from respiratory
insufficiency

Simpson-­Golabi-­
Behmel

GPC3

Xq26.2

TGA, VSD, PVS, CoA,
AS, PDA, BAV, CM

26

Macrosomia, coarse
face, macroglossia,
hepatosplenomegaly,
nephromegaly, variable
cognitive disability

Sotos

NSD1

5q35.3

ASD, PDA, VSD

21

Excessive size, large hands and
feet, prominent forehead,
hypotonia, variable intellectual
disability, scoliosis, advanced
bone age

Townes-­Brocks

SALL1

16p12.1

ASD, TOF, VSD, TA, PA,
PDA

14–25

Auricular anomalies, preauricular
tags, hearing loss, thumb
hypoplasia/polydactyly,
imperforate anus, renal
agenesis, multicystic kidney,
microphthalmia

22q11.2DS, 22q11.2 deletion syndrome; AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; AS, aortic stenosis; ASD, atrial septal defect; AVA, aortic valve anomaly; AVSD,
atrioventricular septal defect; BAV, bicuspid aortic valve; BPV, bicuspid pulmonary valve; CFC, cardiofaciocutaneous; CHARGE, coloboma, heart defects, choanal atresia, retarded
growth and development, genital anomalies, and ear anomalies; CM, cardiomyopathy; CoA, coarctation of the aorta; DEX, dextrocardia; DOLV, double-­outlet left ventricle;
DORV, double-­outlet right ventricle; HCM, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; HD, heart disease; HLHS, hypoplastic left heart; HRH, hypoplastic right heart; IAA, interruption of aortic
arch; LVNC, left ventricular noncompaction; MR, mitral regurgitation; MVP, mitral valve prolapse; PA, pulmonary atresia; PAS, pulmonary artery stenosis; PDA, patent ductus
arteriosus; PE, pericardial effusion; PPS, peripheral pulmonary stenosis; PS, pulmonary stenosis; PVS, pulmonary stenosis; RVOTO, right ventricular outflow tract obstruction; SVAS,
supravalvular aortic stenosis; TA, truncus arteriosus; TGA, transposition of great arteries; TOF, tetralogy of Fallot; VACTERL, association of vertebral defects, anal atresia, cardiac
defects, tracheoesophageal fistula, renal and limb anomalies; VR, vascular ring; VSD, ventricular septal defect.
From Pierpont ME, Brueckner M, Chung WK, et al. Genetic basis for congenital heart disease: revisited: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation.
2018;138(21):e653–e711, Table 5.

in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis allows rapid screening of suspected cases if a specific chromosomal abnormality is suspected.
Chromosome microarray tools, including array comparative genome
hybridization and single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) arrays,
have identified copy number variations (microdeletions or microduplications) or SNPs in many patients with CHD and suspicion of a
congenital anomaly syndrome. These variants are submicroscopic and
thus not visible on routine chromosome analysis. Comparative genome
hybridization has in many cases replaced routine karyotyping in the

clinical workup of newborns with CHD. Overall, 25% of cases of CHD
can be associated with a gene alteration using these methodologies.
Whole exome and whole genome sequencing are available for clinical
genetic evaluations. The advantage of whole genome sequencing is that
it allows the assessment of noncoding DNA sequences, which could
participate in the regulation of gene expression of cardiac developmental gene pathways (Table 473.5).
A well-­characterized genetic cause of CHD is the deletion of a large
region (1.5-­3 Mb) of chromosome 22q11.2, known as the DiGeorge

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 473 u Epidemiology and Genetic Basis of Congenital Heart Disease

2767

Table 473.3  Chromosomal Aneuploidies and Copy Number Variants Associated with Congenital Heart Disease
PERCENT WITH
CONGENITAL HD

HEART ANOMALY

I. ANEUPLOIDES (IDENTIFIABLE BY ROUTINE KARYOTYPE)
Trisomy 8 mosaicism
Widely spaced eyes, broad nasal bridge, small
jaw, high arched palate, cryptorchidism, renal
anomalies, skeletal/vertebral anomalies

25

VSD, PDA, CoA, PVS, TAPVR, TrA

Trisomy 9/mosaicism

Prenatal and postnatal growth restriction,
microcephaly, deep-­set eyes, low-­set ears,
severe intellectual disability

65

PDA, LSVC, VSD, TOF/PA, DORV

Trisomy 13 (Patau syndrome)

Cleft lip and palate, scalp defects, hypotelorism,
microphthalmia or anophthalmia, colobomata
of irides, holoprosencephaly, microcephaly,
deafness, severe intellectual disability, rib
abnormalities, polydactyly, omphalocele, renal
abnormalities, hypospadias, cryptorchidism,
uterine abnormalities

57–80

ASD, VSD, PDA, HLHS, laterality
defects, atrial isomerism

Trisomy 18 (Edwards syndrome)

IUGR, polyhydramnios, micrognathia, short
sternum, hypertonia, rocker-­bottom feet,
overlapping fingers and toes, TEF, CDH,
omphalocele, renal anomalies, biliary atresia,
severe intellectual disability

80–90

ASD, VSD, PDA, TOF, DORV, TGA,
CoA, BAV, BPV, polyvalvular
nodular dysplasia

Trisomy 21 (Down syndrome)

Hypotonia, hyperextensibility, epicanthal folds,
up-­slanting palpebral fissures, single palmar
transverse crease, clinodactyly of fifth finger,
brachydactyly, variable intellectual disability,
premature aging

40–50

AVSD, VSD, ASD, (TOF, TGA less
common)

Monosomy X (Turner syndrome,
45,X)

Lymphedema of hands and feet, widely
spaced hypoplastic nipples, webbed neck,
primary amenorrhea, short stature, normal
intelligence, or mild learning disability

23–35

CoA, BAV, AS, HLHS, aortic
dissection

CHROMOSOME CHANGE

MAIN FEATURES

II. CHROMOSOME ABNORMALITIES (IDENTIFIABLE ON KARYOTYPE AND CHROMOSOMAL MICROARRAY)
3p25 deletion
Prenatal and postnatal growth deficiency,
33
VSD, AVSD, tricuspid atresia
polydactyly, microcephaly, intellectual
disability, renal anomalies
Deletion 4p16.3 (Wolf-­Hirschhorn
syndrome)

Microcephaly, widely spaced eyes, broad
50–65
nasal bridge (Greek helmet appearance),
downturned mouth, micrognathia, preauricular
skin tags, severe intellectual disability,
seizures, poor growth

ASD, VSD, PDA, LSVC, aortic
atresia, dextrocardia, TOF,
tricuspid atresia

Deletion 4q

Growth restriction, intellectual disability, cleft
palate, broad nasal bridge, micrognathia,
abnormal ears, genitourinary defects

50

VSD, PDA, AS, ASD, TOF, CoA

Deletion 5p (cri-­du-­chat)

Catlike cry, prenatal and postnatal growth
restriction, round face, widely spaced eyes,
epicanthal folds, single palmar transverse
crease, severe intellectual disability

30–60

VSD, ASD, PDA

Deletion 9p syndrome

Craniosynostosis, trigonocephaly, up-­slanting
palpebral fissures, abnormal ear pinnae,
scoliosis, micropenis, cryptorchidism,
intellectual disability

35–50

VSD, PDA, PVS

Deletion 10p

Frontal bossing, short down-­slanting palpebral
fissures, small low-­set ears, micrognathia, cleft
palate, short neck, urinary/genital and upper-­
limb anomalies

42

BAV, ASD, VSD, PDA, PVS, CoA

Duplication 10q24-­qter

Prenatal growth restriction, intellectual
disability, camptodactyly, renal anomalies,
cryptorchidism

50

AVSD, VSD

70

PDA, VSD, ASD, BAV, Ebstein
anomaly, noncompaction
cardiomyopathy

III. COPY NUMBER VARIANTS (IDENTIFIABLE BY CHROMOSOMAL MICROARRY)
1p36 deletion
Growth deficiency, intellectual disability,
microcephaly, deep-­set eyes, low-­set ears,
hearing loss, hypotonia, seizures, CNS defects,
genital anomalies

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2768 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 473.3  Chromosomal Aneuploidies and Copy Number Variants Associated with Congenital Heart Disease—cont’d
PERCENT WITH
CONGENITAL HD

HEART ANOMALY

Short stature, microcephaly, colobomas,
microphthalmia, hearing loss, seizures,
mild intellectual disability, autism spectrum
disorder, skeletal malformations

N/A

PDA, VSD, ASD, TrA, TOF

1q21.1 duplication

Large head size, hemivertebrae, variable
intellectual disability, variable autistic features,
hypospadias, clubfoot

N/A

TOF, TGA, PVS

1q41q42 microdeletion

Growth restriction, intellectual disability,
microcephaly, diaphragmatic hernia, seizures,
short limbs

40

BAV, ASD, VSD, TGA

1q43q44 microdeletion

Prenatal and postnatal poor growth, intellectual
disability, limited speech, microcephaly, deep-­
set eyes, microcephaly, large low-­set ears, cleft
palate, agenesis of corpus callosum

N/A

VSD, CoA, HLHS

2q31.1 microdeletion

Prenatal and postnatal poor growth, large
ventricles, microcephaly, narrow forehead,
down-­slanting palpebral fissures, cleft palate/
cleft lip, limb defects, hypoplastic genitalia

25

VSD, ASD, PDA

2q37 microdeletion

Short stature, obesity, intellectual disability,
sparse hair, arched eyebrows, epicanthal
folds, thin upper lip, small hands and feet,
clinodactyly

30

VSD, ASD, CoA, hypoplastic aortic
arch

Deletion 7q11.23 (Williams-Beuren
syndrome)

Infantile hypercalcemia, skeletal and renal
anomalies, cognitive deficits, “social”
personality, elfin facies

53–85

Supravalvar AS and PS, PPS

8p23.1 deletion

Microcephaly, poor growth, deep-­set eyes,
malformed ears, small chin, genital anomalies
in males, intellectual disability

50–75

AVSD, PVS, VSD, TOF

9q34.3 Subtelomeric deletion
(Kleefstra syndrome)

Short stature, obesity, intellectual disability,
microcephaly, behavior abnormalities, brain
anomalies, hypertelorism, arched eyebrows,
midface hypoplasia

31–44

ASD, VSD, TOF, pulmonary arterial
stenosis

Deletion 11q (Jacobsen
syndrome)

Growth restriction, developmental delay,
thrombocytopenia, platelet dysfunction,
widely spaced eyes, strabismus, broad nasal
bridge, thin upper lip, prominent forehead,
intellectual disability

56

HLHS, AS, VSD, CoA, Shone
complex

15q24 microdeletion

Prenatal and postnatal growth restriction,
intellectual disability, abnormal corpus
callosum, microcephaly, high forehead,
down-­slanting palpebral fissures, tapered
eyebrows, abnormal ear pinnae, hearing loss,
hypospadias, scoliosis, coloboma, strabismus

40

PDA, pulmonary arterial stenosis,
PVS

16p11.2p12.2 microdeletion

Hypotonia, intellectual disability, long narrow
face, deep-­set eyes, low-­set malformed ears

33

TOF, BAV, pulmonary atresia

17q21 microdeletion

Abnormal hair pigmentation, up-­slanting
palpebral fissures, epicanthal folds, bulbous
nasal tip, strabismus, ptosis, long slender
fingers, hip dislocation, renal anomalies,
spine deformities, cryptorchidism, global
developmental delay

27

PVS, ASD, VSD, BAV

Deletion 20p12 (Alagille
syndrome)

Bile duct paucity, cholestasis, skeletal or ocular
anomalies, broad forehead, widely spaced
eyes, underdeveloped mandible

85–94

Peripheral PA hypoplasia, TOF,
PVS (left-­sided heart lesions and
septal defects less common)

75

IAA-­B, TrA, isolated aortic arch
anomalies, TOF, conoventricular
VSD

CHROMOSOME CHANGE

MAIN FEATURES

1q21.1 deletion

22q11.2DS (DiGeorge,
Hypertelorism, micrognathia, low-­set posteriorly
velocardiofacial, and conotruncal
rotated ears, thymic and parathyroid
anomaly face syndrome)
hypoplasia, hypocalcemia, feeding/
speech/learning/behavioral disorders,
immunodeficiency, palate/skeletal/renal
anomalies, learning disability

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 473 u Epidemiology and Genetic Basis of Congenital Heart Disease

2769

Table 473.3  Chromosomal Aneuploidies and Copy Number Variants Associated with Congenital Heart Disease—cont’d
PERCENT WITH
CONGENITAL HD

HEART ANOMALY

Very variable phenotype, some with
velopharyngeal insufficiency, cleft palate,
hearing loss, minor facial anomalies, mild
learning disability to normal learning ability,
hypotonia, scoliosis, frequent infections

15

TOF, HLHS, VSD, PVS, TrA

Normal growth, intellectual disability,
dolichocephaly, dysplastic ears, pointed chin,
large fleshy hands, hypotonia

>25

PDA, VSD, ASD, TAPVR

CHROMOSOME CHANGE

MAIN FEATURES

22q11.2 duplication

22q13 microdeletion (Phelan-­
McDermid syndrome)

22q11.2DS, 22q11.2 deletion syndrome; AS, aortic stenosis; ASD, atrial septal defect; AVSD, atrioventricular septal defect; BAV, bicuspid aortic valve; BPV, bicuspid pulmonary
valve; CDH, congenital diaphragmatic hernia; CoA, coarctation of the aorta; DORV, double-­outlet right ventricle; HD, heart disease; HLHS, hypoplastic left heart syndrome;
IAA-­B, interrupted aortic arch type B; IUGR, intrauterine growth retardation; LSVC, persistent left superior vena cava; N/A, not available; PA, pulmonary artery; PDA, patent ductus
arteriosus; PPS, peripheral pulmonary stenosis; PS, pulmonary stenosis; PVS, pulmonic valve stenosis; TAPVR, total anomalous pulmonary venous return; TEF, tracheoesophageal
fistula; TGA, d-­transposition of the great arteries; TOF, tetralogy of Fallot; TOF/PA, tetralogy of Fallot with pulmonary atresia; TrA, truncus arteriosus; VSD, ventricular septal defect.
From Pierpont ME, Brueckner M, Chung WK, et al. Genetic basis for congenital heart disease: revisited: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation.
2018;138(21):e653–e711, Appendix Table.

Table 473.4  Disease Genes for Nonsyndromic Congenital Cardiovascular Disease
GENE

CARDIOVASCULAR MALFORMATION

NONSYNDROMIC (NS) OR SYNDROMIC (S)

TRANSCRIPTION FACTORS
CITED2

ASD, VSD

NS

GATA4

ASD, VSD, AVSD, PVS, TOF

NS

GATA6

PTA, TOF

NS

MED13L

TGA

NS

NR2F2

AVSD, AS, CoA, VSD, HLHS, TOF

NS

NKX2-­5

ASD, atrioventricular conduction delay, TOF,
HLHS

NS

NKX2.6

PTA

NS

TBX20

ASD, VSD, MS, DCM

NS

ZFPM2/FOG2

TOF, DORV

NS

CELL SIGNALING AND ADHESION PROTEINS
ACVR1/ALK2
AVSD

NS

CRELD1

ASD, AVSD

NS

GJA1

HLHS, VSD, PA

S (oculodentodigital dysplasia) and NS

JAG1

TOF, PVS, PAS

S (Alagille syndrome) and NS

NOTCH1

BAV, AS, HLHS, TOF, PVS

S (Adams-­Oliver syndrome) and NS

PDGFRA

TAPVR

NS

SMAD6

BAV, CoA, AS

NS

TAB2

BAV, AS, TOF

NS

STRUCTURAL PROTEINS
ACTC1

ASD, HCM, DCM, LVNC

NS

DCHS1

MVP

NS

ELN

SVAS

S (Williams-­Beuren syndrome) and NS

MYH6

ASD, HCM, DCM

NS

MYH7

Ebstein anomaly, LVNC, HCM, DCM

NS

MYH11

PDA, TAA

NS

AS, Aortic valve stenosis; ASD, atrial septal defect; AVSD, atrioventricular septal defect; BAV, bicuspid aortic valve; CoA, coarctation of aorta; DCM, dilated cardiomyopathy; DORV,
double-­outlet right ventricle; HCM, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; HLHS, hypoplastic left heart syndrome; LVNC, left ventricular noncompaction cardiomyopathy; MS, mitral valve
stenosis; MVP, mitral valve prolapse; NS, nonsyndromic; PA, pulmonary atresia; PAS, pulmonary artery stenosis; PDA, patent ductus arteriosus; PTA, persistent truncus arteriosus;
PVS, pulmonary vein stenosis; S, syndromic; SVAS, supravalvar aortic stenosis; TAA, thoracic aortic aneurysm; TAPVR, total anomalous pulmonary venous return; TGA, transposition
of great arteries; TOF, tetralogy of Fallot; and VSD, ventricular septal defect.
From Pierpont ME, Brueckner M, Chung WK, et al. Genetic basis for congenital heart disease: revisited: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation.
2018;138(21):e653–e711, Table 8.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2770 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 473.5  Clinical Genetic Tests
GENOMIC VS
TARGETED

ANEUPLOIDIES AND
CHROMOSOMAL
REARRANGEMENTS

COPY NUMBER
VARIATION

SNPs AND
INDELs

EXAMPLE OF CLINICAL USE

Karyotype

Genomic

+++

+

−

Confirmation of trisomy 21

Array CGH

Genomic

++

+++

−

Multiple congenital anomalies
without obvious syndromic
association

FISH

Targeted

+

+

−

Suspected 22q11.2 deletion
syndrome

Gene panel testing

Targeted

−

+

+++

Suspected monogenic disease with
a small differential diagnosis

Exome sequencing

Genomic

−

−

+++

Broad genetic differential diagnosis
without obvious syndromic
association, or previous negative
panel testing

Genome sequencing

Genomic

+

+

+++

Broad genetic differential diagnosis
without obvious syndromic
association, or previous negative
panel testing and need for rapid
turnaround time

Sensitivity of tests for the types of genetic variation are indicated as not detected (−), low (+), medium (++), or high (+++). Array CGH indicates comparative genomic hybridization
using arrays; FISH, fluorescence in situ hybridization; INDEL, insertion or deletion; and SNP, single nucleotide polymorphism.
From Pierpont ME, Brueckner M, Chung WK, et al. Genetic basis for congenital heart disease: revisited: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation.
2018;138(21):e653–e711, Table 1.

critical region. At least 30 genes have been mapped to the deleted
region; Tbx1, a transcription factor involved in early outflow tract
development, is one gene that has been implicated as a possible cause
of DiGeorge syndrome. The estimated prevalence of 22q11.2 deletions
is 1 in 4,000 live births; these occur in 2% of all patients with CHD.
Cardiac lesions associated with 22q11.2 deletions are most often seen
in association with either DiGeorge syndrome or Shprintzen (velocardiofacial) syndrome. The acronym CATCH 22 has been used to summarize the major components of these syndromes: Cardiac defects,
Abnormal facies, Thymic aplasia, Cleft palate, and Hypocalcemia. The
specific cardiac anomalies are conotruncal defects (tetralogy of Fallot,
truncus arteriosus, double-­outlet right ventricle, subarterial VSD) and
branchial arch defects (coarctation of the aorta, interrupted aortic
arch, right aortic arch). Congenital airway anomalies such as tracheomalacia and bronchomalacia are sometimes present. In addition to
extracardiac defects, studies in adults with repaired tetralogy of Fallot
have linked the presence of a 22q11.2 microdeletion to increased all-­
cause mortality. Although the risk of recurrence is extremely low in
the absence of a parental 22q11.2 deletion, the risk rises to 50% if one
parent carries the deletion. More than 90% of patients with the clinical
features of DiGeorge syndrome have a deletion at 22q11.2. A second
genetic locus on the short arm of chromosome 10 (10p13p14) has also
been identified, the deletion of which shares some, but not all, phenotypic characteristics with the 22q11.2 deletion; patients with del(10p)
have an increased incidence of sensorineural hearing loss.
Other structural heart lesions associated with specific chromosomal
abnormalities include familial secundum atrial septal defect (ASD)
associated with heart block (the transcription factor Nkx2.5 on chromosome 5q35), familial ASD without heart block (the transcription
factor GATA4), Alagille syndrome (Jagged1 on chromosome 20p12),
and Williams syndrome (elastin on chromosome 7q11). Of interest,
patients with VSDs and atrioventricular septal defects have been found
to have multiple Nkx2.5 pathogenic variants in cells isolated from diseased heart tissues, but not from normal heart tissues or from circulating lymphocytes, indicating a potential role for somatic rather than
germline changes leading to mosaicism in the pathogenesis of congenital heart defects. Tables 473.2 to 473.4 are a compilation of known
genetic causes of CHD.
The most progress in identifying the genetic origin of cardiovascular disease has been made in the genetic cardiomyopathies, and in

particular, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). Over 1,000 different
pathogenic variants in over a dozen genes have been implicated, most
of which encode proteins of the cardiac sarcomere, either the contractile thick filament (myosin) or associated regulatory subunits (e.g., troponin or myosin binding protein C), although variants in metabolic/
mitochondrial genes are also common in those presenting with HCM
in infancy and early childhood. Variants of the cardiac β-­myosin heavy-­
chain gene MYH7 and the myosin-­binding protein C gene are the most
common (Table 473.6), with additional common variants including cardiac troponin T and I, α-­tropomyosin, regulatory and essential myosin
light chains, titin, and α-­myosin heavy chain. Some patients (∼15%) may
carry variants in more than one sarcomeric gene. Routine clinical laboratory tests are available for most of these genes, so that patients with
clinical findings of HCM or children of parents who have been diagnosed with HCM should be tested. However, not all genes causing HCM
have been identified, so a negative test does not eliminate a genetic cause.
Progress has also been made in identifying the genetic basis of
dilated cardiomyopathy, which is familial in 20–30% of cases. Autosomal dominant inheritance is most often encountered, and similar to HCM, multiple genes have been identified (see Table 473.3).
X-­linked inheritance accounts for 5–10% of cases of familial dilated
cardiomyopathy. Pathogenic variants in the dystrophin gene are the
most common in this group, causing Duchenne or Becker muscular
dystrophy. Variants in the gene encoding tafazzin are associated with
Barth syndrome and for some cases of isolated noncompaction of the
left ventricle (LVNC). Autosomal recessive inheritance is associated
with a variant in cardiac troponin I. Mitochondrial myopathies may
be caused by alterations of enzymes of the electron transport chain
encoded by nuclear DNA or enzymes of fatty acid oxidation encoded
by mitochondrial DNA. Table 473.6 is a compilation of the most common genetic causes of cardiomyopathy.
The genetic basis of heritable arrhythmias, most notably the long
QT syndromes, has been linked to pathogenic variants of genes coding
for subunits of cardiac potassium and sodium channels (Table 473.7).
Other heritable arrhythmias include arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia, familial atrial fibrillation, familial complete heart block,
and Brugada syndrome. Table 473.7 is a compilation of the most common genetic causes of arrhythmias.
Of all cases of CHD, 2–4% are associated with known environmental
or adverse maternal conditions and teratogenic influences, including

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 473 u Epidemiology and Genetic Basis of Congenital Heart Disease

2771

Table 473.6  Genetics of Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathies
CARDIOMYOPATHY

CHROMOSOMAL LOCATION

GENE

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy

14q1

β-­Myosin heavy chain

15q2

α-­Tropomyosin

1q31

Troponin T

19p13.2-­19q13.2

Troponin I

11p13-­q13

Myosin-­binding protein C

12q23

Cardiac slow myosin regulatory light chain

13p21

Ventricular slow myosin essential light chain

2q31

Titin

3p25

Caveolin-­3

Mitochondrial DNA

tRNA-­glycine

Mitochondrial DNA

tRNA-­isoleucine

7q36.1

AMP-­activated protein kinase

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with Wolff-­
Parkinson-­White syndrome

OTHER GENETIC DISEASES CAUSING CARDIAC HYPERTROPHY
Familial amyloid disease
18q12.1

Transthyretin (TTR)

Noonan syndrome

12q24.1, 2p22.1, 3p25, 12p12.1

Protein tyrosine phosphatase 11 (PTPN11),
son of sevenless homolog 1 (SOS1), RAF1
protooncogene, GTPase KRAS

Fabry disease

Xq22

α-­Galactoside A (GLA)

Danon disease

Xq24

Lysosomal-­associated membrane protein 2
(LAMP2)

Hereditary hemochromatosis

6p21.3

Hereditary hemochromatosis protein (HFE)

Pompe disease

17q25

Acid α-­glucosidase (GAA)

Xp21

Dystrophin

Xp28

Tafazzin

19p13.2-­19q13.2

Troponin I

Dilated cardiomyopathy
X-­linked

Autosomal recessive

Autosomal dominant: Genes encoding multiple proteins have been identified, including cardiac actin; desmin; δ-­sarcoglycan; β-­myosin heavy chain; cardiac troponin C and T;
α-­tropomyosin; titin; metavinculin; myosin-­binding protein C; muscle LIM protein; α-­actinin-­2; phospholamban; Cypher/LIM binding domain 3; α-­myosin heavy chain; SUR2A
(regulatory subunit of KATP channel); and lamin A/C.
Isolated noncompaction of the left ventricle: Autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, X-­linked, and mitochondrial inheritance patterns have been reported. Genes that have been
implicated include those for α-­dystrobrevin, Cypher/ZASP, lamin A/C, tafazzin, MIB1, and LIM domain-­binding protein 3 (LDB3).
Partially adapted from Dunn KE, Caleshu C, Cirino AL, et al. A clinical approach to inherited hypertrophy: the use of family history in diagnosis, risk assessment, and management.
Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2013;6:118–131.

maternal diabetes mellitus, maternal phenylketonuria, or systemic
lupus erythematosus; congenital rubella syndrome; and maternal
ingestion of drugs (lithium, ethanol, warfarin, thalidomide, antimetabolites, vitamin A derivatives, anticonvulsant agents). Associated noncardiac malformations noted in identifiable syndromes may be seen in
as many as 25% of patients with CHD.
Gender differences in the occurrence of specific cardiac lesions
have been identified. Transposition of the great arteries and left-­sided
obstructive lesions are slightly more common in males (65%), whereas
ASD, VSD, PDA, and pulmonic stenosis are more common in females.
No ethnic differences in the occurrence of congenital heart lesions as a
whole have been noted, although there are some exceptions: supracristal VSD in children of Asian background and transposition of the great
arteries, which has a higher occurrence in White infants.

GENETIC COUNSELING

Parents who have a child with CHD require counseling regarding the
probability of a cardiac malformation occurring in subsequent children
(Table 473.8 and see Chapter 98.1). Except for syndromes caused by a
pathogenic variant of a single gene, many forms of CHD, but not all,
are still relegated to a multifactorial inheritance pattern, which should

result in a low risk of recurrence. When more genetic etiologies are
identified, these risks are constantly updated; therefore consultation
with a cardiac geneticist or genetic counselor is important.
The degree of severity may vary, as may the presence of associated
defects. Careful echocardiographic screening of first-­degree relatives
will often uncover mild forms of CHD that were clinically silent. For
example, the incidence of bicuspid aortic valve is more than double
(5% vs 2% in the general population) in the relatives of children with
left ventricular outflow obstruction (aortic stenosis, coarctation of the
aorta, HLHS). Consultation with a knowledgeable genetic counselor is
the most reliable way of providing the family with up-­to-­date information regarding the risk of recurrence.
Fetal echocardiography improves the rate of detection of congenital
heart lesions in at-­risk patients (see Chapter 472.4). This type of ultrasound is much more comprehensive than the screening ultrasound
performed by an obstetrician and is usually performed and interpreted
by a pediatric cardiologist specializing in fetal echocardiography. The
resolution and accuracy of fetal echocardiography are excellent but are
not perfect; families should be counseled that a normal fetal echocardiogram does not guarantee the absence of CHD. Congenital heart
lesions may evolve in the course of the pregnancy; moderate aortic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2772 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 473.7  Genetics of Arrhythmias
ARRHYTHMIA

CHROMOSOMAL LOCATION

GENE(S) IMPLICATED

Complete heart block

19q13

Not known

LQT1 (autosomal dominant)

11p15.5

KVLQT1 (K+ channel)

LQT2 (autosomal dominant)

7q35

HERG (K+ channel)

LQT3 (autosomal dominant)

3p21

SCN5A (Na+ channel)

LQT4 (autosomal dominant)

4q25-­27

Not known

LQT5 (autosomal dominant)

21q22-­q22

KCNE1 (K+ channel)

LQT6

21q22.1

KCNE2 (K+ channel)

LQT7

17q23

KCNJ2 (K+ channel)

LQT8

12p13.3

CACNAIC (L type Ca2+ channel)

LQT9

3p25

CAV-­3 (caveolin-­3, Na+ current)

LQT10

11q23

SCN4B (Na+ channel)

LQT11

7q21

AKAP9 (A-­kinase anchoring protein)

LQT12

20q11.21

SNTA1 (A1-­synthrophin)

LQT13

11q24.3

KCNJ5 (K+ channel)

11p15.5
21q22.1

KVLQT1 (K+ channel), KCNE1 (K+ channel)

Long QT syndrome

Jervell and Lange-­Nielsen syndrome
(autosomal recessive, congenital deafness)

Arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia (ARVD): 11 genes are now associated with ARVD (ARVD1 through ARVD11) usually with autosomal
dominant inheritance, but with variable penetrance. These genes include TGFβ3 (transforming growth factor β), RYR2 (ryanodine receptor),
LAMR1 (laminin receptor-­1), PTPLA (protein tyrosine phosphatase), DSP (desmoplakin), PKP2 (plakophilin-­2), DSG2 (desmoglein), and DSC2
(desmocollin).
Familial atrial fibrillation (autosomal dominant)

10q22-­q24, 6q14-­16

Not known

11p15.5

KVLQT1 (K+ channel)

11p15.5

KCNQ1 (K+ channel)

21q22

KCNE2 (K+ channel)

17q23.1-­q24.2

KCNJ2 (K+ channel)

7q35-­q36

KCNH2 (K+ channel)

Brugada syndrome (right bundle branch block,
ST segment elevation, unexpected sudden
death)

3p21-­p24

SCN5A (Na+ channel), rarely CACNA1C,
HCN4, TRPM4

3p22-­p24

GPD1L (glycerol-­3-­phosphate dehydrogenase)

Catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular
tachycardia

1q43

RYR2 (autosomal dominant)

1p13.1

CASQ2 (autosomal recessive)

stenosis with a normal-­sized left ventricle at 18 weeks of gestation may
progress to aortic atresia with a hypoplastic left ventricle by 34 weeks
because of decreased flow through the atria, ventricle, and aorta in the
latter half of gestation. This progression has prompted initial clinical
trials of interventional treatment, such as fetal aortic balloon valvuloplasty, for the prevention of HLHS (see Chapter 472.7). In addition
to diagnosing CHD in utero and subsequent parental counseling, the

benefit of fetal ultrasound is that it allows for careful planning of perinatal care, especially in cases where immediate intervention in the neonatal period is warranted.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 474 u Evaluation and Screening of the Infant or Child with Congenital Heart Disease

2773

Table 473.8  Recurrence Risks for Isolated (Nonsyndromic) Congenital Heart Disease
DEFECT

FATHER AFFECTED (%)

MOTHER AFFECTED (%)

ONE SIBLING AFFECTED (%)

TWO SIBLINGS AFFECTED (%)

ASD

1.5–3.5

4–6

2.5–3

8

AVSD

1–4.5

11.5–14

3–4

10

VSD

2–3.5

6–10

3

10

AS

3–4

8–18

2

6

PVS

2–3.5

4–6.5

2

6

TOF

1.5

2–2.5

2.5–3

8

CoA

2–3

4–6.5

2

6

PDA

2–2.5

3.5–4

3

10

HLHS

21†

2–9*

6

TGA

2†

1.5

5

L-­TGA

3–5†

5–6

NR

EA

NR

6

1

3

TrA

NR

NR

1

3

TA

NR

NR

1

3

PA

NR

NR

1

3

*Eight percent recurrence risk for HLHS; up to 22% recurrence risk for any congenital HD.
†Recurrence when one parent is affected, irrespective of sex; used in the absence of sex-­stratified risks.

AS, Aortic stenosis; ASD, atrial septal defect; AVSD, atrioventricular septal defect; CoA, coarctation of the aorta; EA, Ebstein anomaly; HLHS, hypoplastic left heart syndrome; L-­TGA,
congenitally corrected transposition of the great arteries; NR, not reported/insufficient data; PA, pulmonary atresia; PDA, patent ductus arteriosus; PVS, pulmonary valve stenosis;
TA, tricuspid atresia; TGA, d-­transposition of the great arteries; TOF, tetralogy of Fallot; TrA, truncus arteriosus; VSD, ventricular septal defect.
From Cowan JR, Ware SM. Genetics and genetic testing in congenital heart disease. Clin Perinatol. 2015;42(2): 373–393, Table 5.

Chapter 474

Congenital heart disease

Evaluation and Screening
of the Infant or Child with
Congenital Heart Disease

Observation/pulse oximetry

Daniel Bernstein
The initial evaluation for suspected congenital heart disease
(CHD) involves a systematic approach with two major components
(Fig. 474.1). First, congenital cardiac defects can be divided into
two major groups based on the presence or absence of cyanosis,
which can be determined by physical examination aided by pulse
oximetry. Second, these groups can usually be further subdivided
based on whether the chest radiograph shows evidence of increased,
normal, or decreased pulmonary vascular markings. Next, the electrocardiogram (ECG) can be used to determine whether right, left,
or biventricular hypertrophy exists. The character of the heart
sounds and the presence and character of any murmurs further
narrow the differential diagnosis. The final diagnosis is then confirmed by echocardiography, cardiac computed tomography (CT)
or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and/or cardiac catheterization. In a cyanotic or otherwise sick newborn, echocardiographic
exam, if available, should not be delayed while awaiting these other
modalities.

Acyanotic

Chest X-ray

Cyanotic

Increased
pulmonary
blood flow

Normal
pulmonary
blood flow

Decreased
pulmonary
blood flow

Increased
pulmonary
blood flow

Left-to-right shunts
ASD
AV septal defect
VSD
PDA
AP Window

Obstructive lesions
Pulmonic stenosis
Cor triatriatum
Mitral stenosis
Aortic stenosis
Coarctation of the aorta

R sided obstructive
lesions with shunt
Tetralogy of Fallot
Pulmonary atresia
Tricuspid atresia
Ebstein anomaly

Mixing lesions
Transposition of the
great arteries
Single ventricle
Hypoplastic L or R heart
Truncus arteriosus
Total anomalous
pulmonary venous return

Fig. 474.1 A general algorithmic approach to the initial diagnosis of

congenital heart disease, based on observation/pulse oximetry and chest
x-­ray, to separate patients into four major physiologic subgroups of congenital heart disease. This schematic is a broad, but useful, diagnostic
overview; only the most common forms of congenital heart disease are
included. A patient’s initial presentation may sometimes straddle two of
these physiologic groups and can evolve between them over the first week
or two of life. For example, in a patient with a VSD, the pulmonary blood
flow will be relatively normal in the newborn period and only increase as
the pulmonary vascular resistance begins to drop. Similarly, a patient with a
mixing lesion may not show pulmonary overcirculation at birth. ASD, Atrial
septal defect; AV, atrioventricular; VSD, ventricular septal defect; PDA, patent ductus arteriosus, AP, aortopulmonary; L, left; R, right

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2774 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Routine pulse oximetry screening is recommended for all newborns to detect unsuspected critical cyanotic CHD; lesions include
hypoplastic left heart syndrome, pulmonary atresia, tetralogy of
Fallot, total anomalous pulmonary venous return, transposition
of the great arteries, tricuspid atresia, truncus arteriosus, neonatal
coarctation of the aorta, and aortic arch hypoplasia/atresia. Many
of these lesions are ductal dependent, and if the ductus arteriosus
closes, severe cardiac decompensation will ensue. In addition, pulse
oximetry may detect respiratory disorders and primary pulmonary
hypertension. Screening is performed between 24 and 48 hours of
life and before discharge in asymptomatic newborns. The neonate
passes if the oxygen saturation is 95% or greater in the right hand
or either foot AND the difference is 3% or less between the right
hand and foot. The screen is failed if the saturation is less than
90% in either the right hand or foot. If it is between 90% and 94%
OR there is more than a 3% difference between the right arm and
foot, the screen should be repeated once in 1 hour. If the saturation is 90–94% OR there is a 3% difference after the third screen,
urgent echocardiography is indicated. In addition, a careful reexamination of the pulses and blood pressure in the upper and lower
extremity and cardiac auscultation are indicated in children with an
initial positive screen.

ACYANOTIC CONGENITAL HEART LESIONS

Acyanotic congenital heart lesions can be classified according to
the predominant physiologic load that they place on the heart.
Although many congenital heart lesions induce more than one
physiologic disturbance, it is helpful to focus on the primary load
abnormality for purposes of classification. The most common
lesions are those that produce a volume load, and the most common of these are the left-­to-­right shunt lesions. Atrioventricular
(AV) valve regurgitation and dilated cardiomyopathies are other
causes of increased volume load. The second major class of lesions
causes an increase in pressure load, most often secondary to ventricular outflow obstruction (pulmonic or aortic valve stenosis) or
narrowing of a great vessel (branch pulmonary artery stenosis or
coarctation of the aorta). The chest radiograph and ECG are useful tools for differentiating between these major classes of volume­and pressure-­overload lesions while awaiting confirmation with
echocardiography.

Lesions Resulting in Increased Volume Load

The most common lesions resulting in increased volume load are
those that cause left-­to-­right shunting (see Chapter 475): atrial
septal defect (ASD), ventricular septal defect (VSD), atrioventricular septal defects (previously known as AV canal or endocardial
cushion defects), and patent ductus arteriosus. The pathophysiologic
common denominator in this group is the presence of a communication between the systemic and pulmonary sides of the circulation, which results in shunting of fully oxygenated blood back into
the lungs for a second passage. This shunt can be quantitated by
calculating the ratio of pulmonary-­to-­systemic blood flow (Qp:Qs).
Thus a 3:1 shunt implies three times the normal pulmonary blood
flow, which is a moderately large shunt likely to cause symptoms of
heart failure.
The direction and magnitude of the shunt across such a communication depend on the size of the defect, the relative pulmonary
and systemic pressures and vascular resistances, and the compliances of the two chambers connected by the defect. These factors
are dynamic and may change dramatically with age; intracardiac
defects may grow smaller with time; pulmonary vascular resistance
(PVR), which is high in the immediate newborn period, decreases
to normal adult levels by several weeks of life; and chronic exposure of the pulmonary circulation to high pressure and blood flow

results in a gradual increase in PVR (Eisenmenger physiology; see
Chapter 482.2). Thus a lesion such as a large VSD may be associated with little shunting and few symptoms during the initial first
2 weeks of life. When PVR declines over the next 2-­4 weeks, the
volume of the left-­to-­right shunt increases, and symptoms begin to
appear.
The increased volume of blood in the lungs decreases pulmonary
compliance and increases the work of breathing. Fluid leaks into
the interstitial space and alveoli and causes pulmonary edema. The
infant develops the symptoms we refer to as heart failure, such as
tachypnea, tachycardia, sweating, chest retractions, nasal flaring,
and wheezing. For children with large left-­to-­right shunts, however,
the term heart failure is a misnomer; total left ventricular output
is not decreased but is several times greater than normal, although
much of this output is ineffective because it returns through the
defect back to the lungs. To maintain this high level of left ventricular output, heart rate and stroke volume are increased, in part
mediated by the Frank-­Starling relation as the increased ventricular
volume stretches the cardiac sarcomeres and in part mediated by an
increase in sympathetic nervous system activity. The increase in catecholamine release, combined with the increased work of breathing,
results in an elevation in total body oxygen consumption (caused
by increased β-­
receptor stimulation), often beyond the oxygen
transport ability of the circulation. Sympathetic activation leads to
peripheral vasoconstriction (caused by increased α-­receptor stimulation) and to the additional symptoms of sweating and irritability,
and the imbalance between oxygen supply and demand leads to failure to thrive. Remodeling of the heart occurs, with predominantly
chamber dilation caused by the increased volume load and a lesser
degree of hypertrophy. If left untreated, the PVR eventually begins
to rise, and by several years of age, the shunt volume will decrease
and symptoms will appear to improve. If still uncorrected, the shunt
will eventually reverse to right-­to-­left as the PVR rises (see Chapter 482.2). At this point, the patient may be inoperative if the pulmonary vascular resistance is elevated and fixed (unresponsive to
vasodilators), and heart-­lung transplant may be the only surgical
option.
Additional lesions that impose a volume load on the heart
include the regurgitant lesions (see Chapter 477) and the dilated
cardiomyopathies (see Chapter 488.1). Regurgitation through the
AV valves is most frequently encountered in patients with partial
or complete AV septal defects (AV canal or endocardial cushion
defects). In these lesions, the combination of a left-­to-­right shunt
with AV valve regurgitation increases the volume load on the heart
and often leads to earlier and more severe symptoms than for isolated septal defects. Regurgitation through the tricuspid valve is
seen in Ebstein anomaly (see Chapter 479.7). Regurgitation involving one of the semilunar (aortic or pulmonary) valves also results
in a volume load but is often also associated with some degree of
stenosis, leading to a combined pressure and volume load. Aortic
regurgitation may be encountered in patients with a VSD directly
under the aortic valve (supracristal VSD), leading to two sources
of volume load on the left ventricle.
In contrast to left-­to-­right shunts, in which intrinsic cardiac
muscle contractile function is generally either normal or increased,
heart muscle function can be decreased in the cardiomyopathies.
Cardiomyopathies may affect systolic contractility (dilated cardiomyopathy) or diastolic relaxation (restrictive cardiomyopathy) or
both. Decreased cardiac function results in increased atrial and ventricular filling pressure, and pulmonary edema occurs secondary to
increased capillary pressure. Poor cardiac output leads to decreased
end-­organ blood flow, sympathetic activation, and the symptoms
of poor perfusion and decreased urine output. The major causes of
cardiomyopathy in infants and children include viral myocarditis,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 474 u Evaluation and Screening of the Infant or Child with Congenital Heart Disease
metabolic disorders, and pathogenic gene variants in sarcomeric
and other cardiac structural, functional, and energy production
genes (see Chapter 488).

Lesions Resulting in Increased Pressure Load

The pathophysiologic common denominator of lesions resulting
in increased pressure load is an obstruction to normal blood flow.
The most frequent are obstructions to ventricular outflow: valvular pulmonic stenosis, valvular aortic stenosis, and coarctation of
the aorta (see Chapter 476). Less common are obstructions to ventricular inflow: tricuspid or mitral stenosis, cor triatriatum, and
obstruction of the pulmonary veins. Ventricular outflow obstruction can occur at the valve, below the valve (double-­chambered
right ventricle, subaortic membrane), or above the valve (branch
pulmonary stenosis or supravalvular aortic stenosis). Unless the
obstruction is severe, cardiac output will be maintained and the
clinical symptoms of heart failure will be either subtle or absent.
The heart compensates for the increased afterload by increasing
wall thickness (hypertrophy), but in later stages the affected chamber develops fibrosis and will begin to dilate and can progress to
ventricular failure.
The clinical picture is different when obstruction to outflow is severe,
which is usually encountered in the immediate newborn period. The
infant may become critically ill within several hours of birth. Severe
pulmonic stenosis in the newborn period (critical pulmonic stenosis)
results in signs of right-­sided heart failure (hepatomegaly, peripheral
edema) and cyanosis from right-­to-­left shunting across the foramen
ovale. Severe aortic stenosis in the newborn period (critical aortic
stenosis) is characterized by signs of left-­sided heart failure (pulmonary edema, poor perfusion), often combined with signs of right-­sided
failure (hepatomegaly, peripheral edema), and may progress rapidly to
total circulatory collapse. In older children, severe untreated pulmonic
stenosis leads to symptoms of right-­sided heart failure, but usually not
to cyanosis unless a pathway persists for right-­to-­left shunting (e.g.,
patency of the foramen ovale).
Coarctation of the aorta in older children and adolescents is
usually manifested as upper body hypertension and diminished
pulses in the lower extremities. In the immediate newborn period,
presentation of coarctation can range from decreased pulses in the
lower extremities to total circulatory collapse, depending on the
severity of the narrowing. The clinical presentation of coarctation
may be delayed because of the normally patent ductus arteriosus
in the first few days of life. In these patients, even as the ductus
begins to close, the open aortic end of the ductus serves as a conduit
for blood flow to partially bypass the obstruction; in more severe
coarctations, blood leaving the right ventricle traverses the ductus to directly supply the descending aorta (as it did in the fetus).
These infants then become symptomatic, often dramatically, when
the ductus finally closes, usually within the first few weeks of life.
Differential cyanosis (normal saturation in the right arm and low
saturation in the foot) is a hallmark sign of this condition, and
if picked up on oximetry screen before hospital discharge can be
lifesaving.

CYANOTIC CONGENITAL HEART LESIONS

The cyanotic group of congenital heart lesions can also be further
divided according to pathophysiology. In one major subdivision, pulmonary blood flow is decreased, usually from an obstruction to right
ventricular outflow (tetralogy of Fallot, tetralogy with pulmonary

2775

atresia, or pulmonary atresia with an intact septum) or to an obstruction to right ventricular inflow (tricuspid atresia). In the second
major subdivision, pulmonary blood flow is increased and oxygenated
and deoxygenated blood are mixing (transposition of the great arteries, single ventricle, truncus arteriosus, total anomalous pulmonary
venous return [TAPVR] without obstruction). In the case of TAPVR
with obstruction, pulmonary flow is decreased but because there is no
exit from the pulmonary veins, the lungs appear to be markedly congested. The chest radiograph is a valuable tool for initial differentiation
between these two categories.

Cyanotic Lesions with Decreased Pulmonary Blood
Flow

For cyanosis to occur, these lesions must include both an obstruction to pulmonary blood flow (at the tricuspid valve or pulmonary
valve level) and a pathway by which systemic venous blood can
shunt from right to left and enter the systemic circulation (via a
patent foramen ovale, ASD, or VSD). Common lesions in this group
include tricuspid atresia, tetralogy of Fallot, tetralogy of Fallot with
pulmonary atresia, pulmonary atresia with intact septum (with
atrial-­level shunting), and various forms of single ventricle with
pulmonary stenosis or atresia (see Chapter 457). In these lesions,
the degree of cyanosis depends on the degree of obstruction to
pulmonary blood flow. If the obstruction is mild, cyanosis may be
absent at rest. However, these patients may have hypercyanotic (tet)
spells during conditions of stress. In contrast, if the obstruction is
severe, pulmonary blood flow may be totally dependent on patency
of the ductus arteriosus. When the ductus closes in the first few
days of life, the neonate experiences profound hypoxemia.

Cyanotic Lesions with Increased Pulmonary Blood
Flow

This group of lesions is not associated with obstruction to pulmonary blood flow. Cyanosis is caused by either abnormal
ventricular-­arterial connections or total mixing of systemic venous
(deoxygenated) and pulmonary venous (oxygenated) blood within
the heart (see Chapter 480). Transposition of the great arteries
(or vessels) is the most common of the former group of lesions. In
this condition the aorta arises from the right ventricle and the pulmonary artery arises from the left ventricle. Systemic venous blood
returning to the right atrium is pumped directly back to the body,
and oxygenated blood returning from the lungs to the left atrium
is pumped back into the lungs. The persistence of fetal pathways
(foramen ovale and ductus arteriosus) allows for some degree of
mixing in the immediate newborn period, keeping the systemic saturation from falling until the ductus begins to close; these infants
can then become extremely cyanotic quite precipitously.
Total mixing lesions include cardiac defects with a common atrium
or ventricle, TAPVR, and truncus arteriosus (see Chapter 480). In this
group, deoxygenated systemic venous blood and oxygenated pulmonary venous blood mix completely at some location in the heart, and
as a result, the oxygen saturation is equal in the pulmonary artery and
aorta. If pulmonary blood flow is not obstructed, these infants have
a combination of cyanosis and pulmonary overcirculation leading to
heart failure. In contrast, if pulmonary stenosis is present, these infants
may have cyanosis alone, similar to patients with tetralogy of Fallot.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2776 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
stroke, echocardiographic screening for a PFO is routinely performed,
and device closure of the PFO is a common treatment option.

Chapter 475

Acyanotic Congenital
Heart Disease: Left-­to-­
Right Shunt Lesions

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

475.2 Ostium Secundum Defect
Daniel Bernstein

475.1 Atrial Septal Defect
Daniel Bernstein
Atrial septal defects (ASDs) can occur in any portion of the atrial septum—secundum, primum, or sinus venosus—depending on which
embryonic septal structure has failed to develop normally (Fig. 475.1)
(see Chapter 469). Less often, the atrial septum may be almost absent,
with the creation of a functional single atrium. Isolated secundum
ASDs account for approximately 7% of all congenital heart defects. The
majority of cases of ASD are sporadic; autosomal dominant inheritance
does occur as part of Holt-­Oram syndrome (hypoplastic or absent
thumbs, radii, triphalangism, phocomelia, first-­degree heart block,
ASD) or in families with both secundum ASD and heart block (see
Table 473.2).
An isolated valve-­incompetent patent foramen ovale (PFO) is a common echocardiographic finding during infancy. It is usually of no hemodynamic significance and is not considered an ASD; a PFO may play an
important role if other structural heart defects are present. If another
cardiac anomaly is causing increased right atrial pressure (pulmonary
stenosis or atresia, tricuspid valve abnormalities, right ventricular dysfunction), venous blood may shunt across the PFO into the left atrium
with resultant cyanosis. Because of the anatomic structure of the PFO,
left-­to-­right shunting is unusual outside the immediate newborn period.
In the presence of a large volume load or a hypertensive left atrium
(e.g., secondary to mitral stenosis), the foramen ovale may be sufficiently dilated to result in a significant atrial left-­to-­right shunt. A valve-­
competent but probe-­patent (able to be pushed opened with a catheter)
PFO may be present in 15–30% of adults. An isolated PFO does not
require surgical treatment, although it is a risk for paradoxical (right-­to-­
left) systemic embolization. In adults who have had a thromboembolic

Superior
sinus venosus defect

An ostium secundum defect in the region of the fossa ovalis is the
most common form of ASD and is associated with structurally normal
atrioventricular (AV) valves (see Fig. 475.1). Mitral valve prolapse has
been described in association with this defect but is rarely an important clinical consideration. Secundum ASDs may be single or multiple
(fenestrated atrial septum), and openings ≥2 cm in diameter are common in symptomatic older children. Large defects may extend inferiorly toward the inferior vena cava (IVC) and ostium of the coronary
sinus, superiorly toward the superior vena cava (SVC), or posteriorly.
Females outnumber males 3:1 in incidence. Partial anomalous pulmonary venous return (PAPVR), usually of the right upper pulmonary vein, may be an associated lesion.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

The degree of left-­to-­right shunting depends on the size of the defect,
the relative compliance of the right and left ventricles, and the relative vascular resistance in the pulmonary and systemic circulations.
In large defects, a considerable shunt of oxygenated blood flows from
the left to the right atrium (Fig. 475.2). This blood is added to the
usual venous return to the right atrium and is pumped by the right
ventricle to the lungs. With large defects, the ratio of pulmonary-­to-­
systemic blood flow (Qp:Qs) is usually between 2:1 and 4:1. The paucity of symptoms in infants with ASDs is related to the structure of the
right ventricle in early life, when its muscular wall is still thick and less
compliant, thus limiting the left-­to-­right shunt. As the infant becomes
older and pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) drops, the right ventricular (RV) wall becomes thinner, and the left-­to-­right shunt across
the ASD increases. The increased blood flow through the right side of
the heart results in enlargement of the right atrium and ventricle and
dilation of the pulmonary artery. The left atrium may also be enlarged
as the increased pulmonary blood flow returns to the left atrium, but
the left ventricle and aorta are normal in size. Despite the large pulmonary blood flow, pulmonary arterial pressure is usually initially normal

Confines of true atrial septum

Atrioventricular
septal defect
(“ostium primum”)

SVC

IVC

Oval fossa
(ostium secundum)
defect

B

Right
atrial
appendage

ASD
CS

Tric
valve

Eust
valve

Inferior
sinus venosus defect

A

Coronary sinus defect

C

D

Fig. 475.1 Atrial septal defects (ASDs). A, Schematic diagram outlining the different types of interatrial shunting that can be encountered. Note

that only the central defect is suitable for device closure. B, Left, Subcostal right anterior oblique view of a secundum ASD (asterisk) that is suitable
for device closure. Right, Specimen as seen in a similar view, outlining the landmarks of the defect. C, Left, Transesophageal echocardiogram with
color flow before device closure. Right, Taken after release of an Amplatzer device. D, Montage of echocardiographic interatrial communications
that are not secundum ASDs (asterisks) and therefore not suitable for device closure. Top left, Coronary sinus defect caused by unroofing; top right,
superior sinus venosus defect; bottom left, inferior sinus venosus defect; bottom right, ASD in the setting of an atrioventricular septal defect. AO,
Aorta; CS, coronary sinus; Eust, eustachian; IVC, inferior vena cava; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle; RA, right atrium; SVC, superior vena cava; Tric,
tricuspid. (From Webb GD, Smallhorn JF, Therrien J, et al. Congenital heart disease in the adult and pediatric patient. In: Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow
RO, et al., eds. Braunwald’s Heart Disease, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019, Fig 75.17, p. 1536.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 475 u Acyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Left-­to-­Right Shunt Lesions
because of the absence of a high-­pressure communication between the
pulmonary and systemic circulations. PVR remains low throughout
childhood, although it may begin to increase in adulthood and may
eventually result in reversal of the shunt and clinical cyanosis (Eisenmenger syndrome).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

A child with an ostium secundum ASD is often asymptomatic; the
lesion is often discovered during routine physical examination. Even
an extremely large secundum ASD rarely produces clinically evident
heart failure in childhood. However, on closer evaluation, younger
children may show subtle signs of failure to thrive, and older children
may have varying degrees of exercise intolerance. Often, the degree of
limitation may go unnoticed by the family until after repair, when the
child’s growth or activity level greatly increases.
The physical findings of an ASD are usually characteristic but fairly
subtle and require careful examination of the heart, paying special attention to the heart sounds. Examination of the chest may reveal a mild
left precordial bulge. An RV systolic lift may be palpable at the left sternal border. Sometimes a pulmonic ejection click can be heard. In most
patients with an ASD, the characteristic finding is that the second heart
sound (S2) is widely split and fixed in its splitting during all phases of
respiration. Normally, the duration of RV ejection varies with respiration,
with inspiration increasing RV volume and delaying closure of the pulmonary valve, widening the S2 split. With an ASD, RV diastolic volume
is constantly increased because of the shunt, and ejection time is prolonged throughout all phases of respiration. A systolic ejection murmur
is heard; it is usually no greater than a grade 3/6, medium pitched, without harsh qualities, seldom accompanied by a thrill, and best heard at the
left middle and upper sternal border. It is produced by the increased flow
across the RV outflow tract into the pulmonary artery. Because the atria
are at low pressure, flow across the ASD itself does not cause an audible
murmur. A short, rumbling mid-­diastolic murmur produced by the
increased volume of blood flow across the tricuspid valve (see Fig. 475.2)
is often audible at the lower-­left sternal border. This finding, which may
be subtle and is heard best with the bell of the stethoscope, usually indicates a Qp:Qs ratio of at least 2:1.

DIAGNOSIS

The chest radiograph shows varying degrees of enlargement of the
right ventricle and atrium, depending on the size of the shunt. The
pulmonary artery is enlarged, and pulmonary vascularity is increased.
These signs vary and may not be conspicuous in mild cases. Cardiac

2777

enlargement is often best appreciated on the lateral chest radiograph
because the right ventricle protrudes anteriorly as its volume increases.
The electrocardiogram (ECG) shows RV volume overload: the QRS
axis may be normal or exhibit right axis deviation, and a minor RV
conduction delay (rsR′ pattern in the right precordial leads) may be
present (Fig. 475.3). Right ventricular hypertrophy would be unusual

100

3

85

70

6

6

3

3
3

80
100
6
85

70

Fig. 475.2 Physiology of atrial septal defect (ASD). Circled numbers

represent oxygen saturation (So2) values. The numbers next to the arrows represent volumes of blood flow (in L/min/m2). This illustration
shows a hypothetical patient with a pulmonary-­to-­systemic blood flow
ratio (Qp:Qs) of 2:1. Desaturated blood enters the right atrium from the
vena cava at a volume of 3 L/min/m2 and mixes with an additional 3 L
of fully saturated blood shunting left to right across the ASD; the result
is an increase in So2 in the right atrium. Six liters of blood flow through
the tricuspid valve and cause a mid-­diastolic flow rumble. So2 may be
slightly higher in the right ventricle because of incomplete mixing at the
atrial level. The full 6 L flow across the right ventricular outflow tract and
cause a systolic ejection flow murmur. Six liters return to the left atrium,
with 3 L shunting left to right across the defect and 3 L crossing the
mitral valve to be ejected by the left ventricle into the ascending aorta
(normal cardiac output).

I

aVR

V1

V4

V3R

II

aVL

V2

V5

V4R

5 years
III

aVF

V3

V6

Fig. 475.3 Electrocardiogram in a child with an atrial septal defect showing rSR′ pattern (minor RV conduction delay) pattern in the right precordial
leads.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2778 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
in the absence of pulmonary hypertension or other lesions (e.g., valvar
pulmonic stenosis).
The echocardiogram shows findings characteristic of RV volume
overload, including an increased RV end-­diastolic dimension and flattening and abnormal motion of the ventricular septum (see Fig. 475.1).
A normal septum moves posteriorly during systole and anteriorly
during diastole (synchronous with the left ventricular contractions).
With RV overload and normal PVR, septal motion is either flattened or
reversed—that is, anterior movement in systole. The location and size
of the ASD are readily appreciated by two-­dimensional (2D) scanning,
with a characteristic brightening of the echo image seen at the edge
of the defect caused by the increased reflectivity of ultrasound at the
tissue-­blood interface (T-­artifact). The shunt is confirmed by pulsed
and color flow Doppler. The normal entry of all pulmonary veins into
the left atrium should be confirmed given the potential for anomalous
return of the right upper pulmonary vein.
Patients with the classic features of a hemodynamically significant
ASD on physical examination and chest radiography in whom echocardiographic identification of an isolated secundum ASD is made
need not undergo diagnostic catheterization before repair, with the
exception of an older patient, in whom PVR may be a concern. If pulmonary vascular disease is suspected, cardiac catheterization confirms
the presence of the defect and allows measurement of the shunt ratio
and pulmonary pressure and resistance.
If catheterization is performed, usually at the time of device closure,
the oxygen content of blood from the right atrium will be much higher
than that from the SVC (see Fig. 475.2). This feature is not specifically
diagnostic because it may occur with PAPVR to the right atrium, with
a ventricular septal defect (VSD) in the presence of tricuspid insufficiency, with AV septal defects associated with left ventricular–to–
right atrial shunts, and with aorta–to–right atrial communications
(ruptured sinus of Valsalva aneurysm). Pressure in the right side of
the heart is usually normal, but small to moderate pressure gradients
(<25 mm Hg) may be measured across the RV outflow tract because
of functional pulmonary stenosis related to excessive blood flow. If the
pressure gradient across the pulmonary valve is greater, pathologic pulmonary stenosis is likely present. In children and adolescents, PVR is
almost always normal. The shunt is variable and depends on the size
of the defect, but it may be of considerable volume. Cineangiography,
performed with the catheter through the defect and in the right upper
pulmonary vein, demonstrates the defect and confirms the location
of the right upper pulmonary venous drainage (normal or aberrant
into the SVC). Pulmonary angiography demonstrates the defect on
the levophase (return of contrast to left side of the heart after passing
through the lungs).

after ASD repair in adults. For most patients, the procedure of choice
is percutaneous catheter device closure using an atrial septal occlusion
device, implanted transvenously in the cardiac catheterization laboratory (Fig. 475.4). The results are excellent, and patients are usually discharged from the hospital the following day. The incidence of serious
complications (e.g., device erosion) is very low and can be decreased
by identifying high-­risk patients, such as those with a deficient rim of
septum in the area where the device would be anchored. Echocardiography can usually determine whether a patient is a good candidate for
device closure. In patients with small secundum ASDs and minimal
left-­to-­right shunts without RV enlargement, the consensus is that closure is usually not required. Infants with small to moderate-­sized ASDs
can be watched closely, because these defects will often grow smaller in
the first year of life. It is unclear whether the persistence of a small ASD
into adulthood increases the risk for stroke enough to warrant prophylactic closure of these defects in all patients, including those with no
history of stroke.

PROGNOSIS

Small to moderate-­sized ASDs detected in term infants may grow
smaller or close spontaneously. Secundum ASDs are well tolerated during childhood, and significant symptoms do not usually
appear until the third decade or later. Pulmonary hypertension,
atrial dysrhythmias, tricuspid or mitral insufficiency, and heart failure are late manifestations; these symptoms may initially appear

RA

LA

A

COMPLICATIONS

RA

Secundum ASDs are usually isolated, although they may be associated
with PAPVR, pulmonary valvular stenosis, VSD, pulmonary artery
branch stenosis, and persistent left SVC, as well as mitral valve prolapse and insufficiency. Secundum ASDs are associated with autosomal
dominant Holt-­Oram syndrome. The gene responsible for this syndrome, situated in the region 12q21-­q22 of chromosome 12, is TBX5,
a member of the T-­box transcriptional family. A familial form of
secundum ASD associated with AV conduction delay has been linked
to pathogenic variants in another transcription factor, Nkx2.5. Patients
with familial ASD without heart block may carry a variant in the transcription factor GATA4, located on chromosome 8p22-­23 (see Table
473.2).

TREATMENT

Transcatheter device or surgical closure is advised for all symptomatic
patients and for asymptomatic patients with a Qp:Qs ratio of at least
2:1 and those with RV enlargement. The timing for elective closure is
usually after the first year of life and before entry into school. Closure
carried out at open heart surgery is associated with a mortality rate of
<1%. Repair is preferred during early childhood because surgical mortality and morbidity are significantly greater in adulthood; the long-­
term risk of arrhythmia caused by chronic atrial dilation is also greater

LA

B
Fig. 475.4 Intravascular ultrasound imaging of transcatheter occlu-

sion of an atrial septal defect (ASD). A, Catheter (small arrow) has been
advanced across the ASD, and the left-­sided disk of the device (large
arrow) has been extruded from the sheath into the left atrium (LA). B,
The right atrial disk (arrow) has now been extruded into the right atrium
(RA). The two halves of the device are then locked together and the
catheter detached from the occluder device and removed.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 475 u Acyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Left-­to-­Right Shunt Lesions
during the increased volume load of pregnancy. Infective endocarditis is extremely rare, and antibiotic prophylaxis for isolated secundum
ASDs is not recommended.
The results after surgical or device closure in children with moderate-­
sized to large shunts are excellent. Symptoms, if present, disappear rapidly, and growth is frequently enhanced. Heart size decreases to normal,
and the ECG shows decreased RV volume load. Late right-­sided heart
failure and arrhythmias are less common in patients who have had
early repair, becoming more common in patients who undergo surgery
after 20 years of age. Although early and midterm results with device
closure are excellent, the long-­term effects are not yet known. Reports
of resolution of migraine headaches with aura in patients after device
closure of an ASD or PFO suggest a possible thromboembolic etiology;
however, whether to close such defects is still unclear.

475.3 Sinus Venosus Atrial Septal Defect
Daniel Bernstein
A sinus venosus ASD is situated in the upper part of the atrial septum
in close relation to the entry of the superior vena cava (see Fig. 475.1).
Often, one or more pulmonary veins (usually from the right lung)
drain anomalously into the SVC. The SVC sometimes straddles the
defect; in this case, some systemic venous blood enters the left atrium,
but only rarely does it cause clinically evident cyanosis. The hemodynamic disturbance, clinical picture, ECG, and radiograph are similar to
those seen in secundum ASD. The diagnosis can usually be made by
echocardiography. If questions remain after echocardiogram regarding
pulmonary venous drainage, cardiac CT or MRI is usually diagnostic.
Cardiac catheterization is rarely required, except in adult patients in
whom PVR assessment may be important. Anatomic correction generally requires surgical insertion of a patch to close the defect while
incorporating the entry of any anomalous pulmonary veins into the left
atrium. If the anomalous vein drains high in the SVC, the vein can be
left intact and the ASD closed to incorporate the SVC mouth into the
left atrium. The SVC proximal to the venous entrance is then detached
and anastomosed directly to the right atrial appendage (Warden procedure). This procedure avoids direct suturing of the pulmonary vein,
with less chance of future stenosis. Surgical results are generally excellent. Rarely, sinus venosus defects involve the IVC.

475.4 Partial Anomalous Pulmonary
Venous Return
Daniel Bernstein
One or several pulmonary veins may return anomalously to the SVC
or IVC, right atrium, or coronary sinus and produce a left-­to-­right
shunt of oxygenated blood. Partial anomalous pulmonary venous
return (PAPVR) usually involves some or all of the veins from only
one lung, typically the right. When an associated ASD is present, it is
generally of the sinus venosus type but can be secundum (see Chapters
475.2 and 475.3). When an ASD is detected by echocardiography, one
must always search for associated PAPVR. The history, physical signs,
and electrocardiographic and radiologic findings are indistinguishable from those of an isolated ostium secundum ASD. Occasionally, an
anomalous vein draining into the IVC is visible on chest radiography
as a crescentic shadow of vascular density along the right border of the
cardiac silhouette (scimitar syndrome); in these patients an ASD is
not usually present, but pulmonary sequestration or lung hypoplasia and anomalous arterial supply to that lobe are common findings.
Total anomalous pulmonary venous return (TAPVR) is a cyanotic
lesion and is discussed in Chapter 480.7. Echocardiography generally confirms the diagnosis. MRI and CT are also useful if there is a
question regarding pulmonary venous drainage or in cases of scimitar syndrome. If cardiac catheterization is performed, the presence of
anomalous pulmonary veins is demonstrated by selective pulmonary

2779

arteriography, and anomalous pulmonary arterial supply to the right
lung is demonstrated by descending aortography.
The prognosis for PAPVR is excellent, similar to that for ostium
secundum ASDs. When a significant left-­to-­right shunt is present,
surgical repair is performed. The associated ASD should be closed
in such a way that pulmonary venous return is directed to the left
atrium. A single anomalous pulmonary vein without an atrial communication may be difficult to redirect to the left atrium; if the
shunt is small and the right ventricle is not enlarged, it may be left
unoperated.

475.5 Atrioventricular Septal Defects
(Ostium Primum and Atrioventricular
Canal or Endocardial Cushion Defects)
Daniel Bernstein
The abnormalities encompassed by atrioventricular (AV) septal
defects are grouped together because they represent a spectrum of a
basic embryologic abnormality, a deficiency of the AV septum. In
the normal heart, the tricuspid valve sits slightly lower (more toward
the cardiac apex) than does the mitral valve, and thus a small portion
of septum (the AV septum) separates the left ventricle from the right
atrium. This septum is deficient in all forms of AV septal defect. When
the AV septum is absent and there is also an ostium primum defect,
the main communication is situated in the lower portion of the atrial
septum and overlies the mitral and tricuspid valves. In most cases a
cleft in the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve is also noted. The tricuspid valve is usually functionally normal, although some anatomic
abnormality of the septal leaflet is present. The ventricular septum is
intact.
An AV septal defect, formerly known as an AV canal defect or endocardial cushion defect, consists of a defect of the AV septum and contiguous atrial and ventricular septal defects with a common AV valve. The
severity of the AV valve abnormality varies considerably. In a complete
AV septal defect, a single AV valve is common to both ventricles and
consists of an anterior and a posterior bridging leaflet related to the
ventricular septum, with a lateral leaflet in each ventricle. The anterior
bridging leaflet can be divided into right-­and left-­sided components or
may be single and free floating over the ventricular septum. Complete
AV septal defect is one of the most common forms of congenital heart
disease in children with Down syndrome.
Transitional varieties of these defects also occur and include
ostium primum defects with clefts in the anterior mitral and septal
tricuspid valve leaflets and small VSDs and, less commonly, ostium
primum defects with normal AV valves. In some patients the atrial
septum is intact but a VSD is seen in the inlet septum, similar to
that found in the complete form of AV septal defect. Sometimes,
AV septal defects are associated with varying degrees of hypoplasia
of one of the ventricles, known as either left-­dominant or right-­
dominant AV septal defect. If the affected ventricular chamber is
too small to establish a two-­ventricle circulation, surgical palliation,
aiming for an eventual Fontan procedure, is performed (see Chapters 479.4 and 480.10).

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

In ostium primum defects, the basic abnormality is the combination
of a left-­to-­right shunt across the atrial defect and mitral (or occasionally tricuspid) insufficiency. The shunt is usually moderate to large,
the degree of mitral insufficiency is generally mild to moderate, and
pulmonary artery pressure (PAP) is typically normal or only mildly
increased. The physiology of this lesion is therefore similar to that of an
ostium secundum ASD.
In complete AV septal defects, left-­to-­right shunting occurs at both
the atrial and the ventricular level (Fig. 475.5). Additional shunting
may occur directly from the left ventricle to the right atrium (known
as a Gerbode shunt) because of absence of the AV septum. Pulmonary

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2780 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
hypertension and an early tendency to increase PVR are common.
AV valvular insufficiency, which may be moderate to severe, further
increases the volume load on one or both ventricles. If the defect is
large enough, some right-­to-­left shunting may also occur at the atrial
and ventricular levels and lead to mild arterial desaturation. With time,
progressive pulmonary vascular disease increases the right-­
to-­
left
shunt so that clinical cyanosis develops (Eisenmenger physiology; see
Chapter 482.2). The risk for development of pulmonary vascular disease is greater in patients with Down syndrome, and therefore surgical

100

3

90
9

70

9

80

3

6
3

6
70

100

85

Fig. 475.5 Physiology of atrioventricular (AV) septal defect. Circled

numbers represent oxygen saturation (So2) values. The numbers next to
the arrows represent volumes of blood flow (in L/min/m2). This illustration shows a hypothetical patient with a pulmonary-­to-­systemic blood
flow ratio (Qp:Qs) of 3:1. Desaturated blood enters the right atrium
from the vena cava at a volume of 3 L/min/m2 and mixes with 3 L of fully
saturated blood shunting left to right across the atrial septal defect; the
result is an increase in So2 in the right atrium. Six liters of blood flow
through the right side of the common AV valve, joined by an additional
3 L of saturated blood shunting left to right at the ventricular level,
further increasing So2 in the right ventricle. The full 9 L flow across the
right ventricular outflow tract into the lungs. Nine liters return to the left
atrium, with 3 L shunting left to right across the defect and 6 L crossing the left side of the common AV valve and causing a mid-­diastolic
flow rumble. Three liters of this volume shunt left to right across the
ventricular septal defect, and 3 L are ejected into the ascending aorta
(normal cardiac output).

correction is usually considered early in these patients, within the first
3-­6 months of life.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Many children with an isolated ostium primum defect are asymptomatic, and the anomaly is discovered during a general physical examination. In patients with moderate shunts and mild mitral insufficiency, the
physical signs are similar to those of the secundum ASD, but with an
additional apical holosystolic murmur caused by mitral insufficiency.
A history of exercise intolerance, easy fatigability, and recurrent
pneumonia may be obtained, especially in infants with large left-­to-­
right shunts and severe mitral insufficiency. In these patients, cardiac
enlargement is moderate or marked and the precordium is hyperdynamic. Auscultatory signs produced by the left-­to-­right shunt include a
normal or accentuated first heart sound (S1); wide, fixed splitting of S2;
a pulmonary systolic ejection murmur sometimes preceded by a click;
and a low-­pitched, mid-­diastolic rumbling murmur at the lower-­left
sternal edge or apex, or both, as a result of increased flow through the
AV valves. Mitral insufficiency may be manifested by a harsh (occasionally very high-­pitched) apical holosystolic murmur that radiates
to the left axilla.
With complete AV septal defects, heart failure and intercurrent pulmonary infection usually appear in infancy. The liver is enlarged, and
the infant often develops respiratory symptoms, feeding intolerance,
and failure to thrive. Cardiac enlargement is moderate to marked, and
a systolic thrill is frequently palpable at the lower-­left sternal border. A
precordial bulge and lift may be present as well. S1 is normal or accentuated. S2 is fixed and widely split if the pulmonary flow is massive. A
low-­pitched, mid-­diastolic rumbling murmur is audible at the lower-­
left sternal border, indicative of increased blood flow across the right
side of the common AV valve, and a pulmonary systolic ejection murmur is produced by the large pulmonary flow. The harsh apical holosystolic murmur of mitral insufficiency may also be present.

DIAGNOSIS

Chest radiographs of children with complete AV septal defects often
show moderate to severe cardiac enlargement caused by the prominence of both ventricles and atria. The pulmonary artery is large, and
pulmonary vascularity is increased.
The ECG in patients with a complete AV septal defect is distinctive
and usually diagnostic. Principal abnormalities include (1) superior
and rightward orientation of the mean frontal QRS axis (−90 to −180
degrees) represented by the QRS being negative in both lead I and lead
aVF, (2) counterclockwise inscription of the superiorly oriented QRS
vector loop (manifested by a Q wave in leads I and aVL), (3) signs of
biventricular hypertrophy or isolated RV hypertrophy, (4) RV conduction delay (rSR′ pattern in leads V3R and V1), (5) normal or tall P
waves, and (6) occasional prolongation of the P-­R interval (Fig. 475.6).

I

aVR

V1

V4

II

aVL

V2

V5

III

aVF

V3

V6

Fig. 475.6 Electrocardiogram from an infant with atrioventricular septal defect. Note that the QRS complexes are negative in both leads I and

roughly equipotential in lead III, so the QRS axis is −150 degrees. There is also right ventricular hypertrophy (RVH) and a minor right ventricular
conduction delay with an RSR′ pattern in aVR.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 475 u Acyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Left-­to-­Right Shunt Lesions
The echocardiogram is diagnostic and shows signs of RV enlargement (Fig. 475.7). There is encroachment of the mitral valve into the
left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT); the abnormally low position of
the AV valves results in a “gooseneck” deformity of the LVOT. In normal hearts the tricuspid valve inserts slightly more toward the apex
than does the mitral valve. In AV septal defects, both valves insert at the
same level because of absence of the AV septum. In complete AV septal
defects, the inlet portion of the ventricular septum is also deficient,
and the common AV valve is readily appreciated. Pulsed and color flow
Doppler echocardiography will demonstrate left-­to-­right shunting at
the atrial, ventricular, or left ventricular–to–right atrial levels and can
be used to semiquantitate the degree of AV valve insufficiency. Echocardiography is useful for determining the insertion points of the chordae of the common AV valve, the relative size of the two ventricles,
and evaluating the presence of associated lesions such as patent ductus
arteriosus (PDA) or coarctation of the aorta.
Cardiac catheterization and angiocardiography are rarely required
to confirm the diagnosis unless pulmonary vascular disease is suspected, as when the diagnosis has been delayed beyond early infancy,
especially in patients with Down syndrome in whom the development
of pulmonary vascular disease may be more rapid. Catheterization
demonstrates the magnitude of the left-­to-­right shunt, the degree of
PVR elevation, and the severity of insufficiency of the common AV
valve. By oximetry, the shunt is usually demonstrable at both the atrial
and the ventricular level. Arterial oxygen saturation is normal or only
mildly reduced unless pulmonary vascular disease is present. Children
with ostium primum defects generally have normal or only moderately
elevated PAP. Conversely, complete AV septal defects are associated
with RV and pulmonary arterial hypertension and, in older patients,
increased PVR (see Chapter 482.2).
Selective left ventriculography will demonstrate deformity of
the common AV valve and distortion of the LVOT caused by the

2781

abnormally apical position of this valve (gooseneck deformity). The
abnormal anterior leaflet of the mitral valve is serrated, and insufficiency is noted. Direct shunting of blood from the left ventricle to the
right atrium may also be demonstrated.

TREATMENT

Ostium primum defects are approached surgically from an incision in
the right atrium. The cleft in the mitral valve is located through the
atrial defect and is repaired by direct suture. The defect in the atrial
septum is usually closed by insertion of a patch prosthesis. The surgical
mortality rate for ostium primum defects is very low.
Surgical treatment of complete AV septal defects is more complex, although highly successful. The postoperative course may be
prolonged in infants with severe cardiac failure and in those with
pulmonary hypertension. Because of the risk of pulmonary vascular disease developing as early as 6-­12 months of age, surgical
intervention must be performed during infancy. Full correction of
these defects can be readily accomplished. Palliation with pulmonary arterial banding is uncommon now and reserved for the small
subset of patients who have other associated lesions that make early
corrective surgery too risky. However, banding may not be effective in patients with a large amount of AV valve regurgitation, as
the higher pressure will only increase the regurgitation. The atrial
and ventricular defects are patched, using either one or two separate
patches, and the AV valves are reconstructed. Uncommon complications include surgically induced heart block requiring placement of
a permanent pacemaker and excessive LVOT narrowing requiring
surgical revision. More common long-­term complications include
residual tricuspid or mitral regurgitation, because full repair of
very abnormal valves is often not possible. This requires long-­term
surveillance because these patients may require replacement with a
prosthetic valve later in life.

PROGNOSIS
RA
LA

RV
LV

A

The prognosis for unrepaired complete AV septal defects depends on
the magnitude of the left-­to-­right shunt, degree of PVR elevation, and
severity of AV valve insufficiency. Before the advent of early corrective surgery, death from cardiac failure during infancy was common,
and patients who survived without surgery usually developed pulmonary vascular disease. Most unoperated patients with ostium primum defects and minimal AV valve involvement are asymptomatic
or have only minor, nonprogressive symptoms until they reach the
third or fourth decade of life, similar to the course of patients with
secundum ASDs. Today, long-­term results after surgical repair are
excellent. Late postoperative complications include atrial arrhythmias and heart block, progressive narrowing of the LVOT requiring
surgical revision, and eventual worsening of AV valve regurgitation
(usually on the left side) requiring reoperation or replacement with
a prosthetic valve.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

475.6 Ventricular Septal Defect
Daniel Bernstein

B
Fig. 475.7 Echocardiograms of atrioventricular (AV) septal defect.

A, Subcostal four-­chamber view demonstrating the common AV valve
(arrows) spanning the atrial and ventricular septal defects. B, Doppler
imaging shows two jets of regurgitation through the left side of the
common AV valve (arrows). LA, Left atrium; LV, left ventricle; RA, right
atrium; RV, right ventricle.

Ventricular septal defect is the most common cardiac malformation
and accounts for 25% of cases of congenital heart disease. Defects may
occur in any portion of the ventricular septum, but the most common
are of the membranous type (Fig. 475.8). These defects are in a posteroinferior position, anterior to the septal leaflet of the tricuspid valve.
VSDs between the crista supraventricularis and the papillary muscle of
the conus may be associated with pulmonary stenosis and other manifestations of tetralogy of Fallot (see Chapter 479.1). VSDs superior to
the crista supraventricularis (supracristal) are less common; these are
found just beneath the pulmonary valve and may impinge on an aortic
sinus and cause aortic insufficiency (see Chapter 475.7). Supracristal

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2782 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

100

3

85
6

100
6

3

70

3

3

100

80

Fig. 475.8 Different types of ventricular septal defects (VSDs). The

central diagram outlines the location of the various types of defects as
seen from the right ventricle. Two left images show a perimembranous
VSD as seen in the five-­chamber and short-­axis views. Note the defect
is roofed by the aorta and is next to the tricuspid valve. Bottom middle echocardiogram shows a muscular apical defect. Top right image
is a right anterior oblique view in a doubly committed VSD. Bottom
right image is a short axis view showing an outlet VSD with prolapse
of the right coronary cusp. AO, Aorta; LV, left ventricle; PA, pulmonary
artery; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle. (From Webb GD, Smallhorn
JF, Therrien J, et al. Congenital heart disease in the adult and pediatric
patient. In: Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, et al., eds. Braunwald’s Heart
Disease, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019, Fig 75.21, p. 1514.)

VSDs are more common in patients of Asian descent. VSDs in the midportion or apical region of the ventricular septum are muscular in type
and may be single or multiple (“Swiss cheese” septum).

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

The physical size of the VSD is a major determinant of the size of the
left-­to-­right shunt. When the defect is large, the level of pulmonary
vascular resistance (PVR) in relation to systemic vascular resistance
(SVR) is the major determinant of the shunt’s magnitude, since the
large defect will essentially equalize pressure between the two ventricles. When a small communication is present (usually <5 mm), the
VSD is deemed to be pressure restrictive, meaning that right ventricular (RV) pressure is normal or only slightly elevated. The higher pressure in the left ventricle drives the shunt left to right, and the size of the
defect limits the magnitude of the shunt. In larger, nonrestrictive VSDs
(usually >10 mm), RV and left ventricular (LV) pressures are equalized.
In these defects the direction of shunting and the shunt magnitude are
determined by the PVR/SVR ratio (Fig. 475.9).
After birth in patients with a large VSD, PVR may remain elevated,
delaying the normal postnatal decrease, and thus the size of the left-­
to-­right shunt may initially be limited. Because of normal involution
of the media of small pulmonary arterioles, PVR begins to fall in the
first few weeks after birth, and the size of the left-­to-­right shunt then
increases. Eventually, a large left-­to-­right shunt develops, and clinical symptoms become apparent. In most cases during early infancy,
PVR is only slightly elevated, and the major contribution to pulmonary hypertension is the large communication allowing exposure of the
pulmonary circulation to systemic pressure and the large pulmonary
blood flow. With continued exposure of the pulmonary vascular bed to
high systolic pressure and high flow, pulmonary vascular obstructive
disease eventually develops. When the PVR/SVR ratio approaches 1:1,
the shunt becomes bidirectional, signs of heart failure abate, and the
patient begins to show signs of cyanosis (Eisenmenger physiology; see
Chapter 482.2), intermittent at first, but then more constant. In rare
infants with a large VSD, more often in those with Down syndrome,
PVR never decreases after birth, and symptoms may remain minimal
until Eisenmenger physiology becomes evident.

Fig. 475.9 Physiology of a moderate-to-large ventricular septal de-

fect. Circled numbers represent oxygen saturation (So2) values. The
numbers next to the arrows represent volumes of blood flow (in L/min/
m2). This illustration shows a hypothetical patient with a pulmonary-­to-­
systemic blood flow ratio (Qp:Qs) of 2:1. Desaturated blood enters the
right atrium from the vena cava at a volume of 3 L/min/m2 and flows
across the tricuspid valve. An additional 3 L of blood shunt left to right
across the VSD, resulting in increased So2 in the right ventricle. Six liters of blood are ejected into the lungs (2:1 shunt). Pulmonary arterial
saturation may be further increased because of incomplete mixing at
the right ventricular level. Six liters return to the left atrium, cross the
mitral valve, and cause a mid-­diastolic flow rumble. Three liters of this
volume shunt left to right across the VSD, and 3 L are ejected into the
ascending aorta (normal cardiac output).

The magnitude of intracardiac shunts is usually described by the
Qp:Qs ratio. If the left-­to-­right shunt is small (Qp:Qs <1.5:1), the cardiac chambers are not appreciably enlarged, and the pulmonary vascular bed is probably normal. If the shunt is large (Qp:Qs >2:1), left
atrial and LV volume overload occurs, and RV and pulmonary arterial
hypertension may be present if the defect is large. The main pulmonary
artery, left atrium, and left ventricle are enlarged.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The clinical findings of patients with a VSD vary according to the size
of the defect and pulmonary blood flow and pressure. Small VSDs
with trivial left-­to-­right shunts and normal pulmonary artery pressure
(PAP) are common. These patients are asymptomatic, and the cardiac
lesion is usually found during routine physical examination. Characteristically, a loud, harsh, or blowing holosystolic murmur is present
and heard best over the lower-­left sternal border, and it is frequently
accompanied by a thrill. In a few cases the murmur ends before the
second heart sound (S2), presumably because of closure of the defect
during late systole. A short, loud, harsh systolic murmur localized to
the apex in a neonate is often a sign of a tiny VSD in the apical muscular septum. These tiny defects most often close during infancy. In
premature infants the murmur of a VSD may be heard early because
PVR decreases more rapidly.
Large VSDs with excessive pulmonary blood flow and pulmonary
hypertension are responsible for signs of congestive heart failure:
dyspnea, feeding difficulties, poor growth, profuse perspiration, and
recurrent pulmonary infections in early infancy. Cyanosis is usually
absent, but duskiness is sometimes noted during infections or crying.
Prominence of the left precordium is common, as are a palpable parasternal lift, a laterally displaced apical impulse and apical thrust, and a
systolic thrill. The holosystolic murmur of a large VSD is generally less
harsh than that of a small VSD and more blowing in nature because of
the absence of a significant pressure gradient across the defect. It is less
likely to be prominent in the newborn period before PVR drops. The

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 475 u Acyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Left-­to-­Right Shunt Lesions
pulmonic component of S2 may be increased as a result of pulmonary
hypertension. The presence of a mid-­diastolic, low-­pitched rumble at
the apex is caused by increased blood flow across the mitral valve and
usually indicates a Qp:Qs ratio ≥2:1. This murmur is best appreciated
with the bell of the stethoscope.

DIAGNOSIS

In patients with small VSDs, the chest radiograph is usually normal,
although minimal cardiomegaly and a borderline increase in pulmonary vasculature may be observed. The ECG is generally normal but
may suggest LV hypertrophy. The presence of RV hypertrophy on ECG
is worrisome and a warning that the defect is not small and that the
patient has pulmonary hypertension or an associated lesion such as
pulmonic stenosis. In large VSDs the chest radiograph shows gross
cardiomegaly with prominence of both ventricles, the left atrium, and
the pulmonary artery (Fig. 475.10). Pulmonary vascular markings are
increased, and frank pulmonary edema, including pleural effusions,
may be present. The ECG shows biventricular hypertrophy; the P
waves may be notched (indicative of left atrial [LA] enlargement).
The 2D echocardiogram shows the position and size of the VSD (see
Fig. 475.8). In small defects, especially those of the muscular septum,
the defect itself may be difficult to image and is visualized only by color
Doppler examination. In defects of the membranous septum, a thin
membrane (called a ventricular septal aneurysm but consisting of
abnormal tricuspid valve tissue) can partially cover the defect and limit
the volume of the left-­to-­right shunt. Echocardiography is also useful
for estimating shunt size by examining the degree of volume overload
of the left atrium and left ventricle; in the absence of associated lesions,
the extent of their increased dimensions is a good reflection of the size
of the left-­to-­right shunt. Pulsed Doppler examination shows whether
the VSD is pressure restrictive by calculating the pressure gradient
across the defect. Such calculation allows an estimation of RV pressure
and helps determine whether the patient is at risk for the development
of early pulmonary vascular disease. The echocardiogram can also be
useful to determine the presence of aortic valve insufficiency or aortic
leaflet prolapse, which can be associated especially with supracristal
VSDs.
The hemodynamics of a VSD can also be demonstrated by cardiac
catheterization, although catheterization currently is performed only
when laboratory data do not fit well with the clinical findings or when
pulmonary vascular disease is suspected. Oximetry demonstrates
increased oxygen content in the right ventricle; because some defects
eject blood almost directly into the pulmonary artery (streaming), the
full magnitude of the oxygen saturation increase may only be apparent when pulmonary arterial blood is sampled. Small, restrictive VSDs
are associated with normal right-­sided heart pressures and PVR. Large,
nonrestrictive VSDs are associated with equal or near-­equal pulmonary
and systemic systolic pressure and variable elevations in PVR. Pulmonary blood flow may be 2-­4 times systemic blood flow. In patients with

such “hyperdynamic pulmonary hypertension,” PAP is at systemic
level, but PVR is only minimally elevated because of the high pulmonary blood flow (resistance is equal to the mean pressure divided by
flow). However, if left untreated until Eisenmenger syndrome is present, systolic and diastolic PAP will be elevated and the degree of left-­
to-­right shunting minimal. In these cases, desaturation of blood in the
left ventricle is usually encountered. The size, location, and number of
ventricular defects can be demonstrated by left ventriculography. Contrast medium passes across the defect(s) to opacify the right ventricle
and pulmonary artery. Administration of 100% oxygen with and without nitric oxide can be used to determine whether PVR, if elevated, is
still reactive and therefore more likely to decrease after surgical repair.

TREATMENT

The natural course of a VSD depends to a large degree on the size of
the defect. A significant number (30–50%) of small defects close spontaneously, most frequently during the first 2 years of life. Small muscular VSDs are more likely to close (up to 80%) than membranous VSDs
(up to 35%). Most defects that close do so before age 4 years, although
spontaneous closure has been reported in adults. VSDs that close often
have ventricular septal aneurysm (accessory tricuspid valve) tissue
covering them that limits the magnitude of the shunt. Most children
with small restrictive defects remain asymptomatic, without evidence
of an increase in heart size, PAP, or PVR; a long-­term risk is infective
endocarditis. Some long-­term studies of adults with unoperated small
VSDs show an increased incidence of arrhythmia, subaortic stenosis,
and exercise intolerance. It is recommended that an isolated, small,
hemodynamically insignificant VSD is not an indication for surgery.
However, with the declining risk of open heart surgery, whether all
VSDs should be closed electively in mid-­childhood is still debated.
It is less common for moderate or large VSDs to close spontaneously, although even defects large enough to result in heart failure may
become smaller, and up to 8% may close completely. More frequently,
infants with large defects have repeated episodes of respiratory infection and heart failure despite optimal medical management. Heart failure may be manifested in many of these infants primarily as failure to
thrive. Pulmonary hypertension occurs as a result of high pulmonary
blood flow. These patients are at risk for pulmonary vascular disease if
the defect is not repaired during early infancy.
Patients with VSD are also at risk for the development of aortic valve
regurgitation, the greatest risk occurring in patients with a supracristal
VSD (see Chapter 475.7), where the position of the defect undermines
support for the right coronary or noncoronary leaflet of the aortic
valve. A small number of patients with VSD develop acquired infundibular pulmonary stenosis, which then protects the pulmonary circulation from the short-­term effects of pulmonary overcirculation and
the long-­term effects of pulmonary vascular disease. In these patients
the clinical picture changes from that of a VSD with a large left-­to-­right
shunt to a VSD with pulmonary stenosis. The shunt may diminish in

Fig. 475.10 A, Preoperative radio-

graph in a patient with a ventricular
septal defect with a large left-­to-­right
shunt and pulmonary hypertension.
Significant cardiomegaly, prominence
of the pulmonary arterial trunk, and
pulmonary overcirculation are evident.
B, Three years after surgical closure
of the defect, heart size is greatly decreased and the pulmonary vasculature
is normal.

A

2783

B

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2784 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
size, become balanced, or even become a net right-­to-­left shunt. These
patients must be carefully distinguished from those in whom an Eisenmenger physiology develops (see Chapter 482.2).
In patients with small VSDs, parents should be reassured of the relatively benign nature of the lesion, and the child should be encouraged
to live a normal life, with no restrictions on physical activity. Surgical repair is not recommended; however, routine follow-­up with the
cardiologist is important. As protection against infective endocarditis, the integrity of primary and permanent teeth should be carefully
maintained; with the latest revision of the American Heart Association
(AHA) guidelines, antibiotic prophylaxis is no longer recommended
for dental visits or surgical procedures (see Chapter 486). These patients
can be monitored by a combination of clinical examination and noninvasive laboratory tests until the VSD has closed spontaneously. Echocardiography is used to estimate PAP, screen for the development of
LVOT pathology (subaortic membrane or aortic regurgitation), and
confirm spontaneous closure.
In infants with a large VSD and heart failure, management is
directed at reducing symptoms and optimizing the patient’s fluid status
so that they are in optimal condition for surgical repair. In infants in
the first year of life, if early treatment is successful, the size of the defect
may sometimes diminish in size with clinical improvement. Selected
patients in this group can be observed closely with echocardiographic monitoring. The clinician must be alert not to confuse clinical
improvement caused by a decrease in defect size with clinical changes
caused by the development of Eisenmenger physiology. Because surgical closure can be carried out at low risk in most infants, medical
management should not be pursued in symptomatic infants after an
initial unsuccessful trial. Because pulmonary vascular disease can usually be prevented when surgery is performed within the first year of life,
even infants with well-­controlled heart failure should not have surgery
delayed inordinately unless there is echocardiographic evidence that
the defect is becoming pressure restrictive.
Indications for surgical closure of a VSD include patients at any age
with large defects in whom clinical symptoms and failure to thrive cannot be controlled medically or in whom the defect is not decreasing in
size; infants between 6 and 12 months of age with moderate to large
defects associated with pulmonary hypertension, even if the symptoms
are controlled by medication; and patients older than 24 months with
a Qp:Qs ratio greater than 2:1. Patients with a supracristal VSD of any
size are usually referred for surgery because of their higher risk for
developing aortic valve regurgitation (see Chapter 475.7). Severe pulmonary vascular disease nonresponsive to pulmonary vasodilators is a
contraindication to closure of a VSD.
Transcatheter closure has been used successfully in treating larger
muscular VSDs, which may be difficult to access by surgery. Perimembranous and intracristal VSD catheter closure is more complex because
of the proximity of the defect to the tricuspid valve and conduction
system; devices have been designed more specifically to address these
issues and are currently being investigated. Preliminary data suggest
that, for carefully selected patients (usually children beyond infancy),
the results appear to be comparable to surgical repair. Hybrid methods
employing a sternotomy with device placement through the anterior
wall of the right ventricle under transesophageal echocardiographic
and fluoroscopic visualization have also been performed in difficult-­
to-­approach defects.

PROGNOSIS

The results of primary surgical repair are excellent, and complications
leading to long-­term problems (residual ventricular shunts requiring
reoperation or device closure and heart block requiring a pacemaker)
are rare. Surgical risks are somewhat higher for defects in the muscular
septum, particularly apical defects and multiple (Swiss cheese–type)
VSDs. Some of these patients may require pulmonary arterial banding if symptomatic, with subsequent debanding and repair of multiple
VSDs at an older age.
After surgical closure of the left-­to-­right shunt, the hyperdynamic
heart becomes quiet, cardiac size decreases toward normal (see Fig.
475.10), thrills and murmurs are absent, and pulmonary artery

hypertension regresses. The patient’s clinical status greatly improves.
Most infants begin to thrive, often quite rapidly after hospital discharge, and cardiac medications are no longer required. Catch-­up
growth occurs in most patients within the next year. In some patients,
after successful surgery, systolic ejection murmurs of low intensity
persist for months. The long-­term prognosis after surgery is excellent.
Patients with a small VSD and those who have undergone surgical closure without residua are considered to be at standard risk for health
and life insurance.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

475.7 Supracristal Ventricular Septal Defect
with Aortic Insufficiency
Daniel Bernstein
A supracristal VSD can be complicated by prolapse of the aortic valve
into the defect and aortic insufficiency, which may eventually develop
in 50–90% of these patients. Although supracristal VSD accounts for
approximately 5% of all patients with VSD, the incidence is higher in
Asian children and in males. The VSD, which may be small or moderate in size, is located anterior to and directly below the pulmonary valve
in the outlet septum, superior to the muscular ridge known as the crista
supraventricularis, which separates the trabecular body of the right
ventricle from the smooth outflow portion. The right or, less often, the
noncoronary aortic cusp prolapses into the defect and may partially or
even completely occlude it. Such occlusion may limit the amount of
left-­to-­right shunting and give the false impression that the defect is
not large. Aortic insufficiency is most often not recognized until after
5 years of age, or even later. Although most common with supracristal
VSDs, aortic insufficiency is occasionally associated with VSDs located
in the membranous septum.
Early heart failure secondary to a large left-­to-­right shunt rarely
occurs, but without surgery, moderate to severe aortic insufficiency and
left ventricular failure may eventually ensue. The murmur of a supracristal VSD is usually heard at the mid-­to upper-­left sternal border, as
opposed to the lower-­left sternal border, and it is sometimes confused
with that of pulmonic stenosis. A decrescendo diastolic murmur will
be appreciated at the upper-­right or mid-­left sternal borders if there is
aortic insufficiency. More advanced degrees of aortic insufficiency will
be associated with a wide pulse pressure and a hyperdynamic precordium. These clinical findings must be distinguished from PDA or other
defects associated with aortic runoff.
The clinical manifestations vary widely, from trivial aortic regurgitation and small left-­to-­right shunts in asymptomatic children to florid
aortic insufficiency and massive cardiomegaly in symptomatic adolescents. Closure of all supracristal ventricular VSDs is usually recommended to prevent the development of aortic regurgitation, even in
an asymptomatic child. Patients who already have significant aortic
insufficiency require surgical intervention to prevent irreversible left
ventricular dysfunction. Surgical options depend on the degree of
damage to the valve, and for mild insufficiency, may include simple
closure of the defect to bolster the valve apparatus without touching the
valve itself, valvuloplasty for more significant degrees of involvement,
and replacement with a prosthesis or homograft or aortopulmonary
translocation (Ross procedure) for severe involvement.

475.8 Patent Ductus Arteriosus
Daniel Bernstein
During fetal life, most of the pulmonary arterial blood is shunted right
to left through the ductus arteriosus into the aorta (see Chapter 470).
Functional closure of the ductus normally occurs soon after birth, usually within the first week of life, but if the ductus remains patent when

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 475 u Acyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Left-­to-­Right Shunt Lesions
PVR falls, aortic blood then is shunted left to right into the pulmonary
artery. The aortic end of the ductus is just distal to the origin of the
left subclavian artery, and the ductus enters the pulmonary artery at
its bifurcation. Female patients with patent ductus arteriosus (PDA)
outnumber males 2:1. PDA is also associated with maternal rubella
infection during early pregnancy, an uncommon occurrence in the
vaccination era. PDA is a common problem in premature infants
because the smooth muscle in the wall of the preterm ductus is less
responsive to high Po2 and therefore less likely to constrict after birth.
In these infants the shunt through a PDA can cause severe hemodynamic derangements and several major sequelae (see Chapter 131.3).
When a term infant is found to have a PDA, the wall of the ductus is
deficient in both the mucoid endothelial layer and the muscular media,
whereas in the premature infant, the PDA usually has a normal structure. Thus a PDA persisting beyond the first few weeks of life in a term
infant rarely closes spontaneously or with pharmacologic intervention,
whereas if early pharmacologic or surgical intervention is not required
in a premature infant, spontaneous closure occurs in most instances.
A PDA is seen in 10% of patients with other congenital heart lesions
and often plays a critical role in providing a source of pulmonary blood
flow when the right ventricular outflow tract is stenotic or atretic (see
Chapter 479) or in providing systemic blood flow in the presence of
aortic coarctation or interruption (see Chapters 476.6-­476.8) or in
hypoplastic left heart syndrome.
A PDA is a common finding (∼90%) in patients with smooth
muscle dysfunction syndrome (SMDS) caused by a heterozygous
pathogenic variant in ACTA2. Additional features include congenital mydriasis, pulmonary hypertension, aortic and other arterial
aneurysms, moyamoya-­like cerebrovascular disease, and intestinal
hypoperistalsis.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

isolated, uncomplicated PDA is untenable when RV hypertrophy is
present on the ECG.
Radiographic studies in patients with a large PDA show a prominent pulmonary artery with increased pulmonary vascular markings.
Cardiac size depends on the degree of left-­to-­right shunting; it may be
normal or moderately to greatly enlarged. The chambers involved are
the left atrium and left ventricle. The aortic knob may be normal or
prominent.
On echocardiogram the cardiac chambers will be normal in size
if the ductus is small. With large shunts, LA and LV dimensions are
increased. The ductus can easily be visualized directly and its size
estimated. Color and pulsed Doppler examinations demonstrate systolic or diastolic (or both) retrograde turbulent flow in the pulmonary
artery and aortic retrograde flow in diastole in the presence of a large
shunt (Fig. 475.11).
The clinical signs and echocardiographic findings are sufficiently
distinctive to allow an accurate diagnosis by noninvasive methods in
most patients. In rare patients with atypical findings, cardiac catheterization may be indicated for confirmation of diagnosis. Cardiac catheterization will demonstrate either normal or increased pressure in
the right ventricle and pulmonary artery, depending on the size of the
ductus. The presence of oxygenated blood shunting into the pulmonary
artery confirms the left-­to-­right shunt. The catheter may pass from the
pulmonary artery through the ductus into the descending aorta. Injection of contrast medium into the ascending aorta shows opacification
of the pulmonary artery from the aorta and identifies the ductus.
Other conditions can produce systolic and diastolic murmurs in the
pulmonic area in an acyanotic patient (see Chapter 471). An aorticopulmonary window defect may rarely be clinically indistinguishable
from a patent ductus, although in most cases the murmur is only systolic and is loudest at the right rather than the left upper sternal border

Because of the higher aortic pressure postnatally, blood shunts left to
right through the ductus, from the aorta to the pulmonary artery. The
extent of the shunt depends on the size of the ductus and on the PVR/
SVR ratio. If the PDA is small, pressures within the pulmonary artery,
the right ventricle, and the right atrium are normal. If the PDA is large,
PAP may be elevated to systemic levels during both systole and diastole. Thus patients with a large PDA are at high risk for the development of pulmonary vascular disease if left unoperated.

RV
MPA

DIAGNOSIS

If the left-­to-­right shunt is small, the ECG is normal; if the ductus is
large, LV or biventricular hypertrophy is present. The diagnosis of an

AV

RA

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

A small PDA is usually asymptomatic and is usually diagnosed by the
presence of a heart murmur. A large PDA will result in heart failure
similar to that encountered in infants with a large VSD. Stunting of
physical growth may be a major manifestation in infants with large
shunts. A small PDA is associated with normal peripheral pulses, and
a large PDA results in bounding peripheral arterial pulses and a wide
pulse pressure, caused by runoff of blood into the pulmonary artery
during diastole. Although normal in size when the ductus is small, the
heart is moderately or grossly enlarged in cases with a large communication; in these patients the apical impulse is prominent and, with
cardiac enlargement, is heaving. A thrill, maximal in the second left
interspace, is often present and may radiate toward the left clavicle,
down the left sternal border, or toward the apex. It is usually systolic
but may also be palpated throughout the cardiac cycle. The classic continuous murmur is described as “machinery-­like” in quality. It begins
soon after onset of S1, reaches maximal intensity at the end of systole,
and wanes in late diastole. It may be localized to the second left intercostal space or radiate down the left sternal border or to beneath the
left clavicle. When PVR is increased, the diastolic component of the
murmur may be less prominent or absent. In patients with a large left-­
to-­right shunt, a low-­pitched mitral mid-­diastolic murmur may be
audible at the apex as a result of the increased volume of blood flow
across the mitral valve.

2785

LA

DescAo

A

B
Fig. 475.11 Echocardiogram in a newborn with a small to moderate-­
size patent ductus arteriosus. A, Color Doppler evaluation in a parasternal short-­axis view shows flow (arrow) from the aorta into the main pulmonary artery. B, Doppler evaluation demonstrates retrograde diastolic
flow into the pulmonary artery. AV, Aortic valve; DescAo, descending
aorta; LA, left atrium; MPA, main pulmonary artery; RA, right atrium; RV,
right ventricle.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2786 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
(see Chapter 475.9). A sinus of Valsalva aneurysm that has ruptured
into the right side of the heart or pulmonary artery, a coronary AV fistula, and an aberrant left coronary artery with massive collaterals from
the right coronary display dynamics similar to that of a PDA with a
continuous murmur and a wide pulse pressure. Truncus arteriosus with
torrential pulmonary flow also can present with aortic runoff physiology. A peripheral AV fistula also results in a wide pulse pressure, but
the distinctive precordial murmur of a PDA is not present. VSD with
aortic insufficiency, repaired tetralogy of Fallot, and combined aortic
and mitral insufficiency (usually from rheumatic fever) may be confused with a PDA, but the murmurs should be differentiated by their
to-­and-­fro rather than continuous nature. In a to-­and-­fro murmur
there is a quiet segment between the systolic and diastolic components,
whereas in a continuous murmur there is flow disturbance throughout the cardiac cycle (even if the murmur is louder during systole than
diastole). The combination of a large VSD and a PDA result in findings
more like those of an isolated VSD. Echocardiography should be able
to eliminate these other diagnostic possibilities.

PROGNOSIS AND COMPLICATIONS

Spontaneous closure of the ductus after infancy is extremely rare.
Patients with a small PDA may live a normal span with few or no cardiac symptoms, but late manifestations may occur. In patients with a
large PDA, cardiac failure most often occurs in early infancy but may
occur later in life, even with a moderate-­sized communication.
Infective endarteritis may be seen at any age. Pulmonary or systemic
emboli may occur. Rare complications include aneurysmal dilation of
the pulmonary artery or the ductus, calcification of the ductus, noninfective thrombosis of the ductus with embolization, and paradoxical emboli. Pulmonary hypertension (Eisenmenger syndrome) usually
develops in patients with a large PDA who do not undergo ductal closure (see Chapter 482.2).

TREATMENT

Irrespective of age, patients with a PDA require either catheter or surgical closure. In patients with a small PDA, the rationale for closure
is prevention of bacterial endarteritis or other late complications. In
patients with a moderate to large PDA, closure is accomplished to treat
heart failure and prevent the development of pulmonary vascular disease. Once the diagnosis of a moderate to large PDA is made, treatment
should not be unduly postponed after adequate medical therapy for
cardiac failure has been instituted.
Transcatheter PDA closure is routinely performed in the cardiac
catheterization laboratory (Fig. 475.12). Small PDAs are generally
closed with intravascular coils. Moderate to large PDAs may be closed

with an umbrella-­like or pluglike device or with a catheter-­introduced
sac into which several coils are released. Surgical closure of a PDA can
be accomplished by a standard left thoracotomy or using thoracoscopic
minimally invasive techniques. The case fatality rate with interventional or surgical treatment is considerably less than 1%; thus closure
of the ductus is indicated even in asymptomatic patients. Pulmonary
hypertension is not a contraindication to surgery at any age if it can
be demonstrated at cardiac catheterization that the shunt flow is still
predominantly left to right and that severe pulmonary vascular disease
is not present. After closure, symptoms of cardiac failure rapidly disappear. Infants who had failed to thrive usually have immediate improvement in physical development. The pulse and blood pressure return
to normal, and the machinery-­like murmur disappears. A functional
systolic murmur over the pulmonary area may persist; it may represent
turbulence in a persistently dilated pulmonary artery. The radiographic
signs of cardiac enlargement and pulmonary overcirculation disappear
over several months, and the ECG becomes normal.

PATENT DUCTUS ARTERIOSUS IN LOW
BIRTHWEIGHT INFANTS
See Chapter 126.1.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

475.9 Aortopulmonary Window Defect
Daniel Bernstein
An aortopulmonary window defect consists of a communication
between the ascending aorta and the main pulmonary artery. The
presence of pulmonary and aortic valves and an intact ventricular
septum distinguishes this anomaly from truncus arteriosus (see
Chapter 480.8). An aortopulmonary window is an associated lesion
in patients with smooth muscle dysfunction syndrome (see Chapter
475.8). Symptoms of heart failure appear during early infancy; occasionally, minimal cyanosis is present. The defect is usually large, and
the cardiac murmur is usually systolic with an apical mid-­diastolic
rumble as a result of the increased blood flow across the mitral valve.
In the rare instance when the communication is smaller and pulmonary hypertension is absent, the findings on examination can mimic
those of a PDA (wide pulse pressure and a continuous murmur at
the upper sternal borders). The ECG shows either LV or biventricular hypertrophy. Radiographic studies demonstrate cardiac enlargement and prominence of the pulmonary artery and intrapulmonary

LSCA

DescAo

A

B

C

Fig. 475.12 Transcatheter closure of a small patent ductus arteriosus using a coil. A, Angiogram of transverse and descending aorta shows small

PDA (arrow). B, Coil (arrow) has been extruded from the sheath and is being positioned in the ductal lumen. C, Angiogram demonstrating total occlusion of PDA by coil (arrow). DescAo, Descending aorta; LSCA, left subclavian artery.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 476 u Acyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Obstructive Lesions
vasculature. The echocardiogram shows enlarged left-­sided heart
chambers; the window defect can best be delineated with color flow
Doppler. CT or MR angiography can also be used to visualize the
defect (see Fig. 472.26).
Cardiac catheterization, usually performed in older children to evaluate pulmonary vascular resistance, reveals a left-­to-­right shunt at the level
of the pulmonary artery, as well as hyperkinetic pulmonary hypertension,
because the defect is almost always large. Selective aortography with injection of contrast medium into the ascending aorta demonstrates the lesion,
and manipulation of the catheter from the main pulmonary artery directly
to the ascending aorta is also diagnostic.
An aortopulmonary window defect is surgically corrected during
infancy. If surgery is not carried out in infancy, survivors carry the risk
of progressive pulmonary vascular obstructive disease, similar to that of
other patients who have large intracardiac or great vessel communications.

475.10 Coronary Artery Fistula
Daniel Bernstein
A congenital fistula may exist between a coronary artery and an atrium,
ventricle (especially the right), or pulmonary artery. Sometimes, multiple
fistulas exist. Regardless of the recipient chamber, the clinical signs are
similar to those of PDA, although the machinery-­like murmur may be
more diffuse. If the flow is substantial, the involved coronary artery may
be dilated or aneurysmal. The anatomic abnormality is usually demonstrable by color flow Doppler echocardiography and, during catheterization, by contrast injection into the ascending aorta. Small fistulas may be
hemodynamically insignificant and may even close spontaneously. If the
shunt is large, treatment consists of either transcatheter coil embolization
or, for lesions not amenable to catheter intervention, surgical closure of
the fistula.

475.11 Ruptured Sinus of Valsalva Aneurysm
Daniel Bernstein
When one of the sinuses of Valsalva of the aorta is weakened by congenital
or acquired disease, an aneurysm may form and eventually rupture, usually into the right atrium or ventricle. This condition is rare in childhood.
The onset is usually sudden. The diagnosis should be suspected in a patient
in whom symptoms of acute heart failure develop in association with a
new, loud, to-­and-­fro murmur. Color Doppler echocardiography and cardiac catheterization demonstrate the left-­to-­right shunt at the atrial or ventricular level. Urgent surgical repair is generally required. This condition is
often associated with infective endocarditis of the aortic valve.

Chapter 476

Acyanotic Congenital
Heart Disease:
Obstructive Lesions
476.1 Pulmonary Valve Stenosis with Intact
Ventricular Septum
Daniel Bernstein
Of the various forms of right ventricular (RV) outflow obstruction with
an intact ventricular septum, the most common is isolated valvular

2787

pulmonary stenosis, which accounts for 7–10% of all congenital heart
defects. The valve cusps are deformed to various degrees and, as a
result, the valve opens incompletely during systole. The valve may be
bicuspid or tricuspid and the leaflets partially fused together with an
eccentric outlet. This fusion may be so severe that only a pinhole central opening remains. If the valve is not severely thickened, it produces
a domelike obstruction to RV outflow during systole. Isolated infundibular or subvalvular stenosis, supravalvular pulmonary stenosis, and
branch pulmonary artery stenosis are also encountered. In cases where
pulmonary valve stenosis is associated with a ventricular septal defect
(VSD) but without anterior deviation of the infundibular septum and
overriding aorta, this condition is better classified as pulmonary stenosis with VSD rather than as tetralogy of Fallot (see Chapter 479.1).
Pulmonary stenosis and an atrial septal defect (ASD) are also occasionally seen as associated defects.
The clinical and laboratory findings reflect the dominant lesion, but
it is important to rule out any associated anomalies. Pulmonary stenosis as a result of valve dysplasia is the most common cardiac abnormality in Noonan syndrome (see Chapter 101.1) and is associated,
in approximately 50% of cases, with a pathogenic variant in PTPN11,
encoding the protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP-­2 on chromosome 12.
SOS1 gene variants cause an additional 10–15%, and RAF1 and RIT1
genes each account for about 5% of cases. These genes are components
of the RAS/MAPK cell signaling pathway, important for cell division;
however, the mechanism by which these gene changes cause pulmonic
stenosis is unknown. Pulmonary stenosis can also be a component of
LEOPARD syndrome (lentigines, electrocardiographic abnormalities,
ocular hypertelorism, pulmonary stenosis, abnormalities of genitalia, retardation of growth, deafness syndrome), often associated with
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Pathogenic variants in PTPN11, RAF1,
BRAF, and MAP2K1 have been implicated in LEOPARD syndrome.
Pulmonary stenosis, of the valve or more commonly of the branch pulmonary arteries, is a common finding in patients with arteriohepatic
dysplasia, also known as Alagille syndrome (see Chapter 404); pathogenic variants have been found in JAGGED1 or NOTCH2, components
of the Notch signaling pathway.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

The obstruction to outflow from the right ventricle to the pulmonary
artery results in increased RV systolic pressure and wall stress, which
lead to hypertrophy of the right ventricle (Fig. 476.1). The severity of
these abnormalities depends on the size of the restricted valve opening. In severe cases, RV pressure may be higher than systemic arterial
systolic pressure, whereas with milder obstruction, RV pressure is only
mildly or moderately elevated. Pulmonary artery pressure (PAP, distal to the obstruction) is either normal or decreased. Arterial oxygen
saturation will be normal even in cases of severe stenosis, unless an
intracardiac communication such as a VSD or ASD is allowing blood
to shunt from right to left. However, when severe pulmonic stenosis
occurs in a neonate, decreased RV compliance often leads to cyanosis
as a result of right-­to-­left shunting through a patent foramen ovale
(PFO), a condition termed critical pulmonic stenosis.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND LABORATORY
FINDINGS

Patients with mild or moderate stenosis usually have no symptoms.
Growth and development are most often normal. If the stenosis is
severe, signs of RV failure such as hepatomegaly, peripheral edema,
and exercise intolerance may be present. In a neonate or young infant
with critical pulmonic stenosis, signs of RV failure may be more prominent; cyanosis is often present because of right-­to-­left shunting at the
foramen ovale.
With mild pulmonary stenosis, central venous pressure is normal.
The heart is not enlarged, the apical impulse is normal, and the RV
impulse is not palpable. A sharp pulmonic ejection click (caused by
doming of the valve) is heard immediately after the first heart sound
(S1) at the left upper sternal border and over the sternum, more
prominently during expiration. The second heart sound (S2) is split,
with a pulmonary component of normal intensity that may be slightly

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2788 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

110 / 70

20 / 10

5

8
110 / 5
80 / 8

Fig. 476.2 Radiograph of patient with valvular pulmonary stenosis
Fig. 476.1 Physiology of valvular pulmonary stenosis. Boxed numbers

and normal aortic root. The heart size is within normal limits, but poststenotic dilation of the pulmonary artery is present.

delayed. A relatively short, low-­or medium-­pitched systolic ejection
murmur is maximally audible over the pulmonic area at the upper left
sternal border and radiates minimally to the lung fields bilaterally. The
electrocardiogram (ECG) is either normal or shows mild right ventricular hypertrophy (RVH) (e.g., slightly increased voltages in the
right precordial leads); inversion of the T waves in the right precordial
leads may be the only finding. Note that the T wave in lead V1 should
normally be inverted after the first week of life until at least 6-­8 years of
age. Therefore a positive T wave in V1 in a young child is a sign of RVH
even in the absence of voltage criteria. The only abnormality demonstrable radiographically is usually poststenotic dilation of the pulmonary artery. Two-­dimensional (2D) echocardiography shows RVH and
a slightly thickened pulmonic valve, which domes in systole. Doppler
studies demonstrate a right ventricle–to–pulmonary artery (RV-­PA)
pressure gradient of ≤30 mm Hg.
In moderate pulmonic stenosis, central venous pressure may be
slightly elevated; in older children, a prominent a wave may be noted
in the jugular pulse. An RV lift may be palpable at the lower-­left sternal border. S2 is split, with a delayed and soft pulmonic component.
As valve motion becomes more limited with more severe degrees of
stenosis, both the pulmonic ejection click and the pulmonic S2 may
become inaudible. With increasing degrees of stenosis, the systolic
ejection murmur becomes louder and harsher (higher frequency),
the peak of the murmur is prolonged later into systole, and the murmur radiates more prominently to both lung fields, heard best over
the back.
The ECG reveals RVH, sometimes with a prominent spiked P
wave. Radiographically, the heart can vary from normal size to mildly
enlarged with uptilting of the apex because of the prominence of the
right ventricle; pulmonary vascularity is usually normal or slightly
decreased. The echocardiogram shows a thickened pulmonic valve
with restricted systolic motion. Doppler examination demonstrates an
RV-­PA pressure gradient of 30-­60 mm Hg. Mild tricuspid regurgitation

may be present and allows for Doppler confirmation of RV systolic
pressure.
In severe pulmonary stenosis, mild to moderate cyanosis may be
noted in patients with an interatrial communication (ASD or PFO).
In the absence of any intracardiac shunt, cyanosis is absent. Hepatic
enlargement and peripheral edema, if present, are an indication of RV
failure. Elevation of central venous pressure is common and is identified as a large presystolic jugular a wave. The heart is moderately or
greatly enlarged, and a conspicuous parasternal RV lift is present and
frequently extends to the left midclavicular line. The pulmonic component of S2 is usually inaudible. A loud, long, and harsh systolic ejection murmur, usually accompanied by a thrill, is maximally audible
in the pulmonic area and may radiate over the entire precordium, to
both lung fields, and to the back. The peak of the murmur occurs later
in systole as valve opening becomes more restricted. The murmur frequently encompasses the aortic component of S2 but is not preceded by
an ejection click.
The ECG shows marked RVH, frequently accompanied by a tall,
spiked P wave. Radiographic studies confirm the presence of cardiac
enlargement with prominence of the right ventricle and right atrium.
Prominence of the main pulmonary artery (MPA) segment may be
seen as a sign of poststenotic dilation (Fig. 476.2). Intrapulmonary vascularity is decreased. The 2D echocardiogram shows severe deformity
of the pulmonary valve and RVH (Fig. 476.3). In the late stages of the
disease, systolic dysfunction of the right ventricle may be seen, and in
these cases the ventricle becomes dilated, with prominent tricuspid
regurgitation. Doppler studies demonstrate a high gradient (>60 mm
Hg) across the pulmonary valve. The classic findings of severe pulmonary stenosis in older children are rarely seen today because of early
intervention. In the newborn period, signs of critical pulmonic stenosis
are accompanied by cyanosis.
Cardiac catheterization is not generally required for diagnostic
purposes but is undertaken to perform a therapeutic balloon valvuloplasty procedure. Catheterization demonstrates an abrupt pressure
gradient across the pulmonary valve. PAP is either normal or low. The
severity of the stenosis is graded based on the ratio of RV systolic pressure to systemic systolic pressure or the RV-­PA pressure gradient: 10-­
30 mm Hg in mild cases, 30-­60 mm Hg in moderate cases, and >60 mm
Hg or with RV pressure greater than systemic pressure in severe cases.
If cardiac output is low or a significant right-­to-­left shunt exists across
the atrial septum, the pressure gradient may underestimate the degree
of valve stenosis. Selective right ventriculography demonstrates the

represent pressure in mm Hg. Because of the absence of right-­to-­left or
left-­to-­right shunting, blood flow through all cardiac chambers is normal
at 3 L/min/m2. The pulmonary-­to-­systemic blood flow ratio (Qp:Qs) is
1:1. Right atrial pressure is increased slightly as a result of decreased
right ventricular compliance. The right ventricle is hypertrophied, and
systolic and diastolic pressures are increased. The pressure gradient
across the thickened pulmonary valve is 60 mm Hg. The main pulmonary artery pressure is slightly low, and poststenotic dilation is present.
Left-­sided heart pressure is normal. Unless right-­to-­left shunting is occurring through a foramen ovale, the patient’s systemic oxygen saturation will be normal.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 476 u Acyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Obstructive Lesions

2789

Flow across valve
MPA
Valve
RV

A

A

B

B

Fig. 476.3 Echocardiogram demonstrating valvar pulmonic stenosis.

A, Subcostal view showing thickened pulmonary valve leaflets (between
crosshatches). B, Doppler study indicating a 95 mm Hg peak pressure
gradient across the stenotic valve. MPA, Main pulmonary artery; RV,
right ventricle.

thickened, poorly mobile valve. In mild to moderate stenosis, doming
of the valve in systole is readily seen. Flow of contrast medium through
the stenotic valve in ventricular systole produces a narrow jet of dye
that fills the dilated MPA. Subvalvular hypertrophy may be present and
may intensify the obstruction.

TREATMENT

Patients with moderate or severe isolated pulmonary stenosis
require relief of the obstruction. Balloon valvuloplasty is the initial
treatment of choice for the majority of patients (Fig. 476.4). Patients
with severely thickened pulmonic valves, especially common in
those with Noonan syndrome, may require surgical intervention.
In a neonate with critical pulmonic stenosis and cyanosis, urgent
treatment by either balloon valvuloplasty or surgical valvotomy is
warranted.
Excellent results are obtained in most patients. The gradient
across the pulmonary valve is greatly reduced or abolished. In the
early period after balloon valvuloplasty, a small to moderate residual
gradient may remain because of muscular infundibular narrowing;
it usually resolves with time. A short, early decrescendo diastolic
murmur may be heard at the midsternal to upper left sternal border as a result of pulmonary valvular insufficiency. The degree of
insufficiency is usually not clinically significant, although it can
occasionally worsen over time as the child grows. No difference in
patient status after valvuloplasty or surgery has been noted at late
follow-­up; recurrence is unusual after successful treatment except
in those patients with extremely dysplastic valves. In the small
minority of patients where the degree of pulmonary regurgitation
is more severe, RV dilation may ensue, and these patients require
careful follow-­up and may require surgical intervention (repair
or valve replacement) or placement of a transcatheter stent-­valve
(e.g., Melody or Harmony valve).

Fig. 476.4 Valvar pulmonary stenosis and balloon valvuloplasty. A,
Right ventricular angiogram showing severely stenotic pulmonary valve
with narrow jet of blood flowing across. B, Inflation of the balloon catheter showing the indentation (arrow) made on the balloon from the
stenotic valve. (Photos courtesy Dr. Jeffrey Feinstein, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.)

PROGNOSIS AND COMPLICATIONS

Heart failure occurs only in severe cases and most often during the first
month of life. The development of cyanosis from a right-­to-­left shunt
across a foramen ovale is almost exclusively seen in the neonatal period
when the stenosis is severe. Infective endocarditis is a risk but is not
common in childhood.
Children with mild stenosis can lead a normal life, but their progress should be evaluated at regular intervals. Patients who have small
gradients rarely show progression and do not need intervention, but a
significant gradient is more likely to develop in children with moderate
stenosis as they grow older. Worsening of obstruction over time may
also be caused by the development of secondary subvalvular muscular hypertrophy. In untreated severe stenosis, the course may abruptly
worsen with the development of RV dysfunction and cardiac failure.
Infants with critical pulmonic stenosis require urgent catheter balloon
valvuloplasty or surgical valvotomy. Development of RV failure many
years after pulmonary balloon valvuloplasty is uncommon. Nonetheless, patients should be followed serially for worsening pulmonary
insufficiency and RV dilation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

476.2 Infundibular Pulmonary Stenosis and
Double-­Chamber Right Ventricle
Daniel Bernstein
Infundibular pulmonary stenosis is caused by muscular or fibrous
obstruction in the outflow tract of the right ventricle. The site of
obstruction may be close to the pulmonary valve or well below it; an

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2790 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
infundibular chamber may be present between the right ventricular cavity and the pulmonary valve. In many cases, a VSD may have
been present initially and later closed spontaneously. When the pulmonary valve is also stenotic, the combined defect is primarily classified as valvular stenosis with secondary infundibular hypertrophy. The
hemodynamics and clinical manifestations of patients with isolated
infundibular pulmonary stenosis are similar, for the most part, to those
described for isolated valvular pulmonary stenosis (see Chapter 476.1).
A common variation in RV outflow obstruction below the pulmonary valve is that of a double-­chambered right ventricle. In this
condition, a muscular band is present in the mid-­RV region; the band
divides the chamber into two parts and creates obstruction between
the inlet and outlet portions. An associated VSD is often noted, and
these may close spontaneously. Obstruction is not usually seen early
in life but may progress rapidly in a similar manner to the progressive
infundibular obstruction observed with tetralogy of Fallot (see Chapter 479.1).
The diagnosis of isolated RV infundibular stenosis or double-­
chambered right ventricle is usually made by echocardiography. The
ventricular septum must be evaluated carefully to determine whether
an associated VSD is present. When the obstruction is moderate to
severe, surgery is indicated. After surgery, the pressure gradient is abolished or greatly reduced, and the long-­term outlook is excellent.

476.3 Pulmonary Stenosis in Combination
with an Intracardiac Shunt
Daniel Bernstein
Valvular or infundibular pulmonary stenosis, or both, may be associated with either an ASD or a VSD. In these patients the clinical features depend on the degree of pulmonary stenosis, which determines
whether the net shunt is from left to right or from right to left. Neonates with severe pulmonary stenosis (termed critical pulmonary stenosis) usually have right-­to-­left shunting through the foramen ovale
(see Chapter 476.1).
The presence of a large left-­to-­right shunt at the atrial or ventricular
level is evidence that the pulmonary stenosis is mild. These patients
have symptoms similar to those of patients with an isolated ASD or
VSD. With increasing age, worsening of the RV outflow obstruction
may limit the shunt and result in a gradual improvement in symptoms.
Eventually, particularly in patients with pulmonary stenosis and VSD,
a further increase in obstruction may lead to right-­to-­left shunting
and cyanosis. When a patient with a VSD has evidence of decreasing
heart failure and increased RV forces on the ECG, one must differentiate between the development of increasing pulmonary stenosis vs the
onset of pulmonary vascular disease (Eisenmenger syndrome; see
Chapter 482.2).
These anomalies are readily repaired surgically. Defects in the
atrial or ventricular septum are closed, and the pulmonary stenosis is
relieved by resection of infundibular muscle or pulmonary valvotomy,
or both, as indicated. Patients with a predominant right-­to-­left shunt
can have symptoms similar to those of patients with tetralogy of Fallot
(see Chapter 479.1).

476.4 Peripheral Pulmonary Stenosis
Daniel Bernstein
Single or multiple constrictions may occur anywhere along the major
branches of the pulmonary arteries and may range from mild to severe
and from localized to extensive. Frequently, these defects are associated with other types of congenital heart disease, including valvular
pulmonic stenosis, tetralogy of Fallot, patent ductus arteriosus (PDA),
VSD, ASD, and supravalvular aortic stenosis. A familial tendency has
been recognized in some patients with peripheral pulmonic stenosis.

Peripheral pulmonary stenosis is a common cardiac sequelae of congenital rubella syndrome. The combination of supravalvular aortic
stenosis with pulmonary arterial branch stenosis, idiopathic hypercalcemia of infancy, elfin facies, and intellectual disability is known as
Williams syndrome, a condition associated with hemizygous microdeletion of ∼25-­27 genes (Williams-­Beuren syndrome critical region:
WBSCR1), including ELN, LIMK1, GTF21, and GTF21RD1 in region
7q11.23 on chromosome 7. Peripheral pulmonary stenosis is also associated with Alagille syndrome, which may be associated with a pathogenic variant in the JAGGED1 or NOTCH2 genes.
A mild constriction has little effect on the pulmonary circulation.
With multiple severe constrictions, pressure is increased in the right
ventricle and in the pulmonary artery proximal to the site of obstruction. When the anomaly is isolated, the diagnosis is suspected by the
presence of murmurs in widespread locations over the chest, either
anteriorly or posteriorly. These murmurs are usually systolic ejection
in quality but may be continuous. Most often, the physical signs are
dominated by the associated anomaly, such as valvar pulmonary stenosis or tetralogy of Fallot (see Chapter 479.1).
In the immediate newborn period, a mild and transient form of
peripheral pulmonic stenosis may be present. Physical findings are
generally limited to a soft systolic ejection murmur, which can be
heard over either or both lung fields. It is the absence of other physical findings of valvular pulmonic stenosis (RV lift, soft pulmonic S2,
systolic ejection click, murmur loudest at upper left sternal border)
that supports this diagnosis. This murmur usually disappears by age
1-­2 months.
If the stenosis is severe, the ECG shows evidence of RVH and right
atrial hypertrophy, and the chest radiograph shows cardiomegaly and
prominence of the MPA. The pulmonary vasculature is usually normal;
in some cases, small intrapulmonary vascular shadows are seen that
represent areas of poststenotic dilation. Echocardiography is limited
in its ability to visualize the distal branch pulmonary arteries. Doppler
examination demonstrates the acceleration of blood flow through the
stenoses and, if tricuspid regurgitation is present, allows an estimation
of RV systolic pressure. MRI and CT are extremely helpful in delineating distal obstructions. If moderate to severe disease is suspected, the
diagnosis is usually confirmed by cardiac catheterization.
Severe obstruction of the MPA and its primary branches can be
relieved during corrective surgery for associated lesions such as
the tetralogy of Fallot or valvular pulmonary stenosis. If peripheral
pulmonic stenosis is isolated, it may be treated by catheter balloon
dilation, sometimes with placement of an intravascular stent (see
Fig. 472.31).

476.5 Aortic Stenosis
Daniel Bernstein
Congenital aortic stenosis accounts for approximately 5% of cardiac
malformations recognized in childhood and is more frequent in males
(3:1). A bicuspid aortic valve (BAV) is one of the most common congenital heart lesions overall, identified in 1–2% of adults. If isolated,
it is not even counted in the overall incidence (0.8% of live births) of
congenital heart disease. There is a high incidence of family clustering,
with multiple individuals affected with BAV or other left-­sided heart
lesions. BAV may be encountered in conjunction with other left-­sided
heart lesions (coarctation of the aorta, aortopathy, mitral stenosis,
Shone complex, and hypoplastic left heart syndrome) or in conjunction with syndromes such as Loeys-­Dietz, Down, Turner, and velocardiofacial (DiGeorge). Several genes have been implicated in BAV,
including NOTCH1, GATA4, GATA5, and SMAD6.
In the most common form, valvular aortic stenosis, the leaflets are
thickened and the commissures are fused to varying degrees. Left ventricular (LV) systolic pressure is increased as a result of the obstruction
to outflow. The LV wall hypertrophies in compensation; as its compliance decreases, end-­diastolic pressure increases as well, impairing
ventricular filling in the more severe cases.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 476 u Acyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Obstructive Lesions

Fig. 476.5 Williams syndrome. (From Jones KL, Smith DW. The Williams elfin facies syndrome: a new perspective. J Pediatr. 1975;86:718.)

Subvalvular (subaortic) stenosis with a discrete fibromuscular shelf
(subaortic membrane) below the aortic valve is also an important form
of left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) obstruction. This lesion is frequently associated with other forms of congenital heart disease such as
mitral stenosis and coarctation of the aorta (Shone complex) and may
progress in severity with age, sometimes rapidly. Subvalvular aortic stenosis may also become apparent after successful surgery for other congenital heart defects (coarctation of the aorta, PDA, VSD), may develop
in association with mild lesions that have not been surgically repaired,
or may occur as an isolated abnormality. Subvalvular aortic stenosis
may also be caused by a markedly hypertrophied ventricular septum
in association with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (see Chapter 488.2).
Supravalvular aortic stenosis, the least common type, may be sporadic, familial, or associated with Williams syndrome, which includes
developmental delay (IQ range: 41-­80), elfin facies (full face, broad forehead, flattened bridge of the nose, long upper lip, and rounded cheeks)
(Fig. 476.5), and idiopathic hypercalcemia of infancy. Additional features include loquacious personality, hypersensitivity to sound, spasticity, hypoplastic nails, dental anomalies (partial anodontia, microdontia
enamel hypoplasia), joint hypermobility, nephrocalcinosis, hypothyroidism, and poor weight gain. Narrowing of the coronary artery ostia
can occur in patients with supravalvar aortic stenosis and should be
carefully evaluated. Stenosis of other arteries, particularly the branch
pulmonary arteries, may also be present. Williams syndrome is caused
by hemizygous microdeletion of ∼25 genes in the WBSCR1 at 7q11.23
on chromosome 7 (see Chapter 476.2).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Symptoms in patients with aortic stenosis depend on the severity of the
obstruction. Severe aortic stenosis that occurs in early infancy is termed
critical aortic stenosis and is associated with LV failure and signs of
low cardiac output. Heart failure, cardiomegaly, and pulmonary edema
are severe, the pulses are weak in all extremities, and the skin may be
pale or grayish. Urine output may be diminished. If cardiac output is
significantly decreased, the intensity of the murmur at the right upper

2791

sternal border may be minimal. The endocardial surface may be fibrotic
and stiff (endocardial fibroelastosis) in the most severe cases.
Outside of the newborn period, most infants and children with less
severe forms of aortic stenosis remain asymptomatic and display normal growth and development. The murmur is usually discovered during routine physical examination. Rarely, fatigue, chest pain, dizziness,
or syncope with exercise may develop in an older child with previously
undiagnosed severe obstruction to LV outflow. Sudden death has been
reported with aortic stenosis but usually occurs in patients with severe
LVOT obstruction in whom the diagnosis and surgical relief have been
delayed.
The physical findings are dependent on the degree of obstruction to
LV outflow. In mild stenosis, the pulses, heart size, and apical impulse
are all normal. With increasing degrees of severity, the pulses become
diminished in intensity and the heart may be enlarged, with an LV apical thrust. Mild to moderate valvular aortic stenosis is usually associated with an early systolic ejection click, best heard at the left sternal
border and over the sternum. Unlike the click in pulmonic stenosis,
its intensity does not vary with respiration. Clicks are unusual in more
severe aortic stenosis or in discrete subaortic stenosis. If the stenosis
is severe, S1 may be diminished because of decreased compliance of
the thickened left ventricle. Normal splitting of S2 is present in mild to
moderate obstruction. In patients with severe obstruction, the intensity of the aortic component of S2 is diminished, and S2 may be split
paradoxically (becoming wider in expiration). A fourth heart sound
(S4) may be audible as a result of decreased LV compliance.
The intensity, pitch, and duration of the systolic ejection murmur are
other indications of severity. The louder, harsher (higher pitch), and
longer the murmur, the greater the degree of obstruction. The murmur will also peak later in systole with increase severity. The typical
murmur is audible maximally at the right upper sternal border and
radiates to the neck and the left midsternal border. It is usually accompanied by a thrill in the suprasternal notch and, in older patients, over
the carotids. In patients with subvalvular aortic stenosis, the murmur
may be maximal along the left sternal border or even at the apex. A
soft, decrescendo diastolic murmur is present in patients who also have
aortic insufficiency, not uncommon with a bicuspid aortic valve or in
patients who have had surgery or balloon valvuloplasty. Occasionally,
an apical short mid-­diastolic rumbling murmur is audible; this murmur should raise suspicion of associated mitral valve stenosis. Careful attention to both upper-­and lower-­extremity peripheral pulses is
essential. Patients with mild aortic stenosis will have normal pulses;
as the severity increases, the pulses will become more diminished.
Discrepancy between upper-­and lower-­extremity pulses or a delay in
femoral pulses (radio-­femoral delay) suggests associated coarctation of
the aorta. Discrepancy between the right and left arm pulses in the
presence of normal femoral pulses is a sign of possible supravalvar aortic stenosis.

LABORATORY FINDINGS AND DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis can usually be made on the basis of the physical examination, and the severity of obstruction confirmed by laboratory tests. If
the pressure gradient across the aortic valve is mild, the ECG is likely
to be normal. The ECG may occasionally be normal even with mild
to moderate obstruction, but evidence of left ventricular hypertrophy
(LVH) and LV strain (inverted T waves in left precordial leads) is generally present if moderate to severe stenosis is long-­standing. The chest
radiograph frequently shows a prominent ascending aorta. Heart size
is typically normal or slightly increased. Valvular calcification is noted
only in older children and adults. Echocardiography identifies both
the site and the severity of the obstruction. Two-­dimensional imaging shows LVH and the thickened and abnormally moving aortic valve
(Fig. 476.6). The echocardiogram will also demonstrate the number of
valve leaflets and their morphology, which leaflets are fused, and the
presence of a subaortic membrane or supravalvar stenosis. Associated
anomalies of the mitral valve or aortic arch (coarctation of the aorta)
or a VSD or PDA are present in up to 20% of cases. In the absence of
LV failure, the shortening fraction of the left ventricle may be increased
because the ventricle is hypercontractile. In infants with critical aortic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2792 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

LV

Ao

LA

A

B
Fig. 476.6 Echocardiogram showing valvar aortic stenosis with regur-

gitation. A, In this parasternal long-­axis view, the stenotic aortic valve
can be seen doming in systole. The crosshatch marks delineate the aortic annulus. B, Doppler study shows the presence of aortic regurgitation
(arrow). Ao, Aorta; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle.

stenosis, the LV shortening fraction is often decreased and may be quite
poor. The endocardium may appear bright, indicative of the development of endocardial fibrous scarring, known as endocardial fibroelastosis. Doppler studies show the specific site of obstruction and
determine the peak and mean systolic LVOT gradients. When severe
aortic obstruction is associated with LV dysfunction, the Doppler-­
derived valve gradient may greatly underestimate the severity of the
obstruction because of the low cardiac output across the valve.
Cardiac catheterization is usually not required for diagnostic purposes, but it is usually performed in conjunction with aortic balloon
valvuloplasty. Left heart catheterization demonstrates the magnitude
of the pressure gradient from the left ventricle to the aorta. The aortic pressure curve is abnormal if the obstruction is severe. In patients
with severe obstruction and decreased LV compliance, left atrial pressure is increased and pulmonary hypertension may be present. When
a critically ill infant with LVOT obstruction undergoes cardiac catheterization, LV function is often greatly decreased. As with the echocardiogram, the gradient measured across the stenotic aortic valve may
underestimate the degree of obstruction because of low cardiac output.
Measurement of cardiac output by thermodilution and calculation of
the aortic valve area may be helpful.

TREATMENT

Balloon valvuloplasty is indicated for children with moderate to severe
valvular aortic stenosis to prevent progressive LV dysfunction and the
risk of syncope and sudden death. Valvuloplasty should be advised
when the catheter-­derived peak-­to-­peak systolic gradient between the
left ventricle and aorta exceeds 60-­70 mm Hg at rest, assuming normal
cardiac output, or for lesser gradients when symptoms or electrocardiographic changes are present. For more rapidly progressive subaortic
obstructive lesions, a gradient of 40-­50 mm Hg or the presence of aortic insufficiency is considered an indication for surgery. Balloon valvuloplasty is the procedure of choice even in the neonatal period. Surgical

treatment is usually reserved for extremely dysplastic aortic valves that
are not amenable to balloon therapy or in patients who also have subvalvar or supravalvar aortic stenosis.
Discrete subaortic stenosis can be surgically resected without damage to the aortic valve, the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve, or the
conduction system. This type of obstruction is not usually amenable
to catheter treatment. Relief of supravalvular stenosis is also achieved
surgically, and the results are excellent if the area of obstruction is discrete and not associated with a hypoplastic aorta. In association with
supravalvular aortic stenosis, one or both coronary arteries may be stenotic at their origins because of a thick supraaortic fibrous ridge. For
patients who have aortic stenosis in association with severe tunnel-­like
subaortic obstruction, the LVOT can be enlarged by “borrowing” space
anteriorly from the right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) (the Konno
procedure).
Regardless of whether surgical or catheter treatment has been carried out, aortic insufficiency or calcification with restenosis is likely to
occur years or even decades later and eventually require reoperation
and often aortic valve replacement. Thus these patients require regular
follow-­up with a cardiologist. When recurrence develops, it may not
be associated with early symptoms. Signs of recurrent stenosis include
electrocardiographic signs of LVH, an increase in the Doppler echocardiographic gradient, deterioration in echocardiographic indices
of LV function, and recurrence of signs or symptoms during graded
treadmill exercise. Evidence of significant aortic regurgitation includes
symptoms of heart failure, cardiac enlargement on radiograph, and
LV dilation on echocardiogram. The choice of reparative procedure
depends on the relative degree of stenosis and regurgitation.
When aortic valve replacement is necessary, the choice of procedure often depends on the age of the patient. Homograft valves tend
to calcify more rapidly in younger children, but they do not require
chronic anticoagulation. Mechanical prosthetic valves are much longer
lasting but require anticoagulation, which can be difficult to manage in
young children, and they are not available in sizes appropriate for the
youngest patients. In adolescent females who are nearing childbearing age, consideration of the teratogenic effects of anticoagulants may
warrant the use of a homograft valve. None of these options is perfect
for a younger child who requires valve replacement because neither
homograft nor mechanical valves grow with the patient. An alternative operation is aortopulmonary translocation (Ross procedure);
it involves removing the patient’s own pulmonary valve and using it
to replace the abnormal aortic valve. A homograft is then placed in
the pulmonary position. The potential advantage of this procedure is
the possibility for growth of the translocated living “neoaortic” valve
and the increased longevity of the homograft valve when placed in the
lower-­pressure pulmonary circulation. The long-­term success of this
operation, especially in young children, is still being investigated.
Transcatheter aortic valve replacement (or implantation) (TAVR)
uses porcine or bovine (Melody or Sapien) valve tissue sewn into a
self-­expanding frame. These devices can be implanted in the cardiac
catheterization laboratory using a femoral or carotid approach, or
transapically through the chest wall, or in a hybrid procedure after a
surgical thoracotomy. Initially used mainly in adults who were too ill
to be candidates for standard surgical replacement, TAVR is gaining
acceptance for carefully selected children who are not good surgical candidates. Short-­term outcomes are equivalent to surgical valve
replacement. Long-­term complications include possible valve regurgitation or perivalvular leaks.

PROGNOSIS

Neonates with critical aortic stenosis may have severe heart failure and
deteriorate rapidly to a low-­output shock state. Emergency surgery or
balloon valvuloplasty is lifesaving, but the mortality risk is not trivial.
Neonates who die of critical aortic stenosis frequently have significant
LV endocardial fibroelastosis. Those who survive may develop signs of
LV diastolic dysfunction (restrictive cardiomyopathy) and eventually
require cardiac transplantation (see Chapter 492).
In older infants and children with mild to moderate aortic stenosis,
the prognosis is reasonably good, although disease progression over

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 476 u Acyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Obstructive Lesions
5-­10 years is common. Patients with aortic valve gradients <40-­50 mm
Hg are considered to have mild disease; those with gradients of 40-­70
mm Hg have moderate disease. These patients usually respond well to
treatment (either surgery or valvuloplasty), although reoperations on
the aortic valve are often required later in childhood or in adult life,
and many patients eventually require valve replacement. In unoperated
patients with severe obstruction, sudden death is a significant risk and
often occurs during or immediately after exercise. Subaortic stenosis
secondary to hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is one of the causes of sudden cardiac death in adolescents and young adults.
Patients with moderate to severe degrees of aortic stenosis should
not participate in active competitive sports. In those with milder disease, sports participation is less severely restricted. The status of each
patient should be reviewed at least annually and intervention advised if
progression of signs or symptoms occurs. Prophylaxis against infective
endocarditis is no longer recommended unless a prosthetic or transcatheter (TAVR) valve has been inserted.
Older children and adults with isolated bicuspid aortic valve are at
increased risk for developing dilation of their ascending aorta, even
in the absence of significant stenosis. This risk increases with age, and
the rate of increase is greatest in those with the largest aortic roots. In
children, this dilation is usually mild and remains stable over many
years of observation, but in young adults and older patients, the aorta
can dilate substantially and progressively. Whether these patients have
some undiagnosed form of connective tissue disorder remains to be
determined (this form of dilation is similar to that seen in Marfan syndrome). Patients with Turner syndrome and bicuspid aortic valve also
have an increased risk of aortic dilation. Although dissection and rupture are described complications of severe aortic root dilation in adults,
there are not yet sufficient data to determine these risks in children,
and careful monitoring with echocardiogram, CT, or MRI is warranted.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

A

D

B

2793

C

E

Fig. 476.7 Metamorphosis of coarctation. A, Fetal prototype with

no flow obstruction. B, Late gestation. The aortic ventricle increases
its output and dilates the hypoplastic segment. Antegrade aortic flow
bypasses the shelf via the ductal orifice. C, Neonate. Ductal constriction initiates the obstruction by removing the bypass and increasing
antegrade arch flow. D, Mature juxtaductal stenosis. The bypass is
completely obliterated, and intimal hypoplasia on the edge of the shelf
is aggravating the stenosis. Collaterals develop. E, Persistence of the
infantile-­type fetal prototype. An intracardiac left-­sided heart obstruction precludes an increase in antegrade aortic flow before or after birth.
Both isthmus hypoplasia and a contraductal shelf are present. Lower-­
body flow often depends on the patency of the ductus. (From Gersony WM. Coarctation of the aorta. In: Adams FH, Emmanouilides GC,
Riemenshneider T, eds. Moss Heart Disease in Infants, Children, and
Adolescents, 4th ed. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins; 1989.)

476.6 Coarctation of the Aorta
Daniel Bernstein
Constrictions of the aorta of varying degrees may occur at any point from
the transverse arch to the iliac bifurcation, but 98% occur just below the
origin of the left subclavian artery at the origin of the ductus arteriosus
(juxtaductal coarctation). The anomaly is responsible for 5–8% of congenital heart disease and occurs twice as often in males as in females.
Coarctation of the aorta is associated with a bicuspid aortic valve in >70%
of patients; mitral valve abnormalities (a supravalvular mitral ring or parachute mitral valve) and subaortic stenosis are other associated lesions.
When this group of left-­sided obstructive lesions occurs together, they
are referred to as Shone complex. Coarctation of the aorta is found in up
to 20% of patients with Turner syndrome (see Chapters 99.4 and 626.1);
∼5–12% of females with coarctation have Turner syndrome.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

Coarctation of the aorta can occur as a discrete juxtaductal obstruction or as tubular hypoplasia of the transverse aorta starting at one of
the head or neck vessels and extending to the ductal area (previously
referred to as preductal or infantile-­type coarctation; Fig. 476.7). Often,
both components are present. It is postulated that coarctation may
be initiated in fetal life by the presence of a cardiac abnormality that
results in decreased blood flow anterograde through the aortic valve
(e.g., bicuspid aortic valve, VSD). Alternatively, it has been theorized
that coarctation may be caused by abnormal extension of contractile
ductal tissue into the aortic wall.
In patients with discrete juxtaductal coarctation, ascending aortic
blood flows through the narrowed segment to reach the descending
aorta, although LV hypertension and hypertrophy result. In the first
few days of life, the PDA may serve to widen the juxtaductal area of
the aorta and provide temporary relief from the obstruction. Net left-­
to-­right ductal shunting occurs in these acyanotic infants. With more

severe juxtaductal coarctation or in the presence of transverse arch hypoplasia, RV blood is ejected through the ductus to supply the descending
aorta. Perfusion of the lower part of the body is then dependent on RV
output. In this situation the femoral pulses are palpable, and differential
blood pressures may not be helpful in making the diagnosis. However,
the ductal right-­to-­left shunting is manifested as differential cyanosis,
with the upper extremities being well oxygenated and the lower extremities cyanotic. This is one of the main reasons for performing upper-­and
lower-­limb oxygen saturation screening in the newborn because subtle
differences in saturation may not be discernable visually. Such infants
may have severe pulmonary hypertension and high pulmonary vascular
resistance. Signs of heart failure are prominent. Occasionally, severely
hypoplastic segments of the aortic isthmus may become completely
atretic and result in an interrupted aortic arch, with the left subclavian
artery arising either proximal or distal to the interruption.
Blood pressure (BP) is elevated in the vessels that arise proximal to
the coarctation; BP and pulse pressure are lower below the constriction.
The hypertension is not caused by the mechanical obstruction alone, but
also involves neurohumoral mechanisms. Unless surgically corrected in
infancy, coarctation of the aorta usually results in the development of an
extensive collateral circulation, chiefly from branches of the subclavian,
superior intercostal, and internal mammary arteries, to create channels for
arterial blood to bypass the area of coarctation. The vessels contributing
to the collateral circulation may become greatly enlarged and tortuous by
early adulthood.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Coarctation of the aorta recognized after infancy may not be associated
with significant symptoms, although these may be revealed on closer
questioning. Some children or adolescents complain about weakness
or pain/claudication (or both) in the legs after exercise, but in many
cases, even patients with severe coarctation are asymptomatic. Older

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2794 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
children are frequently brought to the cardiologist’s attention when
they are found to be hypertensive on routine physical examination.
The classic sign of coarctation of the aorta is a disparity in pulsation
and BP in the arms and legs. The femoral, popliteal, posterior tibial, and
dorsalis pedis pulses are weak (or absent in up to 40% of patients), in contrast to bounding pulses palpated in the arms and carotid vessels. However, in patients with large numbers of collaterals, the pulse and BP may
not be much diminished in the lower extremities; in these cases, diagnosis
depends on palpation of the radial and femoral pulses simultaneously for
the presence of a radial-­femoral delay. Normally, the femoral pulse occurs
slightly before the radial pulse. A radial-­femoral delay occurs when blood
flow to the descending aorta is dependent on collaterals, in which case the
femoral pulse is felt after the radial pulse. In normal persons (except neonates), systolic BP in the legs obtained by the cuff method is usually 10-­20
mm Hg higher than that in the arms. In coarctation of the aorta, BP in the
legs is lower than that in the arms; frequently, it is difficult to obtain. This
differential in BPs is common in patients with coarctation who are older
than 1 year, approximately 90% of whom have systolic hypertension in an
upper extremity >95th percentile for age. It is important to determine the
BP in each arm; a BP higher in the right than the left arm suggests involvement of the left subclavian artery in the area of coarctation. Occasionally,
the right subclavian may arise anomalously from below the area of coarctation and result in a left arm BP that is higher than the right. With exercise,
a more prominent rise in upper arm BP occurs, and the upper-­to lower-­
extremity pressure gradient will increase.
The precordial impulse and heart sounds are usually normal; the presence of a systolic ejection click or thrill in the suprasternal notch suggests
a bicuspid aortic valve (present in 70% of cases). A short systolic murmur
is often heard along the left sternal border at the third and fourth intercostal spaces. The murmur is well transmitted to the left infrascapular
area and occasionally to the neck. With a bicuspid aortic valve, the typical murmur of aortic stenosis can be heard at the upper right and mid-­
left sternal borders. Occasionally, more significant degrees of obstruction
are noted across the aortic valve. The presence of a low-­pitched mid-­
diastolic murmur at the apex suggests mitral valve stenosis. In older
patients with well-­developed collateral blood flow, systolic or continuous
murmurs may be heard over the left and right sides of the chest laterally and posteriorly. In these patients, a palpable thrill can sometimes be
appreciated in the intercostal spaces on the back.
Neonates or infants with more severe coarctation, usually including
some degree of transverse arch hypoplasia, initially have signs of lower-­
body hypoperfusion, acidosis, and severe heart failure. These signs may
be delayed days or weeks until after closure of the ductus arteriosus. If
detected before ductal closure, patients may exhibit differential cyanosis, best demonstrated by simultaneous oximetry of the upper and
lower extremities. On physical examination the heart is large, and a
systolic murmur is heard along the left sternal border.

Diagnosis

Findings on chest x-­ray examination depend on the age of the patient
and on the effects of hypertension and the collateral circulation. Cardiac
enlargement and pulmonary congestion are noted in infants with severe
coarctation. In patients with less severe forms of coarctation, the findings
may not be that striking until after the first decade, when the heart tends to
be mildly or moderately enlarged because of LV prominence. The enlarged
left subclavian artery typically produces a prominent shadow in the left
superior mediastinum. Notching of the inferior border of the ribs from
pressure erosion by enlarged collateral vessels is common by late childhood. In most patients the descending aorta has an area of poststenotic
dilation.
The ECG is usually normal in young children with milder degrees of
coarctation but demonstrates LV hypertrophy in older patients. Neonates and young infants display right or biventricular hypertrophy. The
segment of coarctation can generally be visualized by 2D echocardiography (Fig. 476.8); associated anomalies of the mitral and aortic valve
can also be demonstrated. The descending aorta is hypopulsatile, and
color Doppler demonstrates the specific site of the obstruction. Pulsed
and continuous wave Doppler studies determine the pressure gradient
directly at the area of coarctation; in the presence of a PDA, however,
the severity of the narrowing may be underestimated. CT and MRI

BR
AscAo

LCA
LSCA

A

B
Fig. 476.8 Echocardiogram demonstrating coarctation of the aorta

with hypoplastic transverse arch. A, Suprasternal notch 2D echocardiogram showing marked narrowing beginning just distal to the brachiocephalic artery. B, Color Doppler demonstrates turbulent flow in the
juxtaductal area (arrow). AscAo, Ascending aorta; BR, brachiocephalic
artery; LCA, left carotid artery; LSCA, left subclavian artery.

are valuable noninvasive tools for evaluation of coarctation when the
echocardiogram is equivocal (Fig. 476.9). Cardiac catheterization with
selective left ventriculography and aortography is useful in occasional
patients with additional anomalies and as a means of visualizing collateral blood flow. In cases that are well defined by echocardiography, CT,
or MRI, diagnostic catheterization is not usually required before surgery.

TREATMENT

In neonates with severe coarctation of the aorta, closure of the ductus
often results in hypoperfusion, acidosis, and rapid deterioration. These
patients should be given an infusion of prostaglandin E1 to reopen the
ductus and reestablish adequate lower-­extremity blood flow. Once a
diagnosis has been confirmed and the patient stabilized, surgical repair
should be performed. Older infants with heart failure but good perfusion should be managed with anticongestive measures to improve their
clinical status in preparation for surgical intervention. There is usually
no reason to delay surgical repair waiting for patient growth; successful
repairs have been performed even in small premature infants.
Older children with significant coarctation of the aorta should be
treated relatively soon after diagnosis. Delay is unwarranted, especially after the second decade of life, when there may be decreased
LV function and degenerative changes in the aortic wall. For patients
with significant left ventricular dysfunction, relief of the obstruction
can improve function as afterload on the ventricle is dramatically
decreased; however, if fibrosis has occurred, patients can have residual
left ventricular dysfunction. If cardiac function is normal, satisfactory
repair and long-­term outcome are possible well into mid-­adult life.
Surgery remains the treatment of choice for isolated juxtaductal coarctation of the aorta in neonates, infants, and young children at most centers;
several surgical techniques are used. The area of coarctation can be excised
and a primary reanastomosis performed. Most often, the transverse
aorta is opened and an “extended end-­to-­end” anastomosis performed
to increase the effective cross-­sectional area of the repair. The subclavian

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 476 u Acyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Obstructive Lesions

2795

(e.g., nitroprusside, esmolol, captopril) and intestinal decompression; surgical exploration is rarely required for bowel obstruction or infarction.

PROGNOSIS
Sag>Cor 24

A

B

AO

C

D

Fig. 476.9 Coarctation of the aorta. A, CT angiogram of coarctation.

B, 3D reconstruction. Angiograms of the coarctation before (C) and after
(D) stenting (arrows). AO, Aorta. (Adapted from Webb GD, Smallhorn
JF, Therrien J, et al. Congenital heart disease in the adult and pediatric
patient. In: Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, et al., eds. Braunwald’s Heart
Disease, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019: Fig. 75.41, p. 1561.)

flap procedure, which involves division of the left subclavian artery and its
incorporation into the wall of the repaired coarctation, has fallen out of
favor because of a higher degree of residual stenosis. Some centers favor a
patch aortoplasty, in which the area of coarctation is enlarged with a roof of
prosthetic material. The use of primary angioplasty for native coarctation
has been effective in older children and adults. In infants ≥3 months of age,
balloon angioplasty has been as effective as surgery but is associated with
higher rates of recoarctation requiring intervention (repeat angioplasty
or surgery) and aortic aneurysm formation. Surgery is the treatment of
choice for the symptomatic neonate. Angioplasty is the treatment of choice
for recoarctation. Primary stent placement in the catheterization laboratory is considered in older children, where the stent can be expanded
if needed to keep up with patient growth and for young adults (see Fig.
476.9). For patients who present with severe LV dysfunction, where surgical intervention may be associated with increased risk, catheter-­based
treatments are often considered.
After surgery, a striking increase in the amplitude of the pulse in the
lower extremities is noted. In the immediate postoperative course, rebound
hypertension can occur and requires medical management. This exaggerated acute hypertension gradually subsides, and in most patients, antihypertensive medications can be discontinued. Residual murmurs are
common and may result from associated cardiac anomalies, a residual
flow disturbance across the repaired area, or collateral blood flow. Rare
operative problems include spinal cord injury from aortic cross-­clamping
(if collaterals are poorly developed), chylothorax, diaphragm injury, and
laryngeal nerve injury. If a left subclavian flap approach is used, the radial
pulse and BP in the left arm are diminished or absent.

POSTCOARCTECTOMY SYNDROME

Postoperative mesenteric arteritis may be associated with acute hypertension and abdominal pain in the immediate postoperative period. The pain
varies in severity and may occur in conjunction with anorexia, nausea,
vomiting, leukocytosis, intestinal hemorrhage, bowel necrosis, and small
bowel obstruction. Relief is usually obtained with antihypertensive drugs

Although restenosis in older patients after coarctectomy is rare, a significant number of infants operated on before 1 year of age require revision
later in childhood. All patients should be monitored carefully for the
development of recoarctation and for aortic aneurysm at the anastomotic
site. Should recoarctation occur, balloon angioplasty is the procedure of
choice. In these patients, scar tissue from a previous surgery may make
reoperation more difficult, yet it makes balloon angioplasty safer because
of the lower incidence of aneurysm formation. Relief of obstruction with
this technique is usually excellent. Intravascular stents are typically used,
especially in adolescents and young adults, with generally excellent results.
Repair of coarctation in the second decade of life or beyond may be
associated with a higher incidence of premature cardiovascular disease,
even in the absence of residual cardiac abnormalities. Early onset of adult-­
type chronic hypertension may occur, even in patients with adequately
resected coarctation.
Abnormalities of the aortic valve are present in a majority of patients.
Bicuspid aortic valves are common but do not generally produce clinical signs unless the stenosis is significant. The association of a PDA
with coarctation of the aorta is also common. VSDs and ASDs may be
suspected by signs of a left-­to-­right shunt; they are exacerbated by the
increased resistance to flow through the left side of the heart. Mitral valve
abnormalities are also occasionally seen, as is subvalvular aortic stenosis.
Severe neurologic damage or even death may rarely occur from associated cerebrovascular disease. Subarachnoid or intracerebral hemorrhage
may result from rupture of congenital aneurysms in the circle of Willis,
rupture of other vessels with defective elastic and medial tissue, or rupture
of normal vessels; these events are secondary to hypertension. Children
with PHACE syndrome (posterior brain fossa anomalies, facial hemangiomas, arterial anomalies, cardiac anomalies and aortic coarctation, eye
anomalies syndrome) may have strokes (see Table 691.5). Abnormalities
of the subclavian arteries may include involvement of the left subclavian
artery in the area of coarctation, stenosis of the orifice of the left subclavian
artery, and anomalous origin of the right subclavian artery.
Untreated, the great majority of older patients with coarctation of
the aorta would succumb between ages 20 and 40 years; some live well
into middle life without serious disability. The common serious complications are related to systemic hypertension, which may result in
premature coronary artery disease, heart failure, hypertensive encephalopathy, or intracranial hemorrhage. Heart failure may be worsened
by associated anomalies. Infective endocarditis or endarteritis is a
significant complication in these adult patients. Aneurysms of the
descending aorta or the enlarged collateral vessels may develop.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

476.7 Coarctation with Ventricular Septal
Defect
Daniel Bernstein
In most cases, coarctation is the major anomaly causing the severe symptoms, and resection of the coarcted segment results in striking improvement. Repair of both the VSD and coarctation is usually performed at the
same operation through a midline sternotomy using cardiopulmonary
bypass.

476.8 Coarctation with Other Cardiac
Anomalies and Interrupted Aortic Arch
Daniel Bernstein
Coarctation often occurs in infancy in association with other major cardiovascular anomalies, including hypoplastic left heart, severe mitral or
aortic valve disease, transposition of the great arteries, and variations of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2796 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
double-­outlet or single-­ventricle. The clinical manifestations depend on
the effects of the associated malformations and on the coarctation itself.
Coarctation of the aorta associated with severe mitral and aortic
valve disease may have to be treated within the context of hypoplastic
left heart syndrome (see Chapter 480.10), even if the LV chamber is not
severely hypoplastic. Such patients usually have a long segment of narrow, transverse aortic arch in addition to an isolated coarctation at the
site of the ductus arteriosus. Coarctation of the aorta with transposition of the great arteries or single ventricle may be repaired alone or
in combination with other corrective or palliative measures.
Complete interruption of the aortic arch is the most severe form of
coarctation and is usually associated with other intracardiac pathology.
Interruption may occur at any level, although it is most often seen between
the left subclavian artery and the insertion of the ductus arteriosus (type
A), followed in frequency by those between the left subclavian and left
carotid arteries (type B), or between the left carotid and brachiocephalic
arteries (type C). In newborns with an interrupted aortic arch, the ductus
arteriosus provides the sole source of blood flow to the descending aorta,
and differential oxygen saturations between the right arm (normal saturation) and the legs (decreased saturation) is noted. When the ductus begins
to close, severe congestive heart failure, lower-­extremity hypoperfusion,
and anuria usually develop, progressing to shock. Patients with an interrupted aortic arch can be supported with prostaglandin E1 to keep the
ductus open before surgical repair. As one of the conotruncal malformations, an interrupted aortic arch, especially type B, can be associated with
DiGeorge syndrome (cardiac defects, abnormal facies, thymic hypoplasia,
cleft palate, hypocalcemia). Cytogenetic analysis using fluorescence in situ
hybridization demonstrates deletion of a segment of chromosome 22q11,
known as the DiGeorge critical region.

476.9 Congenital Mitral Stenosis
Daniel Bernstein
Congenital mitral stenosis is a rare anomaly that can be either isolated
or associated with other defects, the most common being subvalvar and
valvar aortic stenosis and coarctation of the aorta (Shone complex).
The mitral valve may be funnel shaped, with thickened leaflets and
chordae tendineae that are shortened and deformed. Other mitral valve
anomalies associated with stenosis include parachute mitral valve,
caused by a single papillary muscle, and double-­orifice mitral valve.
If the stenosis is moderate to severe, symptoms usually appear within the
first 2 years of life. These infants have failure to thrive and various degrees
of dyspnea and pallor. In some patients, wheezing may be a dominant
symptom, and a misdiagnosis of bronchiolitis or reactive airway disease
may have been made. Heart enlargement because of dilation and hypertrophy of the right ventricle and left atrium is common. Most patients have
rumbling apical diastolic murmurs, but because the pressure gradients
in diastole are not very high, the auscultatory findings may be relatively
obscure. S2 is split with a loud P2 if pulmonary hypertension is present. An
opening snap of the mitral valve may be present. The ECG reveals RVH
and may show bifid or spiked P waves indicative of left atrial enlargement.
Radiographs usually show left atrial and RV enlargement and pulmonary
congestion in a perihilar or venous pattern. The echocardiogram is diagnostic and shows thickened mitral valve leaflets, a significant reduction of
the mitral valve orifice, abnormal papillary muscle structure (or a single
papillary muscle), and an enlarged left atrium with a normal or small left
ventricle. A double-­orifice mitral valve is one variant that can usually be
seen on echocardiogram. Doppler studies demonstrate a mean pressure
gradient across the mitral orifice during diastole. Associated anomalies
such as aortic stenosis and coarctation can be evaluated. Cardiac catheterization is often performed to confirm the transmitral pressure gradient before surgery. An increase in RV, pulmonary artery, and pulmonary
capillary wedge pressure can be noted. Angiocardiography shows delayed
emptying of the left atrium and the small mitral orifice.
The results of surgical treatment depend on the anatomy of the valve,
but if the mitral orifice is significantly hypoplastic, reduction of the gradient may be difficult. In some patients, a mitral valve prosthesis is required,

and if the valve orifice is too small, the prosthesis may be placed in the
supramitral position. However, whatever prosthesis is used, it must be
replaced serially as the child grows. These patients must be anticoagulated,
usually with warfarin, and although manageable in older children, complications of excessive and insufficient anticoagulation are more common in
infancy. Transcatheter balloon valvuloplasty has been used as a palliative
procedure with mixed results, except in the situation of rheumatic mitral
stenosis. Recent experience using the percutaneous Melody stent-­valve in
selected patients in the mitral position is encouraging.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

476.10 Pulmonary Venous Hypertension
Daniel Bernstein
A variety of lesions may give rise to chronic pulmonary venous hypertension, which, when extreme, may result in pulmonary arterial hypertension
and right-­sided heart failure. These lesions include congenital mitral stenosis, mitral insufficiency, total anomalous pulmonary venous return
with obstruction, left atrial myxomas, cor triatriatum, individual pulmonary vein stenosis, and supravalvular mitral rings. Early symptoms
can be confused with chronic pulmonary disease such as asthma because
of a lack of specific cardiac findings on physical examination. Subtle signs
of pulmonary hypertension may be present. The ECG shows RVH with
spiked P waves. Radiographic studies demonstrate prominence of the pulmonary veins in the hilar region and enlargement of the right ventricle and
atrium and the main pulmonary artery; the left atrium is normal in size or
only slightly enlarged.
The echocardiogram may demonstrate left atrial myxoma, cor triatriatum, stenosis of one or more pulmonary veins, or a mitral valve abnormality (e.g., supravalvar mitral ring). Cardiac catheterization excludes
the presence of a shunt and demonstrates pulmonary hypertension with
elevated pulmonary arterial wedge pressure. Left atrial pressure is normal
if the lesion is at the level of the pulmonary veins, but it is elevated if the
lesion is at the level of the mitral valve. Selective pulmonary arteriography
usually delineates the anatomic lesion. Cor triatriatum, left atrial myxoma,
and supravalvular mitral rings can all be successfully managed surgically.
The differential diagnosis includes pulmonary venoocclusive disease,
an idiopathic process that produces obstructive lesions in one or more
pulmonary veins. The cause is uncertain, and disease that begins in one
vein can spread to others. Although it is usually encountered in patients
after repair of obstructed total anomalous pulmonary venous return (see
Chapter 480.7), it can occur sporadically or in families in the absence of
congenital heart disease. Pathogenic variants in BMPR2 may be seen in
the familial or sporadic cases. The patient initially presents with symptoms similar to left-­sided heart failure on the basis of congested lungs with
apparent pulmonary edema. Dyspnea, fatigue, and pleural effusions are
common. Left atrial pressure is normal, but pulmonary arterial wedge
pressure is usually elevated. A normal wedge pressure may be encountered
if collaterals have formed, or the wedge recording is performed in an uninvolved segment. Angiographically, the pulmonary veins return normally
to the left atrium, but one or more pulmonary veins are narrowed, either
focally or diffusely. Sporadic or familial cases present with a primary pulmonary hypertension phenotype, with dyspnea and cyanosis. However,
treatment with a primary pulmonary hypertension regimen will precipitate pulmonary edema.
Studies using lung biopsy have demonstrated pulmonary venous
and, occasionally, arterial involvement. Pulmonary veins and venules
demonstrate fibrous narrowing or occlusion, and pulmonary artery
thrombi may be present. Attempts at surgical repair, balloon dilation,
and transcatheter stenting have not significantly improved the generally poor prognosis of these patients. Use of antiproliferative agents
with imatinib with or without bevacizumab has demonstrated success
in preliminary studies. Combined heart-­lung transplantation is often
the only alternative therapeutic option (see Chapter 492.2).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 477 u Acyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Regurgitant Lesions

Chapter 477

Acyanotic Congenital
Heart Disease:
Regurgitant Lesions
477.1 Pulmonary Valvular Insufficiency and
Congenital Absence of the Pulmonary
Valve
Daniel Bernstein
Pulmonary valvular insufficiency most often accompanies other cardiovascular diseases (surgical repair of pulmonary valve stenosis) or may be
secondary to severe pulmonary hypertension. Some degree of incompetence of the valve is an expected result after surgery for right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) obstruction, including pulmonary valvotomy
in patients with valvular pulmonic stenosis or valvotomy with infundibular resection in patients with tetralogy of Fallot. Isolated congenital
insufficiency of the pulmonary valve is rare, and these patients are usually asymptomatic because the insufficiency is generally mild.
The prominent physical sign is a decrescendo diastolic murmur at
the upper and mid-­left sternal border, which has a lower pitch than
the murmur of aortic insufficiency because of the lower pressure
involved. Radiographs of the chest show prominence of the main
pulmonary artery and, if the insufficiency is severe, right ventricular
(RV) enlargement. The electrocardiogram (ECG) is normal or shows
an rSR′ pattern in the right precordial leads (V1, V2) and minimal or
no RV hypertrophy. Pulsed and color Doppler studies demonstrate
retrograde flow from the pulmonary artery into the right ventricle
during diastole. Echocardiography can give qualitative measures of
RV volume; cardiac magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) is the
best method for quantifying RV volume, the regurgitant fraction, and
RV systolic function (ejection fraction). Mild pulmonary valvular
insufficiency is generally well tolerated and does not require surgical treatment. When pulmonary insufficiency is moderate to severe
and the right ventricle becomes significantly dilated and/or if tricuspid insufficiency has begun to develop, re-­repair, replacement with a
homograft valve, or transcatheter stent-­valve placement may become
necessary to preserve RV function.
Congenital absence of the pulmonary valve is usually associated
with a ventricular septal defect (VSD), often in the context of tetralogy of Fallot (see Chapter 479.1). In many of these neonates, the pulmonary arteries become widely dilated and compress the bronchi,
resulting in recurrent episodes of wheezing, pulmonary collapse, and
pneumonitis. The presence and degree of cyanosis are variable. Florid
pulmonary valvular incompetence may not be well tolerated, and death
may occur from a combination of bronchial compression, hypoxemia,
and heart failure. Correction involves plication of the massively dilated
pulmonary arteries, closure of the VSD, and placement of a homograft
across the RVOT.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

477.2 Congenital Mitral Insufficiency
Daniel Bernstein
Congenital mitral insufficiency is rare as an isolated lesion and is
more often associated with other anomalies. It is most frequently

2797

encountered in combination with an atrioventricular septal defect,
either an ostium primum defect or a complete atrioventricular septal defect (see Chapter 475.5) where the insufficient jet is through a
cleft in the mitral valve. Mitral insufficiency is also seen in patients
with dilated cardiomyopathy (see Chapter 488.1) when the left ventricular (LV) function deteriorates, the chamber dilates, and the
valve ring is stretched. In adults, mitral insufficiency can be the
result of ischemic injury to a papillary muscle; this is uncommon in
children. Mitral insufficiency may also be encountered in conjunction with coarctation of the aorta, VSD, corrected transposition of
the great vessels, anomalous origin of the left coronary artery from
the pulmonary artery, or Marfan syndrome. In the absence of other
congenital heart disease, endocarditis or rheumatic fever should be
suspected in a patient with isolated mitral insufficiency.
In mitral insufficiency caused by a congenitally malformed valve,
the mitral valve annulus may be dilated, the chordae tendineae short
and may insert anomalously, and the valve leaflets are deformed.
When mitral insufficiency is severe enough to cause clinical symptoms, the left atrium enlarges as a result of the regurgitant flow, and
the left ventricle becomes dilated and mildly hypertrophied. Pulmonary venous pressure is increased, and the increased pressure can
ultimately result in pulmonary hypertension and RV hypertrophy
and dilation. Mild lesions produce no symptoms; the only abnormal sign is an apical holosystolic murmur of mitral regurgitation. In
contrast, moderate to severe regurgitation results in symptoms that
can appear at any age, including poor growth, frequent respiratory
infections, fatigue on exertion, and episodes of pulmonary edema
or congestive heart failure. Often, a diagnosis of reactive airways
disease will have been made because of the similarity in pulmonary
symptoms, including wheezing, which may be a dominant finding
in infants and young children. The presence of a murmur helps distinguish these two etiologies.
The typical murmur of mitral insufficiency is a moderately high-­
pitched, apical blowing, holosystolic murmur. The murmur radiates
from the apex toward the mid-­left sternal border. If the insufficiency
is moderate to severe, it is usually associated with a low-­pitched,
apical mid-­diastolic rumbling murmur indicative of increased diastolic flow across the mitral valve (physiologic mitral stenosis). The
pulmonic component of the second heart sound will be accentuated
if there is pulmonary hypertension. The ECG usually shows bifid P
waves consistent with left atrial enlargement, signs of LV hypertrophy, and sometimes signs of RV hypertrophy. Radiographic examination shows enlargement of the left atrium, which at times can be
massive. The left ventricle is also enlarged and pulmonary vascularity prominent, especially in the perihilar areas. The echocardiogram demonstrates the enlarged left atrium and left ventricle and
defines the structure of the valve, the presence or absence of a cleft,
and the chordal apparatus. 3D echocardiography is especially useful for this imaging. Color Doppler demonstrates the extent of the
insufficiency, and pulsed Doppler of the pulmonary veins detects
retrograde flow when mitral insufficiency is severe. Cardiac catheterization shows elevated left atrial pressure and left ventricular
end-­diastolic pressure. Pulmonary artery hypertension of varying
severity may be present. Selective left ventriculography demonstrates the severity of mitral regurgitation.
Surgical mitral valvuloplasty can result in striking improvement in symptoms and heart size, but in some patients, installation
of a prosthetic mechanical mitral valve may be necessary. Before
surgery, associated anomalies must be identified, as they will need
to be addressed at the time of valve repair. If the valve requires
replacement, several alternatives are available, including mechanical (used mainly for older children) and bioprosthetic, as well as
the use of the Melody stent-­valve. These can be inserted during a
hybrid procedure (surgery and catheterization). A cardiac catheter
laboratory–inserted device (MitraClip), used mostly in adults, has
been used in a few selected pediatric patients to cinch together the
anterior and posterior mitral valve leaflets, reducing insufficiency
by creating a double-­orifice mitral valve.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2798 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

477.3 Mitral Valve Prolapse
Daniel Bernstein
Mitral valve prolapse (MVP) results from an abnormal mitral valve
mechanism that causes billowing of one or both mitral leaflets,
especially the posterior cusp, into the left atrium toward the end
of ventricular systole. The abnormality is predominantly congenital
but may not be recognized until adolescence or adulthood. Primary
mitral valve prolapse is common, is present in 2–3% of the population, is more common in females, and may be sporadic or inherited
as an autosomal dominant trait (less often X-­linked) with variable
expression. Pathogenic variants in DCHS1, LMCD1, TNS1, and
DZIP1 are possible genes associated with nonsyndromic MVP. It is
a common finding in patients with Marfan syndrome, Loeys-­Dietz
syndrome, mitral-­aortic-­skeleton-­skin (MASS) phenotype, familial
myxomatous valvular degeneration, fragile X syndrome, mucopolysaccharidoses, Stickler syndrome, straight back syndrome, pectus
excavatum, scoliosis, Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome, osteogenesis imperfecta, and pseudoxanthoma elasticum and can also be associated
with hyperthyroidism. Fibromyxomatous degeneration of the valve
leaflets causes them to be thickened and elongated.
The abnormal signs are auscultatory, although occasional patients
may have chest pain and/or palpitations. The apical murmur is late
systolic and may be preceded by a click, but these signs may vary
in the same patient, and at times, only the click is audible. Sudden
standing, or the strain phase of the Valsalva maneuver, decreases LV
volume, so the click moves closer to S1 and the murmur becomes
longer. Squatting (or the release phase of the Valsalva maneuver)
increases LV volume, so that the click moves away from S1 and the
murmur is shortened. Arrhythmias may occur, primarily unifocal
or multifocal premature ventricular contractions. In young adults,
MVP has been associated with sudden cardiac death secondary to
ventricular arrhythmias.
The ECG is usually normal but may show biphasic T waves, especially in leads II, III, aVF, and V6; the T-­wave abnormalities may
vary at different times in the same patient. The chest radiograph is
normal. The echocardiogram shows a characteristic posterior movement of the posterior mitral leaflet during mid-­or late ventricular
systole or demonstrates pansystolic prolapse of both the anterior
and posterior mitral leaflets. These echocardiographic findings
must be interpreted cautiously because the appearance of minimal
mitral prolapse may be a normal variant. Prolapse is more precisely
defined by single or bileaflet prolapse of >2 mm beyond the long-­
axis annular plane of the valve with or without leaflet thickening.
Prolapse with valve thickening >5 mm is “classic”; a lesser degree is
“nonclassic.” Two-­dimensional echocardiography shows that both
the free edge and the body of the mitral leaflets move posteriorly
in systole toward the left atrium. Doppler is then used to assess the
presence and severity of mitral regurgitation.
This lesion is not progressive in childhood, and specific therapy is
not indicated. Antibiotic prophylaxis is not recommended during surgery and dental procedures (see Chapter 486). This recommendation is
controversial because certain features (regurgitation, thickened redundant leaflets) may increase the risk of endocarditis.
Adults (males more often than females) with MVP are at increased
risk for cardiovascular complications (sudden death, arrhythmia,
cerebrovascular accident, progressive valve dilation, heart failure, and
endocarditis) if they have thickened (>5 mm) and redundant mitral
valve leaflets. Risk factors for morbidity also include poor LV function,
moderate to severe mitral regurgitation, and left atrial enlargement.
MVP with severe valve regurgitation, or heart failure, or significant
arrhythmias may require initial valve repair or replacement. Betablocking agents have been used for patients with palpitations and some
arrhythmias. Most patients are asymptomatic and require no treatment.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

477.4 Tricuspid Regurgitation
Daniel Bernstein
Isolated congenital tricuspid regurgitation is most often associated
with Ebstein anomaly of the tricuspid valve (see Chapter 479.7).
Ebstein anomaly may occur either without cyanosis or with varying degrees of cyanosis, depending on the severity of the tricuspid
regurgitation and the presence of an atrial-­level communication
(patent foramen ovale or atrial septal defect). Older children tend
to have the acyanotic form or only develop cyanosis with exercise,
whereas if detected in the newborn period, Ebstein anomaly is usually associated with severe cyanosis.
In pediatric patients, tricuspid regurgitation is most often associated with congenital heart disease and/or RV dysfunction. When
the right ventricle becomes dilated because of volume overload
(e.g., pulmonary insufficiency) or intrinsic myocardial disease
(dilated cardiomyopathy), the tricuspid annulus also enlarges, with
separation of the leaflets and resultant valve insufficiency. This
form of regurgitation may improve if the cause of the RV dilation
is corrected, or it may require surgical plication of the valve annulus. Tricuspid regurgitation can also be encountered in patients
with congenitally corrected transposition of the great arteries (see
Chapter 479) and in patients with hypoplastic left heart syndrome
after surgical palliation; in both of these situations the RV is pumping at systemic pressure. Isolated tricuspid regurgitation is also
encountered in newborns with perinatal asphyxia. The cause may
be related to an increased susceptibility of the papillary muscles to
ischemic damage and subsequent transient papillary muscle dysfunction. Lastly, tricuspid regurgitation is seen in up to 30% of children after heart transplantation, which can be a risk factor for graft
dysfunction, but is also seen as a result of valve injury caused by
endomyocardial biopsy.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 478

Cyanotic Congenital Heart
Disease: Evaluation of the
Critically Ill Neonate with
Cyanosis and Respiratory
Distress
Daniel Bernstein
See also Chapter 124.
A severely ill neonate with cardiorespiratory distress and cyanosis is a diagnostic challenge. The clinician must perform a rapid
evaluation to determine whether congenital heart disease (CHD)
is a cause so that potentially lifesaving measures can be instituted.
The differential diagnosis of neonatal cyanosis is presented in
Table 121.2.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2798 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

477.3 Mitral Valve Prolapse
Daniel Bernstein
Mitral valve prolapse (MVP) results from an abnormal mitral valve
mechanism that causes billowing of one or both mitral leaflets,
especially the posterior cusp, into the left atrium toward the end
of ventricular systole. The abnormality is predominantly congenital
but may not be recognized until adolescence or adulthood. Primary
mitral valve prolapse is common, is present in 2–3% of the population, is more common in females, and may be sporadic or inherited
as an autosomal dominant trait (less often X-­linked) with variable
expression. Pathogenic variants in DCHS1, LMCD1, TNS1, and
DZIP1 are possible genes associated with nonsyndromic MVP. It is
a common finding in patients with Marfan syndrome, Loeys-­Dietz
syndrome, mitral-­aortic-­skeleton-­skin (MASS) phenotype, familial
myxomatous valvular degeneration, fragile X syndrome, mucopolysaccharidoses, Stickler syndrome, straight back syndrome, pectus
excavatum, scoliosis, Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome, osteogenesis imperfecta, and pseudoxanthoma elasticum and can also be associated
with hyperthyroidism. Fibromyxomatous degeneration of the valve
leaflets causes them to be thickened and elongated.
The abnormal signs are auscultatory, although occasional patients
may have chest pain and/or palpitations. The apical murmur is late
systolic and may be preceded by a click, but these signs may vary
in the same patient, and at times, only the click is audible. Sudden
standing, or the strain phase of the Valsalva maneuver, decreases LV
volume, so the click moves closer to S1 and the murmur becomes
longer. Squatting (or the release phase of the Valsalva maneuver)
increases LV volume, so that the click moves away from S1 and the
murmur is shortened. Arrhythmias may occur, primarily unifocal
or multifocal premature ventricular contractions. In young adults,
MVP has been associated with sudden cardiac death secondary to
ventricular arrhythmias.
The ECG is usually normal but may show biphasic T waves, especially in leads II, III, aVF, and V6; the T-­wave abnormalities may
vary at different times in the same patient. The chest radiograph is
normal. The echocardiogram shows a characteristic posterior movement of the posterior mitral leaflet during mid-­or late ventricular
systole or demonstrates pansystolic prolapse of both the anterior
and posterior mitral leaflets. These echocardiographic findings
must be interpreted cautiously because the appearance of minimal
mitral prolapse may be a normal variant. Prolapse is more precisely
defined by single or bileaflet prolapse of >2 mm beyond the long-­
axis annular plane of the valve with or without leaflet thickening.
Prolapse with valve thickening >5 mm is “classic”; a lesser degree is
“nonclassic.” Two-­dimensional echocardiography shows that both
the free edge and the body of the mitral leaflets move posteriorly
in systole toward the left atrium. Doppler is then used to assess the
presence and severity of mitral regurgitation.
This lesion is not progressive in childhood, and specific therapy is
not indicated. Antibiotic prophylaxis is not recommended during surgery and dental procedures (see Chapter 486). This recommendation is
controversial because certain features (regurgitation, thickened redundant leaflets) may increase the risk of endocarditis.
Adults (males more often than females) with MVP are at increased
risk for cardiovascular complications (sudden death, arrhythmia,
cerebrovascular accident, progressive valve dilation, heart failure, and
endocarditis) if they have thickened (>5 mm) and redundant mitral
valve leaflets. Risk factors for morbidity also include poor LV function,
moderate to severe mitral regurgitation, and left atrial enlargement.
MVP with severe valve regurgitation, or heart failure, or significant
arrhythmias may require initial valve repair or replacement. Betablocking agents have been used for patients with palpitations and some
arrhythmias. Most patients are asymptomatic and require no treatment.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

477.4 Tricuspid Regurgitation
Daniel Bernstein
Isolated congenital tricuspid regurgitation is most often associated
with Ebstein anomaly of the tricuspid valve (see Chapter 479.7).
Ebstein anomaly may occur either without cyanosis or with varying degrees of cyanosis, depending on the severity of the tricuspid
regurgitation and the presence of an atrial-­level communication
(patent foramen ovale or atrial septal defect). Older children tend
to have the acyanotic form or only develop cyanosis with exercise,
whereas if detected in the newborn period, Ebstein anomaly is usually associated with severe cyanosis.
In pediatric patients, tricuspid regurgitation is most often associated with congenital heart disease and/or RV dysfunction. When
the right ventricle becomes dilated because of volume overload
(e.g., pulmonary insufficiency) or intrinsic myocardial disease
(dilated cardiomyopathy), the tricuspid annulus also enlarges, with
separation of the leaflets and resultant valve insufficiency. This
form of regurgitation may improve if the cause of the RV dilation
is corrected, or it may require surgical plication of the valve annulus. Tricuspid regurgitation can also be encountered in patients
with congenitally corrected transposition of the great arteries (see
Chapter 479) and in patients with hypoplastic left heart syndrome
after surgical palliation; in both of these situations the RV is pumping at systemic pressure. Isolated tricuspid regurgitation is also
encountered in newborns with perinatal asphyxia. The cause may
be related to an increased susceptibility of the papillary muscles to
ischemic damage and subsequent transient papillary muscle dysfunction. Lastly, tricuspid regurgitation is seen in up to 30% of children after heart transplantation, which can be a risk factor for graft
dysfunction, but is also seen as a result of valve injury caused by
endomyocardial biopsy.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 478

Cyanotic Congenital Heart
Disease: Evaluation of the
Critically Ill Neonate with
Cyanosis and Respiratory
Distress
Daniel Bernstein
See also Chapter 124.
A severely ill neonate with cardiorespiratory distress and cyanosis is a diagnostic challenge. The clinician must perform a rapid
evaluation to determine whether congenital heart disease (CHD)
is a cause so that potentially lifesaving measures can be instituted.
The differential diagnosis of neonatal cyanosis is presented in
Table 121.2.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 478 u Cyanotic Congenital Heart Disease
CARDIAC DISEASE LEADING TO CYANOSIS

CHD produces cyanosis when obstruction to right ventricular inflow
or outflow causes intracardiac right-­to-­left shunting or when complex
anatomic defects cause an admixture of pulmonary (deoxygenated) and
systemic (oxygenated) venous return somewhere in the heart. Cyanosis
from pulmonary edema may also develop in patients with heart failure
caused by left-­to-­right shunts, although the degree of desaturation is usually less severe. In general, right ventricular outflow obstruction without
an intracardiac shunt (e.g., isolated valvar pulmonary stenosis) does not
cause cyanosis; however, in the newborn period, cyanosis may be caused
by right-­to-­left shunting across the foramen ovale in the presence of elevated right-­sided filling pressures. Persistent pulmonary hypertension
of the newborn (PPHN) is another cause of right-­to-­left shunting at the
atrial level in the newborn period (see Chapter 130).

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The hyperoxia test is one method of distinguishing cyanotic CHD
from pulmonary disease. This test is based on the premise that neonates with cyanotic CHD usually are unable to significantly raise
their arterial blood partial pressure of oxygen (Pao2) during administration of 100% oxygen, whereas in infants with pulmonary disease, high levels of intraalveolar Po2 will overcome at least some
of the ventilation-­perfusion abnormalities and reverse the hypoxia.
This test is performed using a hood rather than nasal cannula or
face mask to guarantee delivery of almost 100% oxygen to the
patient. False-­positive tests can occur if this is not done correctly.
In a healthy newborn, the Pao2 should rise above 300 mm Hg; if
between 150 and 300 mm Hg, noncardiac etiologies (pulmonary
disease, central nervous system disorders, methemoglobinemia) are
most likely. This is not 100% confirmative, however, because some
patients with cyanotic CHD may be able to increase their Pao2 to
>150 mm Hg because of favorable intracardiac streaming patterns.
In infants with cyanosis from a central nervous system disorder, the
Pao2 usually normalizes completely during artificial ventilation. If

A

B

2799

the Pao2 is between 100 and 150 mmHg, then cyanotic congenital heart lesions, increased pulmonary blood flow (mixing lesions,
see Chapter 480), or PPHN are more likely. If the Pao2 is less than
100 mm Hg, then CHD with decreased pulmonary blood flow (see
Chapter 479) is more likely. Another clue to etiology is that hypoxia
in many heart lesions is relatively constant, whereas in respiratory
disorders and in PPHN, Pao2 often varies with time or changes
in ventilator management. For example, hyperventilation may
improve the hypoxia in neonates with PPHN but only occasionally
in those with cyanotic CHD.
Although a significant heart murmur usually suggests a cardiac
basis for the cyanosis, several of the more severe cardiac defects
(e.g., transposition of the great vessels) may not initially be associated with a murmur. The chest radiograph may be helpful in the
differentiation of pulmonary and cardiac disease; in the latter, it
also indicates whether pulmonary blood flow is increased,
normal, or decreased (Fig. 478.1) as well as shows alterations in cardiac size.
Two-­dimensional echocardiography with Doppler is the definitive noninvasive test to determine the presence of CHD. With
today’s high-­quality echocardiography, cardiac catheterization is
less often used for diagnostic purposes and is usually performed to
examine structures that are less well visualized by echocardiography, such as distal branch pulmonary arteries and aortopulmonary
collateral arteries in patients with tetralogy of Fallot with pulmonary atresia (see Chapter 479.2) or coronary arteries and right
ventricular sinusoids in patients with pulmonary atresia and intact
ventricular septum (see Chapter 479.3). If echocardiography is not
immediately available to confirm a diagnosis of cyanotic CHD, the
clinician caring for a newborn with possible cyanotic CHD should
not hesitate to start a prostaglandin infusion (for a possible ductal-­
dependent lesion). Because of the risk of hypoventilation associated
with prostaglandins, a practitioner skilled in neonatal endotracheal
intubation must be available.

C

Fig. 478.1 Physiology of congenital heart disease delineated by chest radiography. A, Mild cardiomegaly with an upturned cardiac apex, a

concave main pulmonary artery segment, and symmetric, severely diminished pulmonary blood flow in a 4-­yr-­old child with tetralogy of Fallot/
pulmonary atresia. B, Moderate cardiomegaly and symmetric, increased pulmonary blood flow in a 3-­mo-­old infant with a large atrial septal defect
and ventricular septal defect. C, Moderate cardiomegaly with interstitial edema in an 8-­day-­old newborn with critical aortic stenosis. (From Frost JL,
Krishnamurthy R, Sena L. Cardiac imaging. In: Walters MM, Robertson RL, eds. Pediatric Radiology—The Requisites, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2017: Fig. 3.9, p. 68.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2800 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

Chapter 479

Cyanotic Congenital
Heart Disease: Lesions
Associated with
Decreased Pulmonary
Blood Flow
479.1 Tetralogy of Fallot
Daniel Bernstein
Tetralogy of Fallot is one of the conotruncal family of heart lesions in
which the primary defect is an anterior deviation of the infundibular
septum (the muscular septum that separates the aortic and pulmonary
outflows during division of the truncus arteriosus). The consequences
of this deviation are the four components that Fallot initially described:
(1) obstruction to right ventricular (RV) outflow (pulmonary stenosis);
(2) a malalignment type of ventricular septal defect (VSD); (3) dextroposition of the aorta so that it overrides the ventricular septum; and
(4) right ventricular hypertrophy (RVH; Fig. 479.1). Obstruction to

80

60
2

3

100

2

60
3

2

1

95

60

Fig. 479.1 Physiology of tetralogy of Fallot. Circled numbers repre-

sent oxygen saturation values. The numbers next to the arrows represent volumes of blood flow (in L/min/m2). Atrial (mixed venous) oxygen
saturation is decreased because of the systemic hypoxemia. A volume
of 3 L/min/m2 of desaturated blood enters the right atrium and traverses the tricuspid valve. Two liters flow through the right ventricular
outflow tract into the lungs, whereas 1 L shunts right to left through
the ventricular septal defect (VSD) into the ascending aorta. Thus pulmonary blood flow is two-­thirds normal (Qp:Qs [pulmonary-­to-­systemic
blood flow ratio] of 0.7:1). Blood returning to the left atrium is fully saturated. Only 2 L of blood flow across the mitral valve. Oxygen saturation
in the left ventricle may be slightly decreased because of right-­to-­left
shunting across the VSD. Two liters of saturated left ventricular blood
mixing with 1 L of desaturated right ventricular blood are ejected into
the ascending aorta. Aortic saturation is decreased, and cardiac output
is normal.

pulmonary artery blood flow is usually at both the RV infundibulum
(subpulmonic area) and the pulmonary valve. The main pulmonary
artery (MPA) may also be small, and various degrees of branch pulmonary artery stenosis may be present. Complete obstruction of RV
outflow (tetralogy with pulmonary atresia) is classified as an extreme
form of tetralogy of Fallot (see Chapter 479.2) and may be associated
with various degrees of hypoplasia of the branch pulmonary arteries.
The degree of pulmonary outflow obstruction and whether the ductus
arteriosus is open or closed determine the degree of the patient’s cyanosis and the age at first presentation.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

The pulmonary valve annulus may range from being nearly normal in
size to being severely hypoplastic. The valve itself is often bicuspid or
unicuspid and, occasionally, is the only site of stenosis. More often, the
subpulmonic or infundibular muscle, known as the crista supraventricularis, is hypertrophic, which contributes to the subvalvar stenosis and
results in an infundibular chamber of variable size and contour. When
the right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) is completely obstructed
(pulmonary atresia), the anatomy of the branch pulmonary arteries
is extremely variable. An MPA segment may be in continuity with RV
outflow, separated by a fibrous but imperforate pulmonary valve; the
MPA may be moderately or severely hypoplastic but still supply part
or all of the pulmonary bed; or the entire main pulmonary artery segment may be absent. Occasionally, the branch pulmonary arteries may
be discontinuous. In these extreme cases, pulmonary blood flow may
be supplied by a patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) or by multiple major
aortopulmonary collateral arteries (MAPCAs) arising from the
ascending and/or descending aorta or aortic branches and supplying
various lung segments.
The VSD is usually nonrestrictive and large, is located just below
the aortic valve, and is related to the posterior and right aortic cusps.
Rarely, the VSD may be in the inlet portion of the ventricular septum
(tetralogy with atrioventricular septal defect). The normal fibrous continuity of the mitral and aortic valves is usually maintained, and if not
(because of the presence of a subaortic muscular conus), the defect is
classified as a double-­outlet right ventricle (DORV) instead of tetralogy of Fallot (see Chapter 479.5). The aortic arch is right sided in 20%
of cases, and the aortic root is usually large and overrides the VSD to
varying degrees. When the aorta overrides the VSD by >50% (in which
case it may also be a subaortic conus), this defect is also classified as a
form of DORV; however, the circulatory dynamics and the method of
repair for these types of DORV are the same as for tetralogy of Fallot.
Systemic venous return to the right atrium and right ventricle is
normal. When the right ventricle contracts in the presence of marked
pulmonary stenosis, blood is shunted into the overriding aorta or
across the VSD into the aorta. Persistent arterial desaturation and cyanosis result, with the degree of desaturation dependent on the severity
of the pulmonary obstruction. Pulmonary blood flow, when severely
restricted by the obstruction to RV outflow, is often supplemented by a
PDA during the immediate newborn period. Peak systolic and diastolic
pressures in each ventricle are similar and at the systemic level. A large
pressure gradient occurs across the obstructed RVOT, and pulmonary
artery pressure is either normal or lower than normal. The degree of
RV outflow obstruction determines the timing of the onset of symptoms and the severity of cyanosis. When obstruction to RV outflow is
mild to moderate and a balanced shunt is present across the VSD, the
patient may not be visibly cyanotic (acyanotic or “pink” tetralogy of
Fallot). When obstruction is severe, cyanosis will be present from birth
and worsen dramatically when the ductus arteriosus begins to close.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Infants with mild degrees of RV outflow obstruction may initially even
have symptoms of heart failure caused by a ventricular-­level left-­to-­
right shunt. In these patients, cyanosis is not present at birth, but with
increasing hypertrophy of the RV infundibulum as the patient grows,
cyanosis occurs later in the first few months of life. In contrast, in
infants with more severe degrees of RV outflow obstruction, neonatal
cyanosis is noted immediately. In these infants, pulmonary blood flow

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 479 u Cyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Lesions Associated with Decreased Pulmonary Blood Flow 2801
may be partially or almost totally dependent on flow through the ductus arteriosus. When the ductus begins to close in the first few hours
or days of life, severe cyanosis and circulatory collapse may occur. All
degrees of variation exist between these two clinical extremes. Older
children with long-­standing cyanosis who have not undergone surgery
may have dusky blue skin, mucous membranes, and nailbeds (the latter
two are key to diagnosing cyanosis in children with darker skin color).
Patients may have gray sclerae with engorged blood vessels and (usually after 2 years of age) clubbing of the fingers and toes. Chapter 483
describes the extracardiac manifestations of long-­standing cyanotic
congenital heart disease.
In older children with unrepaired tetralogy, dyspnea occurs on
minimal exertion. They may play actively for a short time and then sit
or lie down or walk a block or so before stopping to rest. Characteristically, children assume a squatting position for the relief of dyspnea
caused by physical effort; squatting increases venous return to the
right side of the heart and also increases systemic vascular resistance,
both serving to increase flow through the obstructed RV outflow. The
child is usually able to resume physical activity after a few minutes of
squatting.
Paroxysmal hypercyanotic attacks (hypoxic, “blue,” or “tet” spells)
may develop during the first year of life. The infant becomes hyperpneic and restless, cyanosis increases, gasping respirations ensue, and
syncope may follow. The spells occur most frequently in the morning
on initially awakening or after episodes of vigorous crying. Temporary
disappearance or a decrease in intensity of the typical systolic ejection
murmur occurs as flow across the RVOT diminishes during the spell.
Tet spells may last from a few minutes to a few hours. Short episodes are
followed by generalized weakness and sleep. Severe spells may progress
to unconsciousness and occasionally to convulsions, stroke, and death.
The onset of these spells is usually spontaneous and unpredictable.
They are associated with reduction of an already compromised pulmonary blood flow, which, when prolonged, results in severe systemic
hypoxia and metabolic acidosis. Infants who are only mildly cyanotic
at rest may be more prone to the development of hypoxic spells because
they have not acquired the homeostatic mechanisms that would allow
them to better tolerate rapid lowering of arterial oxyhemoglobin saturation (Sao2), such as polycythemia.
Depending on the frequency and severity of hypercyanotic attacks,
one or more of the following procedures should be instituted in
sequence: (1) placement of the infant on the abdomen in the knee-­
chest position while making certain that the infant’s clothing is not
constrictive; (2) administration of oxygen (although increasing
inspired oxygen will not reverse cyanosis caused by intracardiac shunting); (3) injection of morphine subcutaneously or intranasal fentanyl
or intranasal midazolam; (4) administer propranolol or esmolol; and
(5) begin a phenylephrine intravenous infusion. Calming and holding
the infant in a knee-­chest position may abort progression of an early
spell. Premature attempts to obtain blood samples may cause further
agitation and may be counterproductive; transcutaneous oxygen saturation monitoring is helpful in these cases but is limited in not measuring the degree of acidosis if the spell is prolonged.
Because metabolic acidosis develops when arterial oxygen tension
(Pao2) is <40 mm Hg, rapid correction (within several minutes) with
intravenous (IV) administration of sodium bicarbonate is necessary if
the spell is unusually severe and the child shows a lack of response to
the foregoing therapy. Recovery from the spell is usually rapid once the
pH has returned to normal. Repeated blood pH measurements may be
necessary because rapid recurrence of acidosis may ensue. For spells
that are resistant to this therapy, intubation and anesthetic sedation are
often sufficient to break the spell. Drugs that increase systemic vascular resistance, such as IV phenylephrine, can improve RV outflow,
decrease the right-­to-­left shunt, and improve symptoms. β-­Adrenergic
blockade by the IV administration of propranolol (0.15-­0.25 mg/kg/
dose given slowly; can be repeated once in 15 minutes) has also been
used. Spells are quite rare because most infants with tetralogy of Fallot
undergo reparative surgery in early infancy.
Growth and development may be delayed in patients with severe
untreated tetralogy of Fallot, particularly when their Sao2 is chronically

<70%. Puberty may also be delayed in patients who have not undergone surgery.
The peripheral pulses are usually normal, as are central venous and
arterial pressures. In older infants and children, the left anterior hemithorax may bulge anteriorly because of long-­standing RVH. A substernal RV impulse can usually be detected. A systolic thrill may be felt
along the left sternal border in the third and fourth parasternal spaces.
The systolic murmur is usually loud and harsh; it may be transmitted widely, especially to the lungs, but is most intense at the mid-­and
upper-­left sternal border. The murmur is generally ejection in quality
at the upper-­left sternal border, but it may sound more holosystolic
toward the lower-­left sternal border. It may be preceded by a click at
the upper sternal border or over the sternum. The murmur is caused by
turbulence through the RVOT. It tends to become louder, longer, and
harsher as the severity of pulmonary stenosis increases from mild to
moderate; however, it can become less prominent with severe obstruction, especially during a hypercyanotic spell, because of shunting of
blood away from the RV outflow through the overriding aortic valve.
Either the second heart sound (S2) is single or the pulmonic component is soft because of the decreased excursion of the stenotic valve.
Infrequently, a continuous murmur may be audible, especially if prominent MAPCAs are present.

DIAGNOSIS

The typical radiologic configuration as seen in the anteroposterior
(AP) view consists of a narrow base, concavity of the left heart border in the area usually occupied by the pulmonary artery, and normal
overall heart size. The hypertrophied right ventricle causes the rounded
apical shadow to be uptilted so that it is situated higher above the diaphragm than normal and pointing horizontally to the left chest wall.
The cardiac silhouette has been likened to that of a boot (“coeur en
sabot”) (Fig. 479.2). The hilar areas and lung fields are relatively clear
because of diminished pulmonary blood flow or the small size of the
pulmonary arteries, or both. The aorta is usually large, and in approximately 20% of patients it arches to the right, which results in an indentation of the leftward-­positioned air-­filled tracheobronchial shadow in
the AP view.
The electrocardiogram (ECG) demonstrates right-­axis deviation and
evidence of RVH; because prominent right-­sided forces are normal in
the newborn period, the ECG may be technically normal at this time.
A dominant R wave appears in the right precordial chest leads (V1, V2)
or an RSR′ pattern. In some cases, the only sign of RVH may initially

Fig. 479.2 Chest radiograph of 8-­yr-­old child with tetralogy of Fallot.

Note the normal heart size, some elevation of the cardiac apex, concavity in the region of the main pulmonary artery, right-­sided aortic arch,
and diminished pulmonary vascularity.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2802 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

RV
Ao
LV
LA
C

Fig. 479.3 Echocardiogram of patient with tetralogy of Fallot. This
parasternal long-­axis 2D view demonstrates anterior displacement of
the outflow ventricular septum that resulted in stenosis of the subpulmonic right ventricular outflow tract, overriding of the aorta, and an associated ventricular septal defect. Ao, Overriding aorta; LA, left atrium;
LV, left ventricle; RV, right ventricle.

be a positive T wave in leads V3R and V1. The P wave may be tall and
peaked, suggesting right atrial enlargement (see Fig. 472.6).
Two-­dimensional (2D) echocardiography with Doppler establishes
the diagnosis (Fig. 479.3) and provides information about the extent
of aortic override of the septum, the location and degree of the RVOT
obstruction, the size of the pulmonary valve annulus and main and
proximal branch pulmonary arteries, and the side of the aortic arch.
The echocardiogram is also useful in determining whether a PDA is
supplying a portion of the pulmonary blood flow. In a patient with
tetralogy of Fallot without pulmonary atresia, echocardiography
usually obviates the need for catheterization before surgical repair.
However, in patients with pulmonary atresia, catheterization and CT
angiography are usually necessary to image the size and source of
blood supply (native pulmonary arteries or MAPCAs) to each lung
vascular segment.
Cardiac catheterization demonstrates a systolic pressure in the right
ventricle equal to the systemic pressure because the right ventricle is
connected directly to the overriding aorta. If the pulmonary artery is
entered, the pressure is greatly decreased, although crossing the RVOT,
especially in severe cases, may precipitate a tet spell. Pulmonary artery
pressure is usually lower than normal, in the range of 5-­10 mm Hg.
The Sao2 level depends on the magnitude of the right-­to-­left shunt; in
“pink tets,” the systemic So2 may be normal, whereas in a moderately
cyanotic patient at rest, it is usually 75–85%.
Selective right ventriculography will demonstrate all the anatomic
features. Contrast medium outlines the heavily trabeculated right
ventricle. The infundibular stenosis varies in length, width, contour,
and distensibility (Fig. 479.4). The pulmonary valve is usually thickened, and the annulus may be small. In patients with tetralogy and
pulmonary atresia, echocardiography alone is not adequate to assess
the anatomy of the true pulmonary arteries and collateral MAPCAs.
Cardiac CT is extremely helpful, and cardiac catheterization with
injection into each arterial collateral is usually indicated. Complete
and accurate information regarding the size and peripheral distribution of the main pulmonary arteries and any collateral vessels
(MAPCAs) is important when evaluating these children for complex
reparative surgery.
Aortography or coronary arteriography outlines the course of the
coronary arteries. In 5–10% of patients with the tetralogy of Fallot,
coronary artery abnormalities may be present, most often an aberrant
coronary artery crossing over the RVOT; care must be taken not to
cut this artery during surgical repair. Verification of normal coronary
arteries is important when considering surgery in young infants, who
may need a patch across the pulmonary valve annulus. Echocardiography can usually delineate the coronary artery anatomy; angiography is
reserved for cases in which questions remain.

Fig. 479.4 Lateral view of selective right ventriculogram in patient

with tetralogy of Fallot. The left arrow points to an infundibular stenosis
that is below the infundibular chamber (C). The narrowed pulmonary
valve orifice is seen at the distal end of the infundibular chamber.

COMPLICATIONS

Before the advent of corrective surgery, patients with tetralogy of Fallot were susceptible to several serious complications. For this reason,
most children undergo complete repair (or in rare situations palliation) in the first few months of life; consequently, these complications
are now rare. Cerebral thromboses, usually occurring in the cerebral veins or dural sinuses and occasionally in the cerebral arteries,
are sequelae of extreme polycythemia and dehydration. Thromboses
occur most often in patients younger than 2 years. These patients
may have iron-­deficiency anemia, frequently with hemoglobin and
hematocrit levels in the normal range (but too low for cyanotic
heart disease). Therapy consists of adequate hydration and supportive measures. Phlebotomy and volume replacement with albumin
or saline are indicated in extremely polycythemic patients who are
symptomatic.
Brain abscess is less common than cerebrovascular events and
extremely rare today. Patients with a brain abscess are usually older
than 2 years. The onset of the illness is often insidious and consists
of low-­grade fever or a gradual change in behavior, or both. Some
patients have an acute onset of symptoms that may develop after a
recent history of headache, nausea, and vomiting. Seizures may occur;
localized neurologic signs depend on the site and size of the abscess
and the presence of increased intracranial pressure. Head CT or MRI
confirms the diagnosis. Antibiotic therapy may help keep the infection
localized, but surgical drainage of the abscess is usually necessary (see
Chapter 644).
Bacterial endocarditis may occur in the RV infundibulum or on
the pulmonic, aortic, or rarely, tricuspid valve. Endocarditis may complicate palliative shunts or, in patients with corrective surgery, any
residual pulmonic stenosis or VSD. Heart failure is not a usual feature
in patients with tetralogy of Fallot, with the exception of some young
infants with “pink” or acyanotic tetralogy of Fallot. When the degree
of pulmonary obstruction worsens with age, the symptoms of heart
failure resolve, and eventually the patient experiences cyanosis, usually
by 4-­6 months of age. These patients are at increased risk for hypercyanotic spells at this time.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 479 u Cyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Lesions Associated with Decreased Pulmonary Blood Flow 2803
ASSOCIATED ANOMALIES

A PDA may be present, and defects in the atrial septum are occasionally seen. A right aortic arch occurs in approximately 20% of patients,
and other anomalies of the pulmonary arteries and aortic arch may
also be seen. Persistence of a left superior vena cava draining into the
coronary sinus is common but not a concern. Multiple VSDs are occasionally present and should be diagnosed before corrective surgery.
Coronary artery anomalies are present in 5–10% and can complicate
surgical repair. Tetralogy of Fallot may also occur with an atrioventricular septal defect, often associated with Down syndrome.
Congenital absence of the pulmonary valve produces a distinct
syndrome that is usually marked by signs of upper airway obstruction (see Chapter 477.1). Cyanosis may be absent, mild, or moderate;
the heart is large and hyperdynamic; and a loud to-­and-­fro murmur is
present. Marked aneurysmal dilation of the main and branch pulmonary arteries results in compression of the bronchi and then produces
stridulous or wheezing respirations and recurrent pneumonia. If the
airway obstruction is severe, reconstruction of the trachea at the time of
corrective cardiac surgery may be required to alleviate the symptoms.
Absence of a branch pulmonary artery, most often the left, should
be suspected if the radiographic appearance of the pulmonary vasculature differs between the right and left sides; absence of a pulmonary artery is often associated with hypoplasia of the affected lung. It
is important to recognize the absence of a pulmonary artery because
occlusion of the remaining pulmonary artery during surgery seriously
compromises the already reduced pulmonary blood flow.
As one of the conotruncal malformations, tetralogy of Fallot can be
associated with DiGeorge syndrome or velocardiofacial syndrome,
also known by the acronym CATCH 22 (cardiac defects, abnormal
facies, thymic hypoplasia, cleft palate, hypocalcemia). Cytogenetic
analysis using fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) demonstrates deletions of a large segment of chromosome 22q11.2 known
as the DiGeorge critical region. Deletion or pathogenic variants in
Tbx1 have been implicated as a possible cause of DiGeorge syndrome,
although several other genes have been identified as possible candidates or as modifier genes (see Chapter 473).

TREATMENT

Treatment of tetralogy of Fallot depends on the severity of the RVOT
obstruction. Infants with severe tetralogy require urgent medical treatment and surgical intervention in the neonatal period. Therapy is
aimed at providing an immediate increase in pulmonary blood flow
to prevent the sequelae of severe hypoxia. Prolonged, severe hypoxia
may lead to shock, respiratory failure, and intractable acidosis and will
significantly reduce the chance of survival, even when surgically amenable lesions are present. It is critical that normal body temperature
be maintained during the transfer because cold increases oxygen consumption, which places additional stress on a cyanotic infant, whose
oxygen delivery is already limited. Blood glucose levels should be monitored because hypoglycemia is more likely to develop in infants with
cyanotic heart disease.
Neonates with marked RVOT obstruction may deteriorate rapidly
because as the ductus arteriosus begins to close, pulmonary blood flow
is further compromised. The IV administration of prostaglandin E1
(PGE1; 0.05-0.1 μg/kg/min), a potent and specific relaxant of ductal
smooth muscle, causes dilation of the ductus arteriosus and usually
provides adequate pulmonary blood flow until a surgical procedure
can be performed. This agent should be administered intravenously as
soon as cyanotic CHD is clinically suspected and continued through
the preoperative period and during cardiac catheterization. Because
prostaglandin can cause apnea, an individual skilled in neonatal intubation should be readily available.
Infants with less severe RVOT obstruction who are stable and
awaiting surgical intervention require careful observation. Acyanotic
patients can progress fairly quickly to having cyanotic episodes. Prevention or prompt treatment of dehydration is important to avoid
hemoconcentration and possible thrombotic episodes. In the past,
oral propranolol (0.5-­2 mg/kg every 6 hours) was used to decrease the
frequency and severity of hypercyanotic spells, but with the excellent

surgical results available today, surgical treatment is indicated, usually
before spells begin.
Infants with symptoms and severe cyanosis in the first month of life
usually have marked obstruction of the RVOT. Two options are available in these infants. The first option is corrective open heart surgery
performed in early infancy (or even in the newborn period in critically
ill infants). This approach has widespread acceptance with excellent
short-­and long-­term results and has supplanted palliative shunts (see
later) for most cases. Early total repair carries the theoretical advantage that early physiologic correction allows for improved growth of
the branch pulmonary arteries. In infants with less severe cyanosis who
can be maintained with good growth and absence of hypercyanotic
spells, primary repair is performed electively in the first few months.
Corrective surgical therapy consists of relief of the RVOT obstruction by resecting obstructive muscle bundles and by patch closure
of the VSD. If the pulmonary valve is stenotic, as it usually is, a valvotomy is performed. If the pulmonary valve annulus is too small or
the valve is extremely thickened, a valvectomy may be performed, the
pulmonary valve annulus split open, and a transannular patch placed
across the pulmonary valve ring. The advantage of a patch that is not
circumferential is that it preserves part of the normal valve annulus and
leaflets, allowing for future growth. A right ventriculotomy was once
the standard approach; a transatrial-­transpulmonary approach is routinely performed to reduce the long-­term risks of a large right ventriculotomy. In the past, surgeons placed large transannular patches with
the goal of eliminating any possibility of residual pulmonary stenosis,
even if these resulted in wide-­open pulmonary insufficiency. Currently, surgeons use smaller patches and are more accepting of small
RVOT gradients if the degree of valve insufficiency can be minimized.
In tetralogy patients, pulmonary valve insufficiency is one of the main
reasons for reoperation long-­term.
The second option, rarely used today, is a palliative systemic-­to-­
pulmonary artery shunt (Blalock-­Taussig or B-­T shunt) performed
to augment pulmonary artery blood flow. The B-­T shunt augmented
pulmonary blood flow, decreasing hypoxia, improving linear growth,
and augmenting growth of the branch pulmonary arteries. Initially
performed via direct anastomosis of the subclavian artery to the pulmonary artery, today, the modified B-­T shunt consists of a Gore-­Tex
conduit anastomosed side to side from the subclavian artery to the
homolateral branch of the pulmonary artery (Fig. 479.5). Sometimes
the shunt is brought directly from the ascending aorta to the MPA; in
this case it is called a central shunt. Postoperative complications after a
B-­T shunt include chylothorax, diaphragmatic paralysis, and Horner
syndrome. Rarely, postoperative pulmonary overcirculation leading to
symptoms of cardiac failure may be caused by too large a shunt. Long-­
term problems associated with the original B-­T shunt (absent radial
pulse and arm length discrepancy) are rarely seen with the current
procedure.
B-­T shunts are usually reserved for patients with comorbidities, such
as other major congenital anomalies or prematurity, that would make
full repair a higher-­risk option. Many surgeons still recommend full
repair in these situations, being preferable to the combined risks of a
staged procedure, and successful complete repairs have been done even
in small premature infants.

PROGNOSIS

After successful total correction, patients are generally asymptomatic
and are able to lead unrestricted lives. Uncommon immediate postoperative problems include RV failure, transient heart block, residual
VSD with left-­to-­right shunting, and (rarely) myocardial infarction
from interruption of an aberrant coronary artery. The long-­term effects
of isolated, surgically induced pulmonary valvular insufficiency or of
insufficiency and mild stenosis (as is more typical with modern-­era
smaller transannular patches) are still being defined as more patients
with repaired tetralogy of Fallot reach adulthood, but pulmonary
insufficiency is generally well tolerated through childhood and early
adolescence. Many patients after tetralogy repair, and all those with
transannular patch repairs, have a to-­and-­fro murmur at the left sternal border, usually indicative of mild outflow obstruction and mild

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2804 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

85

75

100

60

60

95

Fig. 479.5 Physiology of Blalock-­Taussig shunt in patient with tetral-

ogy of Fallot. Circled numbers represent oxygen saturation values. The
intracardiac shunting pattern is as described for Figure 479.1. Blood
shunting left to right across the shunt from the right subclavian artery
to the right pulmonary artery increases total pulmonary blood flow and
results in a higher oxygen saturation than would exist without the shunt.

to moderate pulmonary insufficiency. Patients with more marked or
long-­standing pulmonary valve insufficiency may also have moderate
to more severe degrees of RV enlargement and may develop tricuspid regurgitation as the tricuspid valve annulus dilates. These patients
will develop a holosystolic murmur at the lower-­left and -­right sternal
borders. Patients with a moderate to severe residual gradient (stenosis)
across the RVOT usually require balloon angioplasty or catheter placement of a stent or reoperation, but milder degrees of residual obstruction usually do not require reintervention.
Follow-­up of patients 5-­20 years after surgery indicates generally
excellent outcomes, with minimal symptoms and good exercise tolerance. Despite being asymptomatic, many patients may have lower-­
than-­
normal exercise capacity and maximal heart rate on formal
cardiopulmonary exercise testing. These abnormal findings are more
common in patients who underwent placement of a transannular outflow tract patch and may be less frequent when surgery is performed
at an early age. When these children move into adolescence and adulthood, some (more often those with transannular patches) will develop
RV dilation as a result of long-­term pulmonary regurgitation. Careful surveillance for excessive RV dilation and early signs of RV dysfunction is critical. After reaching adulthood, lifelong follow-­up by a
specialist in adult congenital heart disease (CHD) is important. Serial
echocardiography and the more quantitative magnetic resonance angiography (MRI/MRA) are valuable tools for assessing the degree of RV
dilation, identifying the presence of early stages of RV dysfunction, and
quantifying the regurgitant fraction. A significant portion of patients
with tetralogy of Fallot have been found to have some degree of fibrosis
within the right ventricle by MRI. Valve repair or replacement is indicated for those patients with increasing RV dilation and if tricuspid
regurgitation is more than mild. For patients requiring valve replacement, nonsurgical (transcatheter) options are available. Several stent-­
valves can be delivered in the cardiac catheterization laboratory, and
these have been used successfully in patients with repaired tetralogy
of Fallot. The initial versions of these devices (the Melody valve) were
designed to be used predominantly in patients who have previously
had a homograft or other artificial conduit placed between the RV and
pulmonary arteries; often stent-­valves (the Harmony valve) have been
designed to be inserted into the native RVOT.

Conduction disturbances can occur after surgery. The atrioventricular node and the bundle of His and its divisions are close to the VSD and
may be injured during surgery; however, permanent complete heart
block after tetralogy repair is rare. When present, it should be treated
by placement of a permanently implanted pacemaker. Even transient
complete heart block in the immediate postoperative period is rare; it
may be associated with an increased incidence of late-­onset complete
heart block and sudden death. In contrast, right bundle branch block
is extremely common on the postoperative ECG. The duration of the
QRS interval has been shown to predict both the presence of residual
hemodynamic derangement and the long-­term risk of arrhythmia
(mainly ventricular tachycardia) and sudden death. Biventricular pacing (in which a pacemaker is used to resynchronize the activation of
the right and left ventricles) has been shown to improve hemodynamics in patients with RV dysfunction and long ventricular conduction
delays on ECG.
Many children have premature ventricular beats after repair of the
tetralogy of Fallot. These beats, if isolated and infrequent, may be benign
but are of particular concern in patients with residual hemodynamic
abnormalities. Approximately 10% of patients with repaired tetralogy
are at risk of life-­threatening ventricular arrhythmias, and 30% are
at risk of atrial arrhythmias as they reach adulthood. Long-­duration
electrocardiographic monitoring studies, such as Holter (24-­48 hours)
or ZioPatch (1-­2 weeks), should be performed on a regular basis to
ensure that occult episodes of ventricular tachycardia are not occurring. Exercise studies may be useful in provoking cardiac arrhythmias
that are not apparent at rest. In the presence of complex ventricular
arrhythmias or severe residual hemodynamic abnormalities, prophylactic antiarrhythmic drug therapy or an implantable defibrillator is
warranted. Surgical or transcatheter intervention is indicated if significant residual RVOT obstruction or severe pulmonary insufficiency is
present because arrhythmia risk may improve after hemodynamics are
restored to a more normal level.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

479.2 Tetralogy of Fallot with Pulmonary
Atresia
Daniel Bernstein
Tetralogy of Fallot with pulmonary atresia is the most extreme form of
the tetralogy of Fallot. The pulmonary valve is atretic (absent), and the
pulmonary trunk may be hypoplastic or atretic as well. The entire RV
output is ejected into the aorta. Pulmonary blood flow is then dependent on multiple major aortopulmonary collateral arteries (MAPCAs) arising from the ascending and/or descending aorta or aortic
branches and supplying various lung segments or, rarely, on a PDA.
The ultimate prognosis depends on the presence or absence of true
branch pulmonary arteries and, if present, the degree of development.
This is best assessed by a combination of CT and cardiac catheterization. If repair is approached early in life and performed at a center with
expertise in this highly complex surgery, the mid-­term outcomes are
good. However, if the pulmonary arteries are severely hypoplastic and
surgical intervention fails to establish low pulmonary vascular pressures, lung or heart-­lung transplantation may be the only therapy (see
Chapter 492.2). Tetralogy of Fallot with pulmonary atresia is also associated with the 22q11.2 deletion and DiGeorge syndrome. The association of severe tracheomalacia or bronchomalacia with these severe
forms of tetralogy/pulmonary atresia may complicate postoperative
recovery.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Patients with tetralogy of Fallot/pulmonary atresia have findings similar to those in patients with severe tetralogy of Fallot. Cyanosis usually appears within the first few hours or days after birth; however, the
prominent systolic murmur associated with tetralogy is usually absent.
The first heart sound (S1) may be followed by an ejection click caused

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 479 u Cyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Lesions Associated with Decreased Pulmonary Blood Flow 2805
by the enlarged aortic root, S2 is single and loud, and continuous murmurs of collateral flow may be heard over the entire precordium and
over the back. Most patients are moderately cyanotic and are initially
stabilized with a PGE1 infusion pending cardiac catheterization and/
or CT scan to further delineate the anatomy. Patients with several large
MAPCAs may be less cyanotic and, once the diagnosis is confirmed,
can be taken off prostaglandin while awaiting palliative surgical intervention. Some patients may even develop symptoms of heart failure
caused by increased pulmonary blood flow via these collateral vessels.

DIAGNOSIS

The chest radiograph demonstrates a varying heart size, depending on
the amount of pulmonary blood flow, a concavity at the position of the
pulmonary arterial segment, and often the reticular pattern of bronchial collateral flow. The ECG shows RVH. The echocardiogram identifies aortic override, a thick RV wall, and atresia of the pulmonary valve.
Pulsed and color Doppler echocardiographic studies show an absence
of forward flow across the pulmonary valve, with pulmonary blood
flow being supplied by MAPCAs, which can usually be seen using color
Doppler arising from the descending aorta. At cardiac catheterization,
right ventriculography reveals a large aorta, opacified immediately by
passage of contrast medium through the VSD but with no dye entering
the lungs through the RVOT. It is important in planning surgical repair
to delineate carefully the often diminutive native pulmonary arteries,
if present, to determine whether they are continuous or discontinuous and whether they arborize to all lung segments. The location and
arborization of all MAPCAs and the presence of any localized stenosis,
which become more common as the patient grows older, are determined by selective contrast injection into each vessel from its origin in
the aorta. CT angiography is extremely valuable in mapping the extent
of MAPCA arborization.

479.3 Pulmonary Atresia with Intact
Ventricular Septum
Daniel Bernstein
Pulmonary atresia with an intact ventricular septum presents in the
newborn period with severe cyanosis. The pulmonary valve leaflets are
completely fused to form a membrane, and the RVOT is atretic. Because
no VSD is present, no egress of blood from the right ventricle can occur.
Any blood that enters the right ventricle will regurgitate back across
the tricuspid valve into the right atrium. Right atrial pressure increases,
and blood shunts via the foramen ovale into the left atrium, where it
mixes with pulmonary venous blood and enters the left ventricle (Fig.
479.6). The combined left and right ventricular output is pumped solely
by the left ventricle into the aorta. In a newborn with pulmonary atresia, the only source of pulmonary blood flow occurs via a PDA. The
right ventricle and tricuspid valve are usually hypoplastic, although the
degree of hypoplasia varies considerably. Patients who have a small RV
cavity also tend to be those with the smallest tricuspid valve annulus,
which limits RV inflow. Patients with pulmonary atresia and intact ventricular septum may have coronary sinusoidal channels within the RV
wall that communicate directly with the coronary arterial circulation.
The high RV pressure results in desaturated blood flowing retrograde
through these channels into the coronary arteries. Sometimes there are
also stenoses of the coronary arteries proximal to where the sinusoids
enter, so that distal coronary artery flow is dependent on flow from
the right ventricle (known as right ventricle–dependent coronary circulation). The prognosis in patients with these sinusoids and proximal
stenosis of the coronary arteries is more guarded than in those patients
without sinusoids or with sinusoids but no coronary stenoses. Rarely,
the proximal coronary artery may be totally absent.

TREATMENT

The surgical procedure of choice depends on whether the MPA segment is present and, if so, on the size and branching pattern of the
branch pulmonary arteries. If these arteries are well developed, a
one-­stage surgical repair with a homograft conduit inserted between
the right ventricle and pulmonary arteries and closure of the VSD is
usually feasible. If the pulmonary arteries are hypoplastic, extensive
reconstruction may be required. This may involve several staged surgical procedures. If the native pulmonary artery is present but small, a
connection made between the aorta and the hypoplastic native pulmonary artery (aortopulmonary window) can be performed in the
newborn period to induce growth of the native pulmonary arteries. At
3-­4 months of age, the multiple MAPCAs are gathered together (unifocalization procedure) and eventually incorporated into the final repair
along with the native pulmonary arteries. This series of operations may
be accomplished through successive right and left lateral thoracotomies
or through a single midline sternotomy if the anatomy is favorable.
To be a candidate for full repair, the pulmonary arteries must be
of adequate size to accept the full volume of RV output. Complete
repair includes closure of the VSD and placement of a homograft conduit from the right ventricle to the pulmonary artery. At the time of
reparative surgery, previous shunts are taken down. Because of patient
growth and homograft narrowing caused by proliferation of intimal
tissue and calcification, replacement of the homograft conduit replacement is usually required in later life, and multiple replacements may be
needed. Some of these patients are candidates for placement of a transcatheter stent-­valve in the pulmonary position. Patients with obstruction of the very distal branches of the pulmonary arteries may undergo
repeat surgical procedures or transcatheter balloon dilation and stenting of the multibranch pulmonary arterial stenosis. Careful follow-­up
is warranted for these patients, with a combination of echocardiogram,
catheterization, and CT or MRI, to ensure maximal chance of growth
of all pulmonary artery segments. Serial radionuclide lung perfusion
scans can be used to assess pulmonary perfusion to each lung segment
and the percentage of flow to the right vs the left lung.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

85
85

85

60

85

Fig. 479.6 Physiology of pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular sep-

tum. Circled numbers represent oxygen saturation values. Right atrial
(mixed venous) oxygen saturation is decreased secondary to systemic
hypoxemia. A small amount of the blood entering the right atrium may
cross the tricuspid valve, which is often stenotic as well. The right ventricular cavity is hypertrophied and may be hypoplastic. No outlet from
the right ventricle exists because of the atretic pulmonary valve; thus
any blood entering the right ventricle returns to the right atrium via
tricuspid regurgitation. Most of the desaturated blood shunts right to
left via the foramen ovale into the left atrium, where it mixes with fully
saturated blood returning from the lungs. The only source of pulmonary
blood flow is via the patent ductus arteriosus. Aortic and pulmonary
arterial oxygen saturation will be identical (definition of a total mixing
lesion).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2806 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

When the ductus arteriosus closes in the first hours or days of life,
infants with pulmonary atresia and an intact ventricular septum
become markedly cyanotic because their only source of pulmonary
blood flow is removed. Untreated, most patients die within the first
week of life. Physical examination reveals severe cyanosis and respiratory distress. S2, representing only aortic closure, is single and loud.
Often, no murmurs are audible; sometimes a systolic or continuous
murmur can be heard secondary to ductal blood flow. A harsh holosystolic murmur may be heard at the lower left and right sternal borders if
there is significant tricuspid regurgitation.

DIAGNOSIS

The ECG shows a frontal QRS axis between 0 and +90 degrees, the
amount of leftward shift reflecting the degree of RV hypoplasia. Tall,
spiked P waves indicate right atrial enlargement. QRS voltages are consistent with left ventricular dominance or hypertrophy; RV forces are
usually decreased in proportion to the decreased size of the RV cavity.
Because the normal newborn ECG shows increased right-­sided forces,
if a normal “adult” ECG R-­wave progression is seen, it suggests RV
hypoplasia of some degree. Most patients with small right ventricles
have decreased RV forces, but occasionally, patients with larger, thickened RV cavities may have evidence of RVH. The chest radiograph
shows decreased pulmonary vascularity, the degree depending on the
size of the branch pulmonary arteries and the patency of the ductus.
Unlike in patients with pulmonary atresia and tetralogy of Fallot, the
presence of MAPCAs is rare.
The 2D echocardiogram is useful in estimating RV dimensions and
the size of the tricuspid valve annulus, which have been shown to be
of prognostic value. Echocardiography can often suggest the presence
of sinusoidal channels but cannot be used to evaluate coronary stenoses. Thus cardiac catheterization is necessary for complete evaluation.
Pressure measurements reveal right atrial and RV hypertension. Ventriculography demonstrates the size of the RV cavity, the atretic RVOT,
the degree of tricuspid regurgitation, and the presence or absence of
intramyocardial sinusoids filling the coronary vessels. Aortography
shows filling of the pulmonary arteries by the PDA and is helpful in
determining the size and branching patterns of the pulmonary arterial bed. An aortogram or, if necessary, selective coronary angiography
is performed to evaluate for the presence of proximal coronary artery
stenosis (RV-­dependent coronary circulation) or proximal coronary
artery atresia.

procedure (see Chapter 479.4), allowing blood to bypass the hypoplastic right ventricle by flowing to the pulmonary arteries directly from the
venae cavae. When coronary artery stenoses are present and retrograde
coronary perfusion occurs from the right ventricle through myocardial
sinusoids, the prognosis is more guarded because of a higher risk of
arrhythmias, coronary ischemia, and sudden death. It is important for
these patients not to try to open the RVOT, because dropping the RV
pressure rapidly will reduce coronary perfusion, leading to ischemia.
These patients are usually treated with an aortopulmonary shunt, followed by the Glenn and Fontan procedure. Although at higher risk
than those without coronary stenoses, recent reports show good success with this approach; however, long-­term complications are higher
than in other groups of single-­ventricle patients. A small number of
these infants (e.g., those with atresia of a proximal coronary artery) are
best referred for heart transplantation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

479.4 Tricuspid Atresia
Daniel Bernstein
In tricuspid atresia, there is no outlet from the right atrium to the right
ventricle; the entire systemic venous return leaves the right atrium and
enters the left side of the heart through the foramen ovale or, most
often, an atrial septal defect (ASD) (Fig. 479.7). The physiology of the
circulation and the clinical presentation will depend on the presence
and type of other congenital heart defects, most notably on whether
the great arteries are normally related or are transposed (aorta arising from the right ventricle, pulmonary artery from the left ventricle).
In patients with normally related great arteries, left ventricular (LV)

80
80
100

TREATMENT

Infusion of PGE1 (0.05-0.1 μg/kg/min) is usually effective in keeping
the ductus arteriosus open before intervention, thus reducing hypoxemia and acidemia before surgery. The choice of surgical procedure
depends on whether there is an RV-­dependent coronary circulation
and on the size of the RV cavity. In patients with only mild to moderate RV hypoplasia without sinusoids, or in patients with sinusoids but
no evidence of coronary stenoses, a surgical pulmonary valvotomy is
carried out to relieve outflow obstruction. Often, the RVOT is widened
with a patch. To provide adequate pulmonary blood flow, an aortopulmonary (Blalock-­Taussig) shunt may also be performed during the
same procedure. An alternative approach uses interventional catheterization, in which the imperforate pulmonary valve is first punctured
either with a wire or a radiofrequency ablation catheter, followed by a
balloon valvuloplasty. If this course is taken, it may take days to weeks
before the RV muscle regresses enough for the patient to be weaned
from prostaglandin, and many of these patients will still require surgical intervention.
The aim of surgery or interventional catheterization is to encourage
growth of the RV chamber by allowing some forward flow through the
pulmonary valve while using the shunt to ensure adequate pulmonary
blood flow. Later, if the tricuspid valve annulus and RV chamber grow
to adequate size, the shunt is taken down and any remaining atrial-­level
shunt can be closed. If the RV chamber remains too small for use as a
pulmonary ventricle, the patient is treated as having a single-­ventricle
circulation, with a Glenn procedure followed by a modified Fontan

85

60

80

Fig. 479.7 Physiology of tricuspid atresia with normally related great

vessels. Circled numbers represent oxygen saturation values. Right
atrial (mixed venous) oxygen saturation is decreased secondary to systemic hypoxemia. The tricuspid valve is nonpatent, and the right ventricle may manifest varying degrees of hypoplasia. The only outlet from
the right atrium involves shunting right to left across an atrial septal
defect or patent foramen ovale to the left atrium. There, desaturated
blood mixes with saturated pulmonary venous return. Blood enters the
left ventricle and is ejected either through the aorta or via a ventricular
septal defect (VSD) into the right ventricle. In this example, some pulmonary blood flow is derived from the right ventricle and the rest from
a patent ductus arteriosus (PDA). In patients with tricuspid atresia, the
PDA may close or the VSD may grow smaller and result in a marked
decrease in systemic oxygen saturation.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 479 u Cyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Lesions Associated with Decreased Pulmonary Blood Flow 2807
blood supplies the systemic circulation through the aorta. Blood also
flows into the right ventricle through a VSD (if the ventricular septum
is intact, the right ventricle will be completely hypoplastic and pulmonary atresia will also be present [see Chapter 479.3]). Pulmonary blood
flow (and thus the degree of cyanosis) depends on the size of the VSD
and the presence and severity of any associated pulmonic stenosis. Pulmonary blood flow may be augmented by or be totally dependent on
a PDA. The inflow portion of the right ventricle is always missing, but
the outflow portion can be of variable size. The clinical presentation of
patients with tricuspid atresia and normally related great arteries will
depend on the degree of obstruction to pulmonary blood flow. Patients
with a smaller VSD or moderate degrees of pulmonary stenosis are
recognized in the early days or weeks of life by decreased pulmonary
blood flow and cyanosis, especially after the PDA begins to close. Alternatively, in those with a large VSD and minimal or no RVOT obstruction, pulmonary blood flow may be normal or increased; these patients
have only mild cyanosis and can present with signs of pulmonary overcirculation and heart failure.
In patients with tricuspid atresia and transposition of the great
arteries (TGA), LV blood flows directly into the pulmonary artery,
whereas systemic blood must traverse the VSD and right ventricle to
reach the aorta. In these patients, pulmonary blood flow is usually massively increased, and heart failure develops early. If the VSD is restrictive, systemic blood flow may be compromised and the patient may
present with signs of decreased perfusion. Coarctation of the aorta is
often noted in this setting.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Some degree of cyanosis is usually evident at birth, with the extent
depending on the degree of limitation to pulmonary blood flow.
Unique to tricuspid atresia, an increased LV impulse may be noted,
in contrast to most other causes of cyanotic heart disease, in which an
increased RV impulse is usually present. Most patients have holosystolic murmurs audible along the left sternal border; S2 is usually single.
Pulses in the lower extremities may be weak or absent in the presence
of transposition and with coarctation of the aorta. Patients with tricuspid atresia are at risk for spontaneous narrowing or even closure of
the VSD, which can occasionally occur rapidly and lead to a marked
increase in cyanosis.

DIAGNOSIS

Radiologic studies show either pulmonary undercirculation (most
often in patients with normally related great arteries) or overcirculation (most often in patients with transposed great arteries). Left-­axis
deviation and LV hypertrophy are generally noted on the ECG (except
in patients with TGA), and these unique features are a hallmark of tricuspid atresia, distinguishing it from most other cyanotic heart lesions,
which are associated with right-­axis deviation and RV hypertrophy. In
the right precordial leads, the normally prominent R wave is replaced
by an rS complex. The left precordial leads show a qR complex, followed by a normal, flat, biphasic, or inverted T wave. RV6 is normal or
tall, and SV1 is generally deep. The P waves are usually biphasic, with
the initial component tall and spiked in lead II. 2D echocardiography
reveals the presence of a fibromuscular membrane in place of a tricuspid valve, a variably small right ventricle, variably sized VSD, and a
slightly to moderately enlarged left ventricle (Fig. 479.8). The relationship of the great vessels (normal or transposed) can be determined.
The degree of obstruction at the level of the VSD or at the RVOT can
be determined by Doppler examination. Blood flow through a patent
ductus can be evaluated by color flow and pulsed Doppler.
Cardiac catheterization, indicated usually only if questions remain
after echocardiography, shows normal or slightly elevated right atrial
pressure with a prominent a wave. If the right ventricle is entered
through the VSD, the pressure may be lower than on the left if the VSD
is restrictive in size. Right atrial angiography shows immediate opacification of the left atrium from the right atrium, followed by left ventricular filling and visualization of the aorta. Absence of direct flow to
the right ventricle results in an angiographic filling defect between the
right atrium and the left ventricle.

LA
RA

RV

LV

Fig. 479.8 Echocardiogram demonstrating tricuspid atresia. The floor

of the right atrium consists of a fibromuscular membrane (longer arrow)
instead of the normal tricuspid valve apparatus. The large secundum
atrial septal defect can be seen between the right and left atria. The
short arrow shows the ventricular septal defect. LA, Left atrium; LV, left
ventricle; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle.

TREATMENT

Management of patients with tricuspid atresia depends on the adequacy of pulmonary blood flow. Moderately or severely cyanotic neonates (most often those with normally related great arteries) should be
maintained on an IV infusion of PGE1 (0.05-0.1 μg/kg/min) until a surgical aortopulmonary shunt procedure can be performed to increase
pulmonary blood flow. The Blalock-­Taussig procedure (see Chapter
479.1) or a variation is the preferred anastomosis. Rare patients with
restrictive atrial-­level communications also benefit from a Rashkind
balloon atrial septostomy (see Chapter 480.2) or surgical septectomy.
Infants with increased pulmonary blood flow because of an unobstructed pulmonary outflow tract (more often patients with TGA)
may require early surgery or pulmonary arterial banding (especially
for patients in the first 1-­2 months of life) to decrease the symptoms
of heart failure and protect the pulmonary bed from the development
of pulmonary vascular disease. Infants with just adequate pulmonary
blood flow who are well balanced between cyanosis and pulmonary
overcirculation can be watched closely for the development of increasing cyanosis, which may occur as the VSD begins to get smaller or the
pulmonary outflow becomes narrower and is an indication for surgery.
The next stage of palliation for patients with tricuspid atresia
involves the creation of an anastomosis between the superior vena cava
and the pulmonary arteries (bidirectional Glenn shunt; Fig. 479.9A).
This procedure is performed at usually between 2 and 6 months of age.
The Glenn shunt provides a stable source of pulmonary blood flow as
well as reducing the volume load on the left ventricle.
The modified Fontan operation is the preferred approach for
longer-­term palliation. It is usually performed between 2 and 3 years
of age, after the patient is ambulatory. Initially, this procedure was performed by anastomosing the right atrium or atrial appendage directly
to the pulmonary artery. The procedure used most often now is a modification of the Fontan procedure, known as a cavopulmonary isolation procedure, which involves anastomosing the inferior vena cava
directly to the pulmonary arteries using a homograft or Gore-­Tex tube
running outside the heart (external-­conduit Fontan; Fig. 479.9C). An
older version of this procedure uses an internal baffle that runs along
the lateral wall of the right atrium (lateral-­tunnel Fontan; see Fig.
479.9B). In a completed Fontan repair, desaturated blood flows from
both venae cavae directly into the pulmonary arteries. Oxygenated
blood returns to the left atrium, enters the left ventricle, and is ejected
into the systemic circulation. The volume load is completely removed
from the left ventricle, and the right-­to-­left shunt is abolished. Because
of the reliance on passive filling of the pulmonary circulation, the Fontan procedure is contraindicated in patients with elevated pulmonary
vascular resistance, in those with pulmonary artery hypoplasia, and in
patients with LV dysfunction. The patient also must not have significant mitral insufficiency. Patients who are not in normal sinus rhythm

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2808 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

SVC

SVC

RPA

SVC
RPA

RPA

RA

*

Right atrium
closed
Baffle
inside
right
atrium

RA

Synthetic
conduit

RA
Fenestration

A

* In some patients the main pulmonary artery
remains connected to the pulmonary arteries

B

IVC

Right atrium
closed

C

IVC

Fig. 479.9 Staged surgical approach to palliation of the patient with a single-­ventricle circulation. A, Bidirectional Glenn shunt. The superior vena

cava (SVC) is divided and detached from the right atrium (RA) and anastomosed end-­to-­side to the pulmonary artery, which has also been divided
and detached from the right ventricle. B, Lateral tunnel Fontan. Inferior vena caval flow is directed upward through a synthetic or pericardial baffle sutured to the RA wall. The lower portion of the SVC (previously divided during the Glenn shunt) is now sutured directly to the right pulmonary
artery. Thus blood flows from the upper body via the SVC directly into the lungs via the previous Glenn shunt and from the lower body via the baffle, through the RA but not emptying into the RA, directly into the lungs. The only remaining blood flow entering into the RA is from the coronary
sinus, which represents the small amount of venous return coming directly from the left ventricle. The RA is thus excluded from the Fontan circuit. C,
Extracardiac Fontan. The inferior vena cava (IVC) is detached from the RA, and an extracardiac synthetic conduit or homograft is used to direct that
flow, outside the heart, to the inferior aspect of the right pulmonary artery (RPA). Both Fontan approaches achieve the same endpoint in isolating
the venous circulation (blue blood) from the arterial circulation (red blood). The external conduit Fontan procedure is more common today because
of concerns about atrial arrhythmias and/or blood clots related to the baffle in the RA. Many surgeons orient the connection from the IVC more
centrally on the pulmonary arteries than shown in (C) to avoid a ”collision” of flow from the upper and lower bodies, which in flow dynamic modeling
studies has been shown to reduce the efficiency of the Fontan circulation, especially during exercise. (Adapted from Burchill LJ, Wald RM, Mertens
L. Single ventricles: echocardiographic assessment after the Fontan operation. In Otto CM, ed. The Practice of Clinical Echocardiography, 5th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017, Figs. 49-­6, 8, and 9.)

are at increased risk, and if a pacemaker is required in these patients,
dual-­chamber pacing is the preferred approach.
Postoperative problems after the Fontan procedure are most often
related to the increase in central venous pressure that occurs when the
vena cavae are connected directly to the pulmonary arteries. Normal
central venous pressure is 0-­5 mm Hg, whereas after the Fontan operation, central venous pressure can rise to 10-­15 mm Hg, and occasionally even more. In the immediate postoperative period, this elevation
of systemic venous pressure can lead to fluid retention and pleural or
pericardial effusions. The occurrence of these effusions has been markedly reduced with the cavopulmonary isolation procedure now in use,
although prolonged chest tube drainage can still occur, but eventually
resolves. Some centers use a fenestration at the time of the Fontan,
consisting of a small communication between the inferior vena cava
and the pulmonary artery conduit and the left atrium. This serves as a
“pop-­off ” during early postoperative recovery and may hasten hospital
discharge. The fenestration will result in some amount of right-­to-­left
shunting and is therefore usually closed with a catheter closure device
after the immediate postoperative period.
Late complications of the Fontan procedure include stenosis of the
superior or inferior vena cava anastomosis, vena cava or pulmonary
artery thromboembolism, protein-­losing enteropathy, plastic bronchitis, renal dysfunction, immune deficiency, supraventricular arrhythmias (atrial flutter, paroxysmal atrial tachycardia), and hepatic injury,
referred to as Fontan-­associated liver disease (FALD), as a result of
persistently elevated central venous pressures. Rarely liver disease may
predispose to the development of hepatocellular carcinoma. As more
patients survive into young and middle adult years, the occurrence of
these complications increases, and these patients require careful follow-­up in a center skilled at caring for adults with congenital heart
disease (ACHDs). Oral budesonide or sildenafil has been used with
varying success to treat protein-­losing enteropathy associated with
the Fontan procedure. MRI lymphangiography followed by thoracic
duct ligation, decompression, or embolization is used to treat plastic

bronchitis and other complications of a Fontan procedure. LV dysfunction may be a late occurrence, usually not until adolescence or young
adulthood. Heart transplantation is a successful treatment option for
pediatric patients with “failed” Fontan circuits but is a somewhat riskier procedure when performed in older adults. Patients with combined
heart failure and liver dysfunction have been treated with combined
heart-­liver transplantation with good result.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

479.5 Double-­Outlet Right Ventricle
Daniel Bernstein
Double-­outlet right ventricle (DORV) is characterized when both the
aorta and pulmonary artery arise from the right ventricle. The only
outlet from the left ventricle occurs through a VSD emptying into the
right ventricle, although some degree of override of the septum may
place either the aorta or pulmonary artery partially over the left ventricle. Normally, the aortic and mitral valves are in fibrous continuity; in
DORV the aortic and mitral valves are separated by a smooth muscular
conus, like that seen under the normal pulmonary valve. In DORV
the great arteries may be normally related, with the aorta closer to (or
slightly overriding) the VSD, or the great arteries may be malposed,
with the pulmonary artery closer to (or slightly overriding) the VSD.
The degree to which the great artery closest to the VSD may override
the defect is variable but must be at least 50% committed to the right
ventricle to be termed DORV. When the VSD is subaortic, the defect
may be viewed as part of a continuum with the tetralogy of Fallot,
and the physiology, history, physical examination, ECG, and radiography depend on the degree of pulmonary stenosis, like the situation
in tetralogy of Fallot (see Chapter 479.1). If the VSD is subpulmonic,
there may be subvalvar, valvar, or supravalvar aortic stenosis, and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 479 u Cyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Lesions Associated with Decreased Pulmonary Blood Flow 2809
coarctation is a possibility as well. This is known as the Taussig-­Bing
malformation. The clinical presentation of these patients will depend
on the degree of aortic obstruction, but because the pulmonary artery
is usually wide open, the presentation will usually include some degree
of pulmonary overcirculation and heart failure. If the aortic obstruction is severe or there is a coarctation, poor pulses, hypoperfusion, and
cardiovascular collapse are possible presenting signs, especially when
the PDA begins to close.
The 2D echocardiogram demonstrates both great vessels arising
from the right ventricle and mitral-­aortic valve discontinuity. The relationships between the aorta and pulmonary artery to the VSD can be
delineated, and the presence of either pulmonary obstruction or aortic
obstruction can be evaluated. The aortic arch is imaged to evaluate for
coarctation. Cardiac catheterization is not necessarily required if the
echocardiogram is straightforward. Angiography will show that the
aortic and pulmonary valves lie in the same horizontal plane and that
both arise predominantly or exclusively from the right ventricle.
Surgical correction depends on the relationship of the great vessels
to the VSD. If the VSD is subaortic, the repair will be like that used
for tetralogy of Fallot with patch closure of the VSD so that the left
ventricle ejects blood into the aorta. In cases where the aorta is more
distant from the left ventricle, repair may consist of creating an intraventricular tunnel so that the left ventricle ejects blood through the
VSD, into the tunnel, and into the aorta. The pulmonary obstruction
is relieved either with an outflow patch or with a right ventricle–to–
pulmonary artery homograft conduit (Rastelli operation). If the VSD
is subpulmonic, the great vessels can be switched (see Chapter 479.6)
and the Rastelli operation performed. However, if there is substantial
aortic obstruction or if one of the ventricles is hypoplastic, a Norwood-­
style single-­ventricle repair may be necessary (see Chapter 480.10). In
selected small infants, palliation with an aortopulmonary shunt can
provide symptomatic improvement and allow for adequate growth
before corrective surgery is performed.

479.6 Transposition of the Great Arteries
with Ventricular Septal Defect and
Pulmonary Stenosis
Daniel Bernstein
The combination of TGA with VSD and pulmonary stenosis may
mimic tetralogy of Fallot in its clinical features (see Chapter 479.1).
However, because of the transposed great vessels, the site of obstruction is in the left as opposed to the right ventricle. The obstruction
can be either valvular or subvalvular; the latter type may be dynamic,
related to the interventricular septum or atrioventricular valve tissue,
or acquired, as in patients with transposition and VSD after pulmonary
arterial banding.
The age at which clinical manifestations initially appear varies from
soon after birth to later infancy, depending on the degree of pulmonic
stenosis. Clinical findings include cyanosis, decreased exercise tolerance, and poor physical development, like those described for tetralogy
of Fallot; the heart is usually more enlarged. The pulmonary vasculature as seen on radiograph depends on the degree of pulmonary
obstruction. The ECG usually shows right-­axis deviation, right and left
ventricular hypertrophy, and sometimes tall, spiked P waves. Echocardiography confirms the diagnosis and is useful in sequential evaluation
of the degree and progression of the LV outflow tract obstruction. Cardiac catheterization, if necessary, shows that pulmonary arterial pressure is low and that oxygen saturation in the pulmonary artery exceeds
that in the aorta, since pulmonary blood flow is coming directly from
the left ventricle. Selective right and left ventriculography demonstrates the origin of the aorta from the right ventricle, the origin of
the pulmonary artery from the left ventricle, the VSD, and the site and
severity of the pulmonary stenosis.
An infusion of PGE1 (0.05-0.1 μg/kg/min) should be started
in neonates who present with cyanosis. When necessary, balloon

atrial septostomy is performed to improve atrial-­level mixing and
to decompress the left atrium (see Chapter 480.2). Cyanotic infants
may be palliated with an aortopulmonary shunt (see Chapter
479.1), followed by a Rastelli operation when older, as the preferred
corrective procedure. The Rastelli procedure achieves physiologic
and anatomic correction by (1) closure of the VSD using an interventricular tunnel so that LV blood flow is directed to the aorta and
(2) connection of the right ventricle to the distal pulmonary artery
by an extracardiac homograft conduit (Fig. 479.10). These conduits
will eventually become stenotic with patient growth and require
replacement. Patients with milder degrees of pulmonary stenosis
amenable to simple valvotomy may be able to undergo complete
correction with an arterial switch procedure (see Chapter 480.2)
and closure of the VSD. Surgical correction by the Mustard or Senning operation (see Chapter 480.2) with simultaneous closure of
the VSD and relief of LV outflow obstruction may be an alternative
when the position of the VSD is not suitable for a Rastelli operation;
however, this procedure leaves the right ventricle as the systemic
pumping chamber and has fallen out of favor.

479.7 Ebstein Anomaly of the Tricuspid
Valve
Daniel Bernstein
Ebstein anomaly consists of downward displacement of an abnormal
tricuspid valve into the right ventricle. The defect arises from failure
of the normal process by which the tricuspid valve is separated from
the RV myocardium (see Chapter 469). The anterior cusp of the valve
retains some attachment to the valve ring, but the other leaflets are
adherent to the wall of the right ventricle. The right ventricle is thus
divided into two parts by the abnormal tricuspid valve: the first, a
thin-­walled “atrialized” portion, is continuous with the cavity of the
right atrium; the second, often smaller, portion consists of normal
ventricular myocardium. The right atrium is enlarged as a result of
tricuspid valve regurgitation, although the degree is extremely variable. In more severe forms of Ebstein anomaly, the effective output
from the right side of the heart is decreased because of a combination of the poorly functioning small right ventricle, tricuspid valve
regurgitation, and RVOT obstruction produced by the large, sail-­like,
anterior tricuspid valve leaflet. The severity of tricuspid valve displacement has been grouped into four degrees (A through D), known
as the Carpentier classification. In newborns, RV function may be so
compromised that it is unable to generate enough force to open the
pulmonary valve in systole, thus producing “functional” pulmonary
atresia. Some infants have true anatomic pulmonary atresia. The
increased volume of right atrial blood shunts through the foramen
ovale (or through an associated ASD) to the left atrium and produces
cyanosis (Fig. 479.11).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The severity of symptoms and the degree of cyanosis are highly variable and depend on the extent of displacement of the tricuspid valve
and the severity of RVOT obstruction. In many patients with milder
forms of tricuspid valve displacement, symptoms are mild and may
be delayed until the teenage years or young adult life; the patient
may initially have fatigue, exercise intolerance, or palpitations as
a result of cardiac dysrhythmias. The atrial right-­to-­left shunt is
responsible for cyanosis, which may only be evident during exercise
and, if long-­standing, polycythemia. Jugular venous pulsations, an
index of central venous pressure, may be normal or increased in
those with tricuspid insufficiency. On palpation, the precordium is
quiet. A holosystolic murmur caused by tricuspid regurgitation is
audible over most of the anterior left side of the chest. A gallop
rhythm is common and often associated with multiple clicks at the
lower-­left sternal border. A scratchy diastolic murmur may also be
heard at the left sternal border. This murmur may mimic a pericardial friction rub.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2810 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
A

Pulmonary a.

Aorta

Pulmonary a.

C

Superior
vena cava
Aorta
Mitral valve
Ventricular
septal defect

Main pulmonary a.
divided
Homograft
conduit
Pericardial roof

Inferior
vena cava
Tricuspid
valve

B

Fig. 479.10 A, Taussig-­Bing type of double-­outlet right ventricle with subpulmonary stenosis necessitating repair by the Rastelli technique. B, The
main pulmonary artery is divided and oversewn proximally. The pulmonary valve lies within the baffle pathway. C, Completion of the Rastelli repair
with a right ventricle–pulmonary artery allograft conduit. (From Castañeda AR, Jonas RA, Mayer JE Jr, et al. Single-­ventricle tricuspid atresia. In:
Castañeda AR, Jonas RA. Mayer JE Jr, Hanley FL, eds. Cardiac Surgery of the Neonate and Infant. Philadelphia: Saunders; 1994.)

Newborns with severe forms of Ebstein anomaly have marked
cyanosis, massive cardiomegaly, and long holosystolic murmurs.
Death may result from cardiac failure, hypoxemia, and pulmonary
hypoplasia, the result of severe long-­standing intrauterine right
atrial enlargement. Spontaneous improvement may occur in some
neonates as pulmonary vascular resistance falls and improves the
ability of the right ventricle to provide pulmonary blood flow. The
majority are dependent on a PDA, and thus on a prostaglandin
infusion, for pulmonary blood flow. Fetuses diagnosed with Ebstein
anomaly on fetal ultrasound can be particularly challenging. Severe
leakage of the tricuspid valve is one of the few congenital heart
lesions that cannot be bypassed by the parallel fetal circulation (see
Chapter 470), and thus cardiac enlargement and fetal heart failure
may supervene. When the heart enlarges, particularly the right
atrium, compression of the lungs can result and the fetus is at risk
for development of pulmonary hypoplasia.

DIAGNOSIS

The ECG usually shows a right bundle branch block without
increased right precordial voltage, normal or tall and broad P
waves, and a normal or prolonged P-­R interval. Wolff-­Parkinson-­
White syndrome may be present, and these patients may have
episodes of supraventricular tachycardia (see Chapter 484). On
radiographic examination, heart size varies from slightly enlarged
to massive, box-­shaped cardiomegaly caused by enlargement of
the right atrium. In newborns with severe Ebstein anomaly, the
heart may be so enlarged as to totally obscure the pulmonary fields

(Fig. 479.12). Echocardiography is diagnostic and shows the degree
of displacement of the tricuspid valve leaflets, a dilated right atrium,
and any RVOT obstruction (Fig. 479.13). Pulsed and color Doppler
examination demonstrates the degree of tricuspid regurgitation. In
severe cases the pulmonary valve may appear immobile, and pulmonary blood flow may come solely from the ductus arteriosus.
It may be difficult to distinguish true from functional pulmonary
valve atresia. Cardiac catheterization, which is not usually necessary, confirms the presence of a large right atrium, an abnormal
tricuspid valve, and any right-­to-­left shunt at the atrial level. The
risk of arrhythmia is significant during catheterization and angiographic studies.

TREATMENT

Neonates with milder degrees of cyanosis can sometimes be managed medically, waiting to see how they do once their pulmonary
vascular resistance decreases over the first few weeks of life. Those
with moderate to severe hypoxia are initially treated with prostaglandins, mechanical ventilation and inhaled nitric oxide in an
attempt to enhance pulmonary blood flow by reducing pulmonary
vascular resistance. Surgical options for these patients include an
aortopulmonary (Blalock-­Taussig) shunt, tricuspid valve replacement (most often with a bioprosthetic valve), or surgical repair of
the tricuspid valve (cone procedure). In the critically ill neonate,
closure of the valve (creating tricuspid atresia physiology) with an
aortopulmonary shunt (Starnes procedure), with eventual single-­
ventricle repair using the Fontan palliation (see Chapter 479.4) is

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 479 u Cyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Lesions Associated with Decreased Pulmonary Blood Flow 2811

LA

RA
85
85
100

LV
85

RV

A
60

85

Fig. 479.11 Physiology of Ebstein anomaly of the tricuspid valve. Cir-

cled numbers represent oxygen saturation values. Inferior displacement
of the tricuspid valve leaflets into the right ventricle has resulted in a
thin-­walled, low-­pressure “atrialized” segment of right ventricle. The
tricuspid valve is grossly insufficient. Right atrial blood flow is shunted
right to left across an atrial septal defect or patent foramen ovale into
the left atrium. Some blood may cross the right ventricular outflow tract
and enter the pulmonary artery; however, in severe cases, the right ventricle may generate insufficient force to open the pulmonary valve, and
“functional pulmonary atresia” results. In the left atrium, desaturated
blood mixes with saturated pulmonary venous return. Blood enters the
left ventricle and is ejected via the aorta. In this example, some pulmonary blood flow is derived from the right ventricle, the rest from a patent ductus arteriosus (PDA). Severe cyanosis will develop in neonates
with a severe Ebstein anomaly when the PDA closes.

B
Fig. 479.13 Echocardiographic demonstration of Ebstein anomaly of

the tricuspid valve. A, Subcostal, four-­chamber, 2D view showing severe
displacement of the tricuspid valve leaflets (arrow) inferiorly into the
right ventricle. The location of the tricuspid valve annulus is outlined by
the arrow. The portion of the right ventricle between the valve annulus
and the valve leaflets is the “atrialized” component. B, Color Doppler
examination showing severe regurgitation of the dysplastic tricuspid
valve. Note that the regurgitant turbulent flow (arrow) begins halfway
into the right ventricular chamber, at the location of the displaced valve
leaflets. LA, Left atrium; LV, left ventricle; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle.

is of primary importance; surgical treatment may not be necessary
until adolescence or young adulthood. Older patients with severe
tricuspid regurgitation can undergo repair or replacement of the
abnormal tricuspid valve along with closure of the ASD. In some
patients, a bidirectional Glenn shunt is also performed, with the
superior vena cava anastomosed to the pulmonary arteries. This
procedure reduces the volume of blood that the dysfunctional right
side of the heart has to pump, thus creating a “one-­and-­one-­half
ventricle repair.”

PROGNOSIS AND COMPLICATIONS
Fig. 479.12 Massive cardiomegaly in a newborn infant with severe
Ebstein anomaly. The heart is so enlarged (in part because of a massive
right atrium) that lung hypoplasia is a major concern.

an option. Many infants with Ebstein anomaly who have undergone
valve repair will also have a bidirectional Glenn shunt performed
to reduce the volume load on the right ventricle and reduce the
amount of tricuspid regurgitation (see Chapter 479.4). In older
children with mild or moderate disease, control of supraventricular
dysrhythmias (medications or radiofrequency ablation), if present,

The prognosis in Ebstein anomaly is extremely variable and depends
on the severity of the defect. The prognosis is more guarded for
neonates or infants with cyanosis. Patients with milder degrees of
Ebstein anomaly usually survive well into adult life. An associated
form of left ventricular cardiomyopathy, isolated left ventricular
noncompaction (LVNC), is seen in up to 18% of patients with
Ebstein anomaly, and the severity of the LV dysfunction directly
affects the prognosis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2812 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

480.2 d-­Transposition of the Great Arteries
with Intact Ventricular Septum

Chapter 480

Cyanotic Congenital
Heart Disease: Lesions
Associated with Increased
Pulmonary Blood Flow
480.1 d-­Transposition of the Great Arteries
Daniel Bernstein
d-­Transposition of the great arteries or vessels (d-­TGA or d-­TGV)
accounts for approximately 5% of all congenital heart disease. In this
anomaly, the systemic veins return, as normal, to the right atrium
and the pulmonary veins return to the left atrium. The connections
between the atria and ventricles are also normal (i.e., atrioventricular concordance). The aorta arises from the right ventricle and the
pulmonary artery from the left ventricle (Fig. 480.1). In normally
related great vessels (i.e., in the normal heart) the aorta is posterior and to the right of the pulmonary artery. Whereas in d-­TGA
the aorta is anterior and to the right of the pulmonary artery (the
d indicates a dextropositioned aorta, transposition indicates that
the aorta arises from the right ventricle and the pulmonary artery
from the left ventricle). Desaturated blood returning from the body
to the right side of the heart goes inappropriately out via the aorta
and back to the body again, whereas oxygenated pulmonary venous
blood returning to the left side of the heart is returned directly to
the lungs. Thus the systemic and pulmonary circulations exist as
two parallel circuits. Survival in the immediate newborn period is
provided by the foramen ovale and the ductus arteriosus, which permit some mixture of oxygenated and deoxygenated blood. Approximately 50% of patients with d-­TGA also have a ventricular septal
defect (VSD), which usually provides for better mixing. The clinical findings and hemodynamics vary in relation to the presence or
absence of associated defects (e.g., VSD or pulmonary stenosis).
d-­TGA is more common in infants of diabetic mothers and in males
(a ratio of 3:1). When accompanied by other cardiac defects such
as pulmonic stenosis or right aortic arch, d-­TGA can be associated
with deletion of chromosome 22q11.2 (DiGeorge syndrome; see
Chapter 473).

Daniel Bernstein
d-­TGA with an intact ventricular septum is also referred to as simple
TGA or isolated TGA. Before birth, oxygenation in the upper and
lower body fetal circulation is only slightly abnormal, given that oxygenated blood enters the heart from the placenta, umbilical vein, and
inferior vena cava. After birth, once the ductus arteriosus begins to
close, the minimal mixing of systemic and pulmonary blood by the
patent foramen ovale is usually insufficient and severe hypoxemia
ensues, generally within the first few days of life.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Cyanosis and tachypnea are most often recognized within the first
hours or days of postnatal life. Untreated, most of these infants would
not survive the neonatal period. Hypoxemia is usually moderate to
severe, depending on the degree of atrial-­level shunting and whether
the ductus is partially open or totally closed. This condition is a medical emergency, and only early diagnosis and appropriate intervention
can avert the development of prolonged severe hypoxemia and acidosis, which lead to death. Physical findings, other than cyanosis, may be
remarkably nonspecific. The precordial impulse may be normal, or a
parasternal heave may be present. The second heart sound (S2) is usually single and loud, although it may be split. Murmurs may be absent,
or a soft systolic ejection murmur may be noted at the mid-­left sternal
border.

DIAGNOSIS

The electrocardiogram (ECG) is usually normal, showing the
expected neonatal right-­sided dominant pattern. Chest radiographs
may show mild cardiomegaly and a narrow mediastinum (the classic “egg-­shaped heart”). In the early newborn period, the pulmonary
blood flow is generally normal. As pulmonary vascular resistance
(PVR) drops during the first several weeks of postnatal life, evidence
of increased pulmonary blood flow becomes apparent. Arterial blood
partial pressure of oxygen (Pao2) is low and does not rise appreciably
after the patient breathes 100% oxygen (hyperoxia test), although this
test may not be totally reliable. Echocardiography is diagnostic and
confirms the transposed ventricular-­arterial connections (Fig. 480.2).
The size of the interatrial communication and the ductus arteriosus
can be visualized and the degree of mixing assessed by pulsed and
color Doppler examination. The presence of any associated lesion,
such as left ventricular outflow tract obstruction or a VSD, can also
be assessed. The origins of the coronary arteries can be imaged,
although echocardiography is not as accurate as catheterization for

Ao
PA
LA

MPA

Ao

MPA

RA
LV

RV

RV

RV

A

Ao

B

C

LV

D

E

Fig. 480.1 d-­Looped transposition of the great arteries (TGA). A, Diagram of d-­TGA, with the main pulmonary artery (MPA) arising from the left

ventricle (LV) and the aorta (Ao) arising from the right ventricle (RV). The degree of cyanosis is variable and depends on the presence of intracardiac
shunts such as an atrial septal defect or a ventricular septal defect (VSD) to get oxygenated blood into the systemic circulation. LA, Left atrium; PA,
pulmonary artery; RA, right atrium. B and C, Oblique reformatted images from a 3D steady-­state free-­precession sequence show (B) the Ao arising
from the anterior RV with a subaortic conus (arrow), and (C) the MPA arising from the posterior LV. D, The Ao and MPA have a parallel “back-­to-­front”
arrangement. E, This parallel back-­to-­front arrangement contributes to the narrow mediastinum and “egg on a string” appearance seen on chest
radiography. This patient has a large VSD with increased pulmonary blood flow. (From Frost JL, Krishnamurthy R, Sena L. Cardiac imaging. In: Walters
MM, Robertson RL, eds. Pediatric Radiology: The Requisites, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017, Fig 3-­20, p. 75.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 480 u Cyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Lesions Associated with Increased Pulmonary Blood Flow 2813

LPA
RPA
PA
LV

RA
RV

A

B

C

D

Fig. 480.2 Subcostal four-­chamber 2D echocardiographic demon-

stration of d-­transposition of the great arteries. The pulmonary artery
(PA) can be seen arising directly from the left ventricle (LV). The immediate bifurcation of this great vessel into the branch pulmonary arteries
differentiates it from the aorta, which branches more distally from the
heart. LPA, Left pulmonary artery; RA, right atrium; RPA, right pulmonary artery; RV, right ventricle.

this purpose. Cardiac catheterization may be performed in patients
for whom noninvasive imaging is diagnostically inconclusive, where
an unusual coronary artery anomaly is suspected, or in patients who
require emergency balloon atrial septostomy (i.e., the Rashkind
procedure). Catheterization will show right ventricular pressure to
be at a systemic level because this ventricle is supporting the systemic
circulation. The blood in the left ventricle (LV) and pulmonary artery
has a higher oxygen saturation than that in the aorta. Depending on
the age at catheterization, LV and pulmonary artery pressure can vary
from a systemic level to <50% of systemic-­level pressure. Right ventriculography demonstrates the anterior and rightward aorta originating from the right ventricle (RV), as well as the intact ventricular
septum. Left ventriculography shows that the pulmonary artery arises
exclusively from the LV.
Anomalous coronary arteries are noted in 10–15% of patients and
can be defined by an aortic root injection or by selective coronary
arteriography.

TREATMENT

When transposition is suspected, an infusion of prostaglandin E1
(PGE1, 0.05-0.1 μg/kg/min) should be initiated immediately to
maintain patency of the ductus arteriosus and improve oxygenation.
Because of the risk of apnea associated with prostaglandin infusion, an
individual skilled in neonatal endotracheal intubation should be available. Hypothermia intensifies the metabolic acidosis resulting from
hypoxemia, and thus the patient should be kept warm. Prompt correction of acidosis and hypoglycemia is essential.
Infants who remain severely hypoxic or acidotic despite prostaglandin infusion should undergo Rashkind balloon atrial septostomy
(Fig. 480.3). A Rashkind atrial septostomy is also usually performed in
patients in whom any significant delay in surgery is expected. If surgery
is planned during the first 2 weeks of life and the patient is stable, catheterization and atrial septostomy may often be avoided.
A successful Rashkind atrial septostomy should result in a rise in
Pao2 to 35-­50 mm Hg and elimination of any pressure gradient across
the atrial septum. Some patients with TGA and VSD (see Chapter
480.3) may require balloon atrial septostomy because of poor mixing,
even though the VSD is large. Others may benefit from decompression
of the left atrium to alleviate the symptoms of increased pulmonary
blood flow and left-­sided heart failure.
The arterial switch (Jatene) procedure is the surgical treatment of
choice for neonates with d-­TGA and an intact ventricular septum and
is usually performed within the first 2 weeks of life. The reason for this
time frame is that as PVR declines after birth, pressure in the LV (connected to the pulmonary vascular bed) also declines. This pressure

Fig. 480.3 Rashkind balloon atrial septostomy. Four frames from a

continuous cineangiogram show the creation of an atrial septal defect
in a hypoxemic newborn infant with transposition of the great arteries
and an intact ventricular septum. A, Balloon inflated in the left atrium.
B, The catheter is jerked suddenly so that the balloon ruptures the foramen ovale. C, Balloon in the inferior vena cava. D, Catheter advanced to
the right atrium to deflate the balloon. The time from A to C is <1 sec.

drop results in a decrease in LV mass over the first few weeks of life.
If the arterial switch operation is attempted after LV pressure (and
mass) has declined too far, the LV will be unable to generate adequate
pressure to pump blood to the high-­pressure systemic circulation. The
arterial switch operation involves dividing the aorta and pulmonary
artery just above the sinuses and reanastomosing them in their correct
anatomic positions. The coronary arteries are removed from the old
aortic root along with a button of aortic wall and reimplanted in the
old pulmonary root (now called the neoaorta). By using a button of
great vessel tissue, the surgeon avoids having to suture directly onto
the coronary artery (Fig. 480.4); this is the major innovation that has
allowed the arterial switch to replace previous atrial switch operations
for d-­TGA. Rarely, a two-­stage arterial switch procedure, with initial
placement of a pulmonary artery band, may be used in patients presenting late who already have had a reduction in LV muscle mass and
pressure. The arterial switch procedure has a survival rate of >95%
for uncomplicated d-­TGA. It restores the normal physiologic relationships of systemic and pulmonary arterial blood flow and eliminates the long-­term complications of the previously used atrial switch
procedure.
Previous operations for d-­TGA consisted of some form of atrial
switch procedure (Mustard or Senning operation). These procedures
produced excellent early survival (85–90%) but had significant long-­
term morbidities. Atrial switch procedures reverse blood flow at the
atrial level by creating an interatrial baffle that directs systemic venous
blood returning from the venae cavae to the left atrium, where it will
enter the LV, the pulmonary artery, and the lungs. The same baffle also
permits oxygenated pulmonary venous blood to cross over to the right
atrium, RV, and aorta. Atrial switch procedures involve significant atrial
surgery and have been associated with the late development of atrial
conduction disturbances, sick sinus syndrome with bradyarrhythmia
and tachyarrhythmia, atrial flutter, sudden death, superior or inferior
vena cava syndrome, edema, ascites, and protein-­losing enteropathy.
The atrial switch procedure also leaves the RV as the systemic pumping
chamber, and this “systemic” RV often begins to fail in young adulthood. Atrial switch operations are currently reserved for patients whose
anatomy is such that they are not candidates for the arterial switch
procedure.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2814 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Pulmonary a.

Aorta

L. coronary a.

R. coronary a.

B

Pulmonary a.

Pulmonary a.

R. coronary a.

A

R. coronary a. L. coronary a.

L. coronary a.

C

Aorta

Fig. 480.4 Method for translocating the coronary arteries in the arte-

rial switch (Jatene) procedure. A, The aorta (anterior) and the pulmonary artery (posterior) have been transected to allow visualization of the
left and right coronary arteries. The coronaries have been excised from
their respective sinuses, including a large flap (button) of arterial wall.
Equivalent segments of the wall of the pulmonary artery (which will become the neoaorta) are also removed. B, The aortocoronary buttons are
sutured into the proximal portion of the neoaorta. With this technique
all sutures are placed in the button of aortic wall rather than directly on
the coronary arteries. C, Completed anastomosis of the left and right
coronary arteries to the neoaorta. (Adapted from Castañeda AR, Jonas
RA, Mayer JE Jr, et al. Cardiac Surgery of the Neonate and Infant. Philadelphia: Saunders; 1994.)

480.3 Transposition of the Great Arteries
with Ventricular Septal Defect
Daniel Bernstein
If the VSD associated with d-­TGA is small, the clinical manifestations,
laboratory findings, and treatment are similar to those described previously for transposition with an intact ventricular septum. A harsh systolic murmur is audible at the lower left sternal border, resulting from
flow through the defect. Many of these small defects eventually close
spontaneously and may not need to be addressed at the time of surgery.
When the VSD is large and not restrictive to ventricular ejection, significant mixing of oxygenated and deoxygenated blood usually occurs
and clinical manifestations of cardiac failure are seen. The degree of
cyanosis may be subtle and sometimes may not be recognized until an
oxygen saturation measurement is performed. The murmur is holosystolic and generally indistinguishable from that produced by a large
VSD in patients with normally related great arteries. The heart is usually significantly enlarged.
Cardiomegaly, a narrow mediastinal waist, and increased pulmonary
vascularity are demonstrated on the chest radiograph. The ECG findings can be variable. It can show prominent P waves and isolated RV
hypertrophy or biventricular hypertrophy. Occasionally, dominance of
the LV is present. Usually, the QRS axis is to the right, but it can be
normal or even to the left. The diagnosis is confirmed by echocardiography, and the extent of pulmonary blood flow can also be estimated by
the degree of enlargement of the left atrium and ventricle. In equivocal
cases, the diagnosis can be confirmed by cardiac catheterization. Right
and left ventriculography indicate the presence of arterial transposition and demonstrate the site and size of the VSD. Systolic pressure is
equal in the two ventricles, the aorta, and the pulmonary artery. Left
atrial pressure may be much higher than right atrial pressure, a finding
indicative of a restrictive communication at the atrial level. At the time
of cardiac catheterization, Rashkind balloon atrial septostomy may be
performed to decompress the left atrium, even when adequate mixing
is occurring at the ventricular level.
Surgical treatment is advised soon after diagnosis because heart failure and failure to thrive are difficult to manage and pulmonary vascular

disease can develop unusually rapidly in these patients. Preoperative
management with diuretics and other anticongestive therapies (including elective intubation and positive pressure ventilation) stabilize the
patient before surgery.
Patients with d-­TGA and a VSD without pulmonic stenosis can be
treated with an arterial switch procedure combined with VSD closure.
In these patients, the arterial switch operation can be safely performed
after the first 2 weeks of life because the VSD results in equal pressure
in both ventricles and prevents regression of LV muscle mass. At major
centers, however, there is no reason to delay repair, as results are excellent when the surgery is performed in the neonatal period.

480.4 l-­Transposition of the Great Arteries
(Corrected Transposition)
Daniel Bernstein
In l-­transposition of the great arteries (l-­TGA), both the atrioventricular and the ventriculoarterial relationships are discordant: the right
atrium is connected to an LV and the left atrium to an RV, which is also
known as ventricular inversion. The great arteries are also transposed,
with the aorta arising from the RV and the pulmonary artery from the
LV. In contrast to d-­TGA, the aorta arises to the left of the pulmonary
artery (thus the designation l for levo-­transposition). The aorta may be
anterior to the pulmonary artery, although often they are nearly side
by side.
The physiology of l-­TGA is quite different from that of d-­TGA.
Desaturated systemic venous blood returns via the vena cavae to a normal right atrium, from which it passes through a bicuspid atrioventricular (mitral) valve into a right-­sided ventricle that has the architecture
and smooth wall morphologic features of the normal LV (Fig. 480.5).
Because transposition is also present, however, the desaturated blood
ejected from this LV enters the transposed pulmonary artery and flows
into the lungs, as it would in the normal circulation. Oxygenated pulmonary venous blood returns to a normal left atrium, passes through
a tricuspid atrioventricular valve into a left-­sided ventricle, which has
the trabeculated morphologic features of a normal RV, and is then
ejected into the transposed aorta. The double inversion of the atrioventricular and ventriculoarterial relationships result in desaturated right
atrial blood appropriately flowing to the lungs and oxygenated pulmonary venous blood appropriately flowing to the aorta. The circulation
is thus physiologically “corrected.” Without other defects, the hemodynamics would be almost normal. In most patients, however, associated
anomalies coexist: VSD, Ebstein-­like abnormalities of the left-­sided
atrioventricular (tricuspid) valve, pulmonary valvular or subvalvular
stenosis (or both), and atrioventricular conduction disturbances (complete heart block, accessory pathways such as Wolff-­Parkinson-­White
syndrome).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Symptoms and signs are widely variable and are usually determined
by the associated lesions. If there is a VSD and pulmonary outflow is
unobstructed, the clinical signs are similar to those of an isolated VSD.
If l-­TGA is associated with pulmonary stenosis and a VSD, the clinical
signs are more similar to those of tetralogy of Fallot.

DIAGNOSIS

The chest radiograph may suggest the abnormal position of the great
arteries; the ascending aorta occupies the upper left border of the
cardiac silhouette and has a straight profile. The ECG, in addition to
any atrioventricular conduction disturbances, may show abnormal P
waves; absent Q waves in V6; abnormal Q waves in leads III, aVR, aVF,
and V1; and upright T waves across the precordium. The echocardiogram is diagnostic. The characteristic echocardiographic features of the
RV (moderator band, coarser trabeculations, tricuspid valve that sits
more inferiorly compared with the bicuspid mitral valve, and a smooth
muscular conus or infundibulum separating the atrioventricular valve

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 480 u Cyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Lesions Associated with Increased Pulmonary Blood Flow 2815

85

60

100

60

85
RV
60

to pulmonary blood flow, clinical manifestations are similar to those
of an uncomplicated VSD with a large left-­to-­right shunt, although
mild systemic desaturation may result from mixing of oxygenated and
deoxygenated blood in the RV. The ECG usually shows biventricular
hypertrophy. Echocardiography is diagnostic and shows the right ventricular origin of both great arteries, their anteroposterior relationship,
and the relationship of the VSD to each of the great arteries. Surgical
correction is dependent on these relationships. If the VSD is subaortic, it is accomplished by creation of an intracardiac tunnel. Blood is
then ejected from the LV via the VSD into the aorta. If the VSD is subpulmonic, an arterial switch may be performed in combination with
an intracardiac tunnel. If pulmonary blood flow is excessive enough
to cause congestive heart failure, pulmonary arterial banding may be
required in infancy, followed by surgical correction when the child
is bigger. When associated pulmonary stenosis is present, cyanosis is
more marked, pulmonary blood flow is decreased, and clinical presentation may be similar to that of tetralogy of Fallot.

LV

Fig. 480.5 Physiology of l-­transposition or corrected transposition of

the great arteries (l-­TGA) with a ventricular septal defect and pulmonic
stenosis (VSD + PS). Circled numbers represent oxygen saturation values. Right atrial (mixed venous) oxygen saturation is decreased secondary to systemic hypoxemia. Blood from the right atrium flows through
the mitral valve into the “inverted” left ventricle (LV). The left ventricle
is, however, attached to the transposed pulmonary artery. Therefore
despite the anomalies, desaturated blood still winds up in the pulmonary circulation. Saturated blood returns to the left atrium, traverses the
tricuspid valve into the “inverted” right ventricle (RV), and is pumped
into the transposed aorta. This circulation would be totally “corrected”
were it not for the frequent association of other congenital anomalies,
in this case, VSD + PS. Because of the stenotic pulmonary valve, some
left ventricular blood flow crosses the VSD and into the right ventricle
and the ascending aorta, and systemic desaturation results.

from the semilunar valve) allow the echocardiographer to determine
the presence of atrioventricular discordance (right atrium connected
to LV; left atrium to RV) and ventriculoarterial discordance (RV connected to aorta; LV to pulmonary artery).
Surgical treatment of the associated anomalies, most often the VSD,
is complicated by the position of the bundle of His, which can be
injured at surgery and result in heart block. Identification of the usual
course of the bundle in corrected transposition (running superior to
the defect) has been accomplished by mapping the conduction system
so that the surgeon can avoid the bundle of His during repair. Even
without surgical injury, patients with l-­TGA are at risk for developing
heart block as they grow older.
Because simple surgical correction leaves the RV as the systemic
pumping chamber, and thus vulnerable to late ventricular failure,
surgeons have become more aggressive about trying operations that
use the LV as the systemic pumping chamber. This is accomplished by
performing an atrial switch operation (see Chapter 480.3) to reroute
the systemic and pulmonary venous returns in combination with an
arterial switch operation to reroute the ventricular outflows (double
switch procedure). The long-­term benefit of this approach in preserving systemic ventricular function is still under investigation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

480.5 Double-­Outlet Right Ventricle
Without Pulmonary Stenosis
Daniel Bernstein
In double-­outlet RV without pulmonary stenosis, both the aorta and
the pulmonary artery arise from the RV (see Chapter 479.5). The only
outlet from the LV is through a VSD. In the absence of obstruction

480.6 Double-­Outlet Right Ventricle with
Malposition of the Great Arteries
(Taussig-­Bing Anomaly)
Daniel Bernstein
In double-­outlet RV with malposed great arteries, the VSD is usually
directly subpulmonic and the aorta distant from the LV. Sometimes
both the pulmonary and the aortic valve may be located close to the
VSD (doubly committed VSD) and sometimes neither is (doubly
uncommitted VSD). The term malposition is used instead of transposition because both great arteries arise from the RV. Aortic obstructive lesions are common, including valvular and subvalvular aortic
stenosis, coarctation of the aorta, and interruption of the aortic arch.
Because pulmonary blood flow is unobstructed, patients experience
cardiac failure early in infancy and are at risk for the development of
pulmonary vascular disease and cyanosis. If aortic obstructive lesions
are a component, patients can present with poor systemic output and
cardiovascular collapse, particularly after the ductus arteriosus begins
to close. Cardiomegaly is usual, and a parasternal systolic ejection murmur is audible, sometimes preceded by an ejection click and loud closure of the pulmonary valve. The ECG shows right axis deviation and
right, left, or biventricular hypertrophy. The chest radiograph shows
cardiomegaly and prominence of the pulmonary vasculature. The anatomic features of the anomaly and associated abnormalities are usually demonstrated by echocardiography, augmented if necessary by
either cardiac catheterization, MRI, or CT. Palliation may be achieved
by corrective surgery or pulmonary arterial banding in early infancy
and surgical correction at a later age, which may be accomplished by
an arterial switch procedure (see Chapter 480.2) combined with an
intracardiac baffle or some modification of the Rastelli procedure (see
Chapter 479.5).

480.7 Total Anomalous Pulmonary Venous
Return
Daniel Bernstein
Abnormal development of the pulmonary veins may result in either
partial or complete anomalous drainage into the systemic venous circulation. Partial anomalous pulmonary venous return (PAPVR) is
usually an acyanotic lesion (see Chapter 475.4). Total anomalous pulmonary venous return (TAPVR) is associated with total mixing of systemic venous and pulmonary venous blood flow within the heart and
thus produces cyanosis.
In TAPVR, there is no direct pulmonary venous connection into the
left atrium (Fig. 480.6). The pulmonary veins may drain above the diaphragm: into the right atrium directly, into the coronary sinus, or into
the superior vena cava by a “vertical vein”; or they may drain below the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2816 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 480.1  Total Anomalous Pulmonary Venous Return
SITE OF CONNECTION
(% OF CASES)

% WITH SIGNIFICANT
OBSTRUCTION

Supracardiac (50)
Left superior vena cava (40)

40

Right superior vena cava (10)

75

Cardiac (25)
Coronary sinus (20)

10

Right atrium (5)

5

Infracardiac (20)

95–100

Mixed (5)

A
closes soon after birth, although supracardiac anomalous veins may
also become obstructed. Occasionally, the drainage may be mixed,
with some veins draining above and others below the diaphragm.
All forms of TAPVR involve mixing of oxygenated and deoxygenated blood before or at the level of the right atrium (total mixing
lesion). This mixed right atrial blood either passes into the RV and
pulmonary artery or passes through an atrial septal defect (ASD) or
patent foramen ovale into the left atrium, which will be the only source
of oxygenated systemic blood flow. The right atrium and ventricle and
the pulmonary artery are generally enlarged, whereas the left atrium
and ventricle may be normal or small. The clinical manifestations of
TAPVR depend on the presence or absence of obstruction of the venous
channels (Table 480.1). If pulmonary venous return is obstructed,
severe pulmonary congestion and pulmonary hypertension develop;
rapid deterioration occurs without surgical intervention. Obstructed
TAPVR is a pediatric cardiac surgical emergency because prostaglandin
therapy is usually not effective.

B

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

C
Fig. 480.6 A, Subcostal view demonstrating total anomalous pulmo-

nary drainage to the coronary sinus. Note the dilated coronary sinus
in both images. The echocardiogram also demonstrates an associated
confluence that connects to the coronary sinus. B, Suprasternal view
demonstrating total anomalous pulmonary venous drainage to a left
vertical vein. Note the direction of flow in the vertical vein that differentiates it from a left superior vena cava. C, Total anomalous pulmonary
venous drainage below the diaphragm. The specimen shows the pulmonary veins as they enter the confluence, whereas the echocardiogram demonstrates the descending veins as they enter the liver. Note
that the direction of flow is away from the heart. AO, Aorta; CS, coronary sinus; DA, descending aorta; DV, descending vein; LVV, left vertical
vein; PA, pulmonary artery; PV, pulmonary vein; PVC, pulmonary venous
confluence; RA, right atrium. (From Webb GD, Smallhorn, JF, Therrien
J, et al. Congenital heart disease in the adult and pediatric patient. In:
Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, et al., eds. Braunwald’s Heart Disease,
11th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019: Fig. 75-­32, p. 1553.)

diaphragm and join into a “descending vein” that enters the inferior
vena cava or one of its major tributaries, often through the ductus venosus. This latter form of anomalous venous drainage is most often associated with obstruction to venous flow, usually as the ductus venosus

Two major clinical patterns of TAPVR are seen, depending on the presence or absence of obstruction. Those neonates with severe obstruction
to pulmonary venous return, most prevalent in the infracardiac group
(see Table 480.1), present with severe cyanosis and respiratory distress.
Murmurs may not be present. These infants are severely ill and fail to
respond to mechanical ventilation. Rapid diagnosis and surgical correction are necessary for survival. In contrast, those with mild or no
obstruction to pulmonary venous return are usually characterized by
the development of heart failure as the PVR falls, with mild to moderate degrees of desaturation. Systolic murmurs may be audible along the
left sternal border, and a gallop rhythm may be present. Some infants
may have mild obstruction in the neonatal period and develop worsening obstruction as time passes.

DIAGNOSIS

The ECG demonstrates RV hypertrophy (usually a qR pattern in V3R
and V1, and P waves are frequently tall and spiked). In neonates with
marked pulmonary venous obstruction, the chest radiograph demonstrates a very dramatic perihilar pattern of pulmonary edema and
a small heart (Fig. 480.7A). This appearance can sometimes be confused with primary pulmonary disease, and the differential diagnosis
includes persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn, respiratory distress syndrome, pneumonia, pulmonary lymphangiectasia, and
other heart defects (hypoplastic left heart syndrome). In older children,
if the anomalous pulmonary veins enter the innominate vein and persistent left superior vena cava (see Fig. 480.7B), a large supracardiac
shadow can be seen, which together with the normal cardiac shadow
forms a snowman appearance. In most cases without obstruction, the
heart is enlarged, the pulmonary artery and RV are prominent, and
pulmonary vascularity is increased.
The echocardiogram demonstrates a large RV and usually identifies the pattern of abnormal pulmonary venous connections

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 480 u Cyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Lesions Associated with Increased Pulmonary Blood Flow 2817
moderately elevated, but in infants with pulmonary venous obstruction, pulmonary hypertension is usual. Selective pulmonary arteriography shows the anatomy of the pulmonary veins and their point of
entry into the systemic venous circulation.
Fetal diagnosis of TAPVR is feasible in many, but not all, cases,
with the main ultrasonographic signs being ventricular disproportion,
increased area behind the left atrium, and the finding of a vertical vein.
Color Doppler is key to making this diagnosis. Prenatal diagnosis can
be helpful in planning for urgent surgical treatment after birth.

A

B

TREATMENT

Fig. 480.7 Chest radiographs of total anomalous pulmonary venous
return (TAPVR). A, A newborn with TAPVR to a descending vein (below
the diaphragm) with obstruction, showing marked pulmonary venous
congestion and normal heart size. B, TAPVR to the left superior vena
cava (preoperative image). Arrows point to the supracardiac shadow,
which produces the “snowman” or figure 8 configuration. Cardiomegaly and increased pulmonary vascularity are evident.

85
85

Surgical correction of TAPVR is performed during early infancy,
with emergent repair performed for those patients with venous
obstruction. If surgery cannot be performed urgently, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) may be required to maintain
oxygenation. Surgically, the pulmonary venous confluence is anastomosed directly to the left atrium, the ASD is closed, and any connection to the systemic venous circuit is interrupted. Early results
are generally good, even for critically ill neonates. The postoperative
period may be complicated by pulmonary artery hypertensive crises.
In some patients, especially those in whom the diagnosis is delayed
or the obstruction is severe, recurrent stenosis and development of
pulmonary venoocclusive disease may occur. Attempts have been
made to treat recurrent stenosis with surgery, balloon angioplasty,
stents, and antiproliferative chemotherapy. The long-­term prognosis
in patients with recurrent obstruction is poor. In those with aggressive venoocclusive disease, heart-­lung transplantation may be the
only option (see Chapter 492.2).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

100

480.8 Truncus Arteriosus
Daniel Bernstein

60

95
70

Fig. 480.8 Physiology of truncus arteriosus. Circled numbers rep-

resent oxygen saturation values. Right atrial (mixed venous) oxygen
saturation is decreased secondary to systemic hypoxemia. Desaturated
blood enters the right atrium, flows through the tricuspid valve into
the right ventricle, and is ejected into the truncus. Saturated blood returning from the left atrium enters the left ventricle and is also ejected
into the truncus. The common aortopulmonary trunk gives rise to the
ascending aorta and to the main or branch pulmonary arteries. Oxygen saturation in the aorta and pulmonary arteries is usually the same
(definition of a total mixing lesion). As pulmonary vascular resistance
decreases in the first few weeks of life, pulmonary blood flow increases
dramatically, and mild cyanosis and congestive heart failure result.

(see Fig. 480.6). The demonstration of any vein with Doppler flow
away from the heart is pathognomonic of TAPVR because normal venous flow is usually toward the heart. Shunting occurs from
right to left at the atrial level. The size of the left atrium and LV
can be measured and the presence of any associated cardiac defects
determined.
Echocardiography should be adequate to demonstrate TAPVR in
most cases; however, if there is question about the drainage of one or
more pulmonary veins, cardiac catheterization, MRI, or CTA is performed. Catheterization shows that the oxygen saturation of blood in
both atria, both ventricles, and the aorta is similar, indicative of a total
mixing lesion. An increase in systemic venous saturation occurs at
the site of entry of the abnormal pulmonary venous channel, either
above or below the diaphragm. In older patients without pulmonary
venous obstruction, pulmonary arterial and RV pressure may be only

In truncus arteriosus, a single arterial trunk (truncus arteriosus) arises
from the heart and supplies the systemic, pulmonary, and coronary
circulations. A VSD is always present, with the truncus overriding the
defect and receiving blood from both the RV and the LV (Fig. 480.8).
The number of truncal valve cusps varies from two to as many as six,
and the valve may be stenotic, regurgitant, or both. The pulmonary
arteries can arise together from the posterior left side of the persistent
truncus arteriosus and then divide into left and right pulmonary arteries (type I). In types II and III truncus arteriosus, no main pulmonary
artery is present, and the right and left pulmonary arteries arise from
separate orifices on the posterior (type II) or lateral (type III) aspects
of the truncus arteriosus. Type IV truncus is a term no longer used
because, in this case, there is no identifiable connection between the
heart and pulmonary arteries, and pulmonary blood flow is derived
from major aortopulmonary collateral arteries (MAPCAs) arising
from the transverse or descending aorta; this is essentially a form of
pulmonary atresia (see Chapter 479.2).
Both ventricles are at systemic pressure, and both eject blood into
the truncus. When PVR is relatively high immediately after birth,
pulmonary blood flow may be normal; as PVR drops in the first few
weeks of life, blood flow to the lungs is greatly increased and heart failure ensues. Truncus arteriosus is a total mixing lesion with complete
admixture of pulmonary and systemic venous return. Because of the
large volume of pulmonary blood flow, clinical cyanosis is usually mild.
If the lesion is left untreated, PVR eventually increases, pulmonary
blood flow decreases, and cyanosis becomes more prominent (Eisenmenger physiology; see Chapter 482.2).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The clinical signs of truncus arteriosus vary with age and depend on
the level of PVR. In the immediate newborn period, signs of heart failure are usually absent; a murmur and minimal cyanosis may be the
only initial findings. If unrepaired, during the next 1-­2 months of life,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2818 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
pulmonary blood flow begins to become torrential and the clinical
picture is dominated by heart failure, with still mild cyanosis. Runoff
of blood from the truncus to the pulmonary circulation may result
in a wide pulse pressure and bounding pulses. These findings will be
further exaggerated if truncal valve insufficiency is present. The heart
is usually enlarged, and the precordium is hyperdynamic. S2 is loud
and single. A systolic ejection murmur, sometimes accompanied by a
thrill, is generally audible along the left sternal border. The murmur
is frequently preceded by an early systolic ejection click caused by the
abnormal truncal valve. In the presence of truncal valve insufficiency, a
medium-­to high-­pitched early diastolic decrescendo murmur is heard
at the mid-­left sternal border. An apical mid-­diastolic rumbling murmur caused by increased flow through the mitral valve is often audible
with the bell of the stethoscope, especially as heart failure develops.
Truncus arteriosus is a conotruncal malformation and may be associated with DiGeorge syndrome, linked to a deletion of a large region of
chromosome 22q11 (see Chapter 473).

DIAGNOSIS

The ECG shows right, left, or combined ventricular hypertrophy. The
chest radiograph also shows considerable variation. Cardiac enlargement will develop over the first several weeks of life and is a result of the
prominence of both ventricles. The truncus may produce a prominent
shadow that follows the normal course of the ascending aorta and aortic knob; the aortic arch is right sided in 50% of patients. Sometimes a
high bulge left of the aortic knob is produced by the main or left pulmonary artery. Pulmonary vascularity is increased after the first few weeks
of life. Echocardiography is diagnostic and demonstrates the large truncal artery overriding the VSD and the pattern of origin of the branch
pulmonary arteries (Fig. 480.9). Associated anomalies such as an interrupted aortic arch may be noted. Pulsed and color Doppler studies
are used to evaluate truncal valve regurgitation. If required, cardiac
catheterization shows a left-­to-­right shunt at the ventricular level, with
right-­to-­left shunting into the truncus. Systolic pressure in both ventricles and the truncus is similar. Angiography reveals the large truncus
arteriosus and better defines the origin of the pulmonary arteries.

TREATMENT

Most centers perform routine neonatal repair shortly after diagnosis.
If surgery is delayed and PVR falls over the first several weeks of life,
heart failure symptoms will worsen. Anticongestive medications can
be used to better prepare these patients for surgery; however, delay of
surgery much beyond this time period may increase the likelihood of
developing pulmonary vascular disease. At surgery, the VSD is closed,
the pulmonary arteries are separated from the truncus, and continuity is established between the RV and the pulmonary arteries with a

LPA

Ao
TR

RV

LV

homograft conduit. Immediate surgical results are excellent, but these
conduits will develop either regurgitation or stenosis over time and
must be replaced, often several times, as the child grows. If regurgitation is the primary problem, patients can now be treated with a transcatheter stent-­valve (see Chapter 479.1)

PROGNOSIS AND COMPLICATIONS

Surgical results have been excellent, and many patients with repaired
truncus are now entering mid-­adulthood, with several centers reporting 30-­and 40-­year-­old survivors. The need to replace the RV-­to-­
pulmonary artery conduit as the child grows means that these patients
will need to undergo multiple operations by the time they reach adulthood. The development of transcatheter stent-­valves may reduce this
in the future (see Chapter 472). When truncus arteriosus is associated
with DiGeorge syndrome, the associated endocrine, immunologic, craniofacial, and airway abnormalities may complicate recovery.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

480.9 Single Ventricle (Double-­Inlet
Ventricle, Univentricular Heart)
Daniel Bernstein
With a single ventricle, both atria empty through a common atrioventricular valve or through two separate valves into a single ventricular
chamber, with total mixing of systemic and pulmonary venous return.
This chamber may have left, right, or indeterminate (both right and
left) ventricular morphologic characteristics. The aorta and pulmonary
artery both arise from this single chamber, although one of the great
vessels may originate from a rudimentary outflow chamber. The aorta
may be posterior, anterior (malposition), or side-­by-­side with the pulmonary artery and either to the right or to the left. Pulmonary stenosis
or atresia is common.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The clinical picture is variable and depends on the associated intracardiac anomalies. If pulmonary outflow is obstructed, the findings are
usually similar to those of tetralogy of Fallot: marked cyanosis without heart failure. If pulmonary outflow is unobstructed, the findings
are similar to those of transposition with VSD: minimal cyanosis with
increasing heart failure.
In patients with pulmonary stenosis, cyanosis is present in early
infancy. Cardiomegaly is mild or moderate, a left parasternal lift is palpable, and a systolic thrill is common. The systolic ejection murmur
is usually loud; an ejection click may be audible, and S2 is single and
loud. In patients with unobstructed pulmonary flow, as PVR drops,
torrential pulmonary blood flow develops, and these patients present
with tachypnea, dyspnea, failure to thrive, and recurrent pulmonary
infections. Cyanosis is only mild or moderate. Cardiomegaly is generally marked, and a left parasternal lift is palpable. A systolic ejection
murmur is present but is not usually loud or harsh, and S2 is loud
and closely split. A third heart sound (S3) is common and may be followed by a short mid-­diastolic rumbling murmur caused by increased
flow through the atrioventricular valves. The eventual development
of pulmonary vascular disease reduces pulmonary blood flow so that
the cyanosis increases and signs of cardiac failure appear to improve
(Eisenmenger physiology; see Chapter 482.2).

DIAGNOSIS
Fig. 480.9 Subcostal 2D echocardiographic demonstration of trun-

cus arteriosus. The large truncal valve can be seen overriding the ventricular septal defect. In this case, only the left pulmonary artery (LPA)
arises from the truncus (TR). The pulmonary arteries are discontinuous,
and the right pulmonary artery arises from the descending aorta via
the ductus arteriosus (not shown). Ao, Aorta; LV, left ventricle; RV, right
ventricle.

ECG findings are nonspecific. P waves are normal, spiked, or bifid.
The precordial lead pattern suggests right ventricular hypertrophy,
combined ventricular hypertrophy, or sometimes left ventricular
dominance. The initial QRS forces are usually to the left and anterior.
Radiographic examination confirms the degree of cardiomegaly. If
present, a rudimentary outflow chamber may produce a bulge on the
upper left border of the cardiac silhouette in the posteroanterior projection. In the absence of pulmonary stenosis, pulmonary vasculature is

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 480 u Cyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Lesions Associated with Increased Pulmonary Blood Flow 2819
increased, whereas in the presence of pulmonary stenosis, pulmonary
vasculature is diminished. Echocardiography will confirm the absence
or near-­absence of the ventricular septum and can usually determine
whether the single ventricle has right, left, or mixed morphologic features. The presence of a rudimentary outflow chamber under one of
the great vessels can be identified, and pulsed Doppler can be used to
determine whether flow through this communication (known as a bulboventricular foramen) is obstructed.
If cardiac catheterization is performed, the pressure in the single
ventricular chamber is at systemic level; however, a gradient may be
demonstrated across the entrance to the rudimentary outflow chamber. Pressure measurements and angiography demonstrate whether
pulmonary stenosis is present.

Aorta
Ascending aorta

PA

TREATMENT

If pulmonary stenosis is severe, a Blalock-­Taussig aortopulmonary
shunt is performed to provide a reliable source of pulmonary blood
flow (see Chapter 479.1). If pulmonary blood flow is unrestricted,
pulmonary arterial banding is used to control heart failure and prevent progressive pulmonary vascular disease. The bidirectional
Glenn shunt is usually performed at 2-­4 months of age, followed by a
modified Fontan operation (cavopulmonary isolation procedure; see
Chapter 479.4) at 2-­3 years. If subaortic stenosis is present because of
a restrictive connection to a rudimentary outflow chamber (restrictive
bulboventricular foramen), surgical relief can be provided by anastomosing the proximal pulmonary artery to the side of the ascending
aorta (Damus-­Stansel-­Kaye operation).

PV

RA

LC
RC

LV

AD

PROGNOSIS AND COMPLICATIONS

Unoperated, some patients succumb during infancy from heart failure. Others may survive to adolescence and early adult life but finally
succumb to the effects of chronic hypoxemia or, in the absence of pulmonary stenosis, to the effects of pulmonary vascular disease. Patients
with moderate pulmonary stenosis have the best prognosis because
pulmonary blood flow, though restricted, is still adequate. Surgical palliation, eventually leading to Fontan-­type circulatory physiology (see
Chapter 479.4), has very good short-­and intermediate-­term results.

480.10 Hypoplastic Left Heart Syndrome
Daniel Bernstein
The term hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS) is used to describe a
related group of anomalies that include various degrees of underdevelopment of the left side of the heart: stenosis or atresia of the aortic and
mitral valves and hypoplasia of the left ventricular cavity and ascending aorta. HLHS categories are based on anatomic characteristics:
(1) mitral and aortic atresia (MA-­AA), (2) mitral stenosis with aortic
atresia (MS-­AA), and (3) mitral and aortic stenosis (MS-­AS). The LV
may be only moderately hypoplastic, very small and nonfunctional,
or totally atretic. The LV cavity may be slitlike, miniaturized, or small
and thick walled with endocardial fibroelastosis. In patients with MS-­
AA, there may be anomalous connections between the ventricle and
the coronary arteries, which some reports associate with an increased
postoperative risk.
The etiology of HLHS may be the result of poor left-­sided fetal blood
flow (no flow–no grow hypothesis). Alternatively, there may be intrinsic defects of myogenic and endocardial programming affecting differentiation, proliferation, maturation, and apoptosis. Although no single
gene is associated with all patients, multiple genes (GJA1, NKX2-­5,
SAP130, PCDHA, Notch 1, MY46) and pathways (transforming growth
factor beta [TGF-­β], Wnt) have been implicated.
In the immediate neonatal period, the RV maintains both the pulmonary circulation and the systemic circulation via the ductus arteriosus (Fig. 480.10). Pulmonary venous blood passes through an ASD
(which may or may not be restrictive) or dilated foramen ovale from
the left to the right side of the heart, where it mixes with systemic
venous blood (total mixing lesion). Minimal (mitral stenosis subtypes)

RV

Fig. 458.10 Hypoplastic left heart with aortic hypoplasia, aortic valve

atresia, and a hypoplastic mitral valve and left ventricle. AD, Anterior
descending; LC, left circumflex; LV, left ventricle; PA, pulmonary artery;
PV, pulmonary vein; RA, right atrium; RC, right coronary artery; RV, right
ventricle. (From Webb GD, Smallhorn, JF, Therrien J, et al. Congenital
heart disease in the adult and pediatric patient. In: Zipes DP, Libby P,
Bonow RO, et al., eds. Braunwald’s Heart Disease, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019: Fig. 75-­28, p. 1548. Adapted from historical illustrations in Neufeld HN, Adams P Jr, Edwards JE, et al. Diagnosis of
aortic atresia by retrograde aortography. Circulation. 1962;25:278; and
Edwards JE, Dry TJ, Parker RL, et al. An Atlas of Congenital Anomalies
of the Heart and Great Vessels. Springfield: Charles C. Thomas; 1954.)

or no (mitral atresia subtype) blood enters the hypoplastic LV. All the
RV blood is ejected into the main pulmonary artery, where it then supplies both the descending and the ascending aorta (retrograde flow)
via the ductus arteriosus. The major hemodynamic abnormalities are
inadequate maintenance of the systemic circulation and, depending on
the size of the atrial-­level communication, either pulmonary venous
hypertension (restrictive foramen ovale) or pulmonary overcirculation
(moderate or large ASD).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Although cyanosis may not always be obvious in the first 48 hours of
life, a grayish-­blue skin color is soon apparent and denotes a mix of cyanosis and poor perfusion. The condition is diagnosed in most infants in
the first few hours or days of life. Once the ductus arteriosus begins to
close, signs of poor systemic perfusion and shock predominate. All the
peripheral pulses may be weak or absent. A palpable RV parasternal lift
may be present along with a nondescript systolic murmur.
This lesion may be isolated or associated in 5–15% of patients with
known genetic syndromes, such as Turner syndrome; trisomy 13,
18, or 21; Jacobsen syndrome (11q deletion); Holt-­Oram syndrome;
and Rubinstein-­Taybi syndrome. In these circumstances, noncardiac

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2820 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
manifestations of the syndrome may be evident and influence the
clinical outcomes. Occasionally, HLHS is familial and inherited as an
autosomal recessive or dominant trait; there are also families with constellations of different severities of left-­sided obstructive lesions, ranging from bicuspid aortic valve, to coarctation of the aorta, to Shone
complex, to HLHS.

DIAGNOSIS

On chest radiograph, the heart is variable in size in the first days of life,
but cardiomegaly develops rapidly and is associated with increased pulmonary vascularity. The initial ECG may show only the normal neonatal pattern of RV dominance, but later, P waves become prominent and
RV hypertrophy is usual with reduced LV forces. The echocardiogram
is diagnostic and demonstrates hypoplasia or atresia of the mitral valve
and aortic root, a variably small left atrium and LV, and a large right
atrium and RV (Fig. 480.11). The size of the atrial communication, by
which pulmonary venous blood leaves the left atrium, is assessed by
pulsed and color flow Doppler studies. The small ascending aorta and
transverse aortic arch are identified; a discrete coarctation of the aorta
in the juxtaductal area may be present, although in the presence of a
large ductus, it may be difficult to identify. Doppler echocardiography
demonstrates whether the mitral and aortic valves are severely stenotic
or totally atretic. The presence of left ventricular–to–coronary sinusoidal connections can be identified. The diagnosis of HLHS can usually
be made without the need for cardiac catheterization. If catheterization is necessary, the hypoplastic ascending aorta is demonstrated by
angiography.

TREATMENT

Surgical therapy for HLHS is associated with improved survival rates,
reported as high as 90–95% for the first-­stage palliation in experienced
centers. The first-­stage repair is designed to construct a reliable source
of systemic blood flow arising from the single RV using a combination
of aortic and pulmonary arterial tissue and to limit pulmonary blood
flow to avoid heart failure and prevent the development of pulmonary
vascular disease. The surgical procedure typically used is the Norwood
procedure (Fig. 480.12) or the Sano procedure. Primary heart transplantation, previously advocated by a few centers, is much less common because of the substantially improved survival rates with standard
surgery and the limited supply of donor organs in this age-­group.
Preoperative medical management includes maintaining ductus
arteriosus patency with PGE1 (0.05-0.1 μg/kg/min) to support systemic blood flow, avoiding excess pulmonary blood flow, and maintaining adequate flow from the left to the right atrium. Correction of
acidosis and hypoglycemia and prevention of hypothermia are also key
components. Excessive pulmonary blood flow, which worsens as the
PVR begins to fall, can lead to both respiratory distress and systemic

LA
RA

LV

RV

Fig. 480.11 Subcostal 2D echocardiographic diagnosis of hypoplas-

tic left heart syndrome. The small left ventricular chamber can be seen,
the apex of which (arrowhead) does not form the apex of the heart. The
atrial septum can be seen bowing from the left to the right, indicating
that the communication between the two atria is pressure restrictive.
LA, Left atrium; LV, left ventricle; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle.

hypoperfusion. This can be prevented through managing ventilator settings to keep the Pco2 in the 45-­50 mm Hg range and avoiding supplemental oxygen (which acts as a pulmonary vasodilator) if the system
arterial O2 saturation is in the 70-­80 mm Hg range. If the atrial septum
is restrictive, a Rashkind balloon atrial septostomy, septal balloon dilation, or rarely, a blade septostomy of the atrial septum may be indicated.
The Norwood or Sano procedure is usually performed in three
stages. Stage I (see Fig. 480.12), usually performed in the first week of
life, includes an atrial septectomy and transection and ligation of the
distal main pulmonary artery; the proximal pulmonary artery is then
connected to the transversely opened hypoplastic aortic arch to form a
“neoaorta,” extending through the coarcted segment of the juxtaductal
aortic arch. In the Norwood operation, a synthetic aortopulmonary
(Blalock-­Taussig) shunt connects the aorta to the main pulmonary
artery to provide controlled pulmonary blood flow. In the Sano modification, an RV–to–pulmonary artery conduit is used instead of an
aortopulmonary shunt to provide pulmonary blood flow, temporarily
creating a double-­outlet RV. The operative risk for these first-­stage procedures has improved dramatically in the past 2 decades, and the best
reported results demonstrate a 90–95% survival rate. After the first stage,
the patient’s oxygen saturation usually ranges from 75% to 85% because
of the continued admixture of oxygenated and deoxygenated blood in
the right atrium. In the past, there was a high interstage mortality rate
in infants discharged from the hospital between stages I and II. This has
largely been prevented by performing careful interstage surveillance in
home monitoring programs run by pediatric cardiac centers.
Stage II consists of a Glenn shunt anastomosis to connect the superior vena cava to the pulmonary arteries (see Chapter 480.4) at 2-­6
months of age. Stage III, usually performed at 2-­3 years, consists of a
modified Fontan procedure (cavopulmonary isolation) to connect the
inferior vena cava to the pulmonary arteries via either an intraatrial
or external baffle. After stage III, all systemic venous return enters the
pulmonary circulation directly. Pulmonary venous flow enters the left
atrium and is directed across the atrial septum to the tricuspid valve
and subsequently to the right (now the systemic) ventricle. Blood
leaves the RV via the neoaorta, which supplies the systemic circulation.
The old aortic root now attached to the neoaorta provides coronary
blood flow. The risks associated with stages II and III are less than those
of stage I; interstage mortality (usually between stages I and II) has
been dramatically reduced with the use of home monitoring programs
and interstage close follow-­up. The short-­and long-­term benefits of
using the Norwood vs the Sano procedure remain to be demonstrated.
An alternative therapeutic approach, initially developed for high-­
risk standard surgical candidates, is to perform a hybrid procedure
for the first stage. This involves performing a Rashkind balloon atrial
septostomy, cardiac catheter laboratory placement of a stent in the ductus arteriosus, and open chest surgical placement of bilateral pulmonary artery bands. After the hybrid procedure, patients can be weaned
off prostaglandin and discharged from the hospital. However, after a
hybrid procedure, patients need to undergo a more extensive second-­
stage procedure involving construction of a neoaorta and removal of
the pulmonary artery bands.
Another alternative therapy is cardiac transplantation, either in
the immediate neonatal period, thereby obviating stage I of the Norwood procedure, or after a successful stage I Norwood procedure
is performed as a bridge to transplantation. After transplantation,
patients usually have normal cardiac function and no symptoms of
heart failure; however, these patients have the chronic risk of organ
rejection and lifelong immunosuppressive therapy (see Chapter 492.1).
The combination of donor shortage and improved results with standard surgical and hybrid procedures has caused most centers to stop
recommending transplantation except when associated lesions make
the Norwood operation an exceptionally high-­risk procedure (e.g., significant coronary artery anomalies) or for patients who develop poor
ventricular function at some time after the standard surgical approach.

PROGNOSIS AND COMPLICATIONS

Untreated patients most often succumb during the first few months of life,
usually during the first or second week. Up to 30% of infants with HLHS

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 480 u Cyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Lesions Associated with Increased Pulmonary Blood Flow 2821

B

Inferior
vena cava

A
Homograft

Aorta
Main
pulmonary a.

C

E
F

D

Fig. 480.12 Norwood procedure, one of the two current techniques for first-­stage palliation of hypoplastic left heart syndrome. A, Incisions used

for the procedure incorporate a cuff of arterial wall allograft. The distal divided main pulmonary artery may be closed by direct suture or with a patch.
B, Dimensions of the cuff of the arterial wall allograft. C, The arterial wall allograft is used to supplement the anastomosis between the proximal divided main pulmonary artery and the ascending aorta, aortic arch, and proximal descending aorta. D and E, The procedure is completed by an atrial
septectomy and a 3.5-­mm modified right Blalock shunt. F, When the ascending aorta is particularly small, an alternative procedure involves placement of a complete tube of arterial allograft. The tiny ascending aorta may be left in situ, as indicated, or implanted into the side of the neoaorta.
(From Castañeda AR, Jonas RA, Mayer JE Jr, et al. Single-­ventricle tricuspid atresia. In: Cardiac Surgery of the Neonate and Infant. Philadelphia:
Saunders; 1994.)

have evidence of either a major or a minor central nervous system abnormality. Other dysmorphic features may be found in up to 40% of patients.
Thus careful preoperative evaluation (genetic, neurologic, ophthalmologic)
should be performed in patients being considered for surgical therapy.
Intermediate-­term follow-­up after completion of all three stages of
the Norwood procedure demonstrates generally good exercise capacity and long-­term complications equivalent to other patients who have
had the Fontan palliation (see Chapter 479.4). Some studies show
that patients with HLHS have a higher risk of neurodevelopmental

problems than those with other complex congenital heart lesions.
Whether the poor neurodevelopmental outcome is the result of genetically associated central nervous system malformations, alteration
of prenatal circulation dynamics or prenatal central nervous system
injury, complications of bypass surgery, or poor preoperative and/or
postoperative perfusion is unknown. Whether a specific HLHS subtype, specifically MS-­AA with ventricular-­coronary connections, is
associated with increased postoperative mortality is still unclear, as
studies have shown contradictory results.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2822 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
PREVENTION

Serial fetal echocardiographic studies demonstrate that in some
fetuses, HLHS may be a progressive in utero lesion, beginning with
simple valvar aortic stenosis in mid-­gestation. The decreased flow
through the stenotic aortic valve reduces flow through the LV during
development, resulting in gradual ventricular chamber hypoplasia.
The potential for preventing this hypoplasia has been demonstrated
by performing in utero aortic balloon valvuloplasty in mid-­gestation
fetuses (Fig. 480.13). Early results are encouraging, although even if
the aortic valve is successfully opened, adequate ventricular growth
occurs in only ∼50% of patients. At present, this procedure is regarded
as experimental.
Because of the high mortality of HLHS with an intact or restrictive
atrial septum, in utero attempts to improve atrial mixing with either
fetal atrial septoplasty or atrial stent placement are undergoing clinical
investigation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

480.11 Abnormal Positions of the Heart
and the Heterotaxy Syndromes
(Asplenia, Polysplenia)
Daniel Bernstein

organs and lung lobation are reversed, an arrangement known as
situs inversus occurs: the left atrium is on the right and the right
atrium on the left. If the visceroatrial situs cannot be readily determined, a condition known as situs indeterminus or heterotaxia
exists. The two major heterotaxy syndromes are asplenia syndrome
(right isomerism or bilateral right-­sidedness), which is associated
with a centrally located liver, absent spleen, and two morphologic
right lungs (Figs. 480.15 and 480.16), and polysplenia syndrome
(left isomerism or bilateral left-­sidedness), which is associated with
multiple small spleens, absence of the intrahepatic portion of the
inferior vena cava, and two morphologic left lungs (Figs. 480.17
and 480.18). The heterotaxia syndromes are usually associated with
severe congenital heart lesions: ASD, VSD, atrioventricular septal defect, hypoplasia of one of the ventricles, pulmonary stenosis
or atresia, and anomalous systemic venous or pulmonary venous
return (Table 480.2).
Human heterotaxia syndromes may be related to disorders in both
motile and primary cilia function and in utero left-­right axis development. Genes involved in heterotaxy syndromes, including NODAL
(known asymmetric gene), and those influenced by NODAL such as the
TGF-­β superfamily (LEFTY2) and Pitx2, have been implicated in the

A Situs solitus

Classification and diagnosis of abnormal cardiac position are best
performed through a segmental approach, with the position of the
viscera and atria defined first, then the ventricles, followed by the
great vessels (Fig. 480.14). Determination of visceroatrial situs
can be made by radiographic demonstration of the position of the
abdominal organs and the tracheal bifurcation for recognition of
the right and left bronchi and by echocardiography. The atrial situs
is usually similar to the situs of the viscera and lungs. In situs solitus the viscera are in their normal positions (stomach and spleen
on the left, liver on the right), the three-­lobed right lung is on the
right, and the two-­lobed left lung on the left; the right atrium is on
the right, and the left atrium is on the left. When the abdominal

B Situs inversus totalis

Lung
Heart
RA

LA

LA

RA

Liver
Stomach

C Left isomerism
(polysplenia)

Spleen

D Right isomerism
(asplenia)

Uterine wall
LA

LA

RA

RA

Fig. 480.14 Variations in thoracoabdominal situs in congenital heart
Fetal chest
wall
Fetal LV

Fig. 480.13 Fetal treatment of critical aortic stenosis to prevent

development of hypoplastic left heart syndrome. Fetal ultrasound
showing insertion of a needle (arrowheads) via the maternal abdominal wall, through the uterus and the fetal chest wall, and into the
fetal left ventricle (LV). A balloon catheter is next inserted via the needle into the left ventricular chamber and across the stenotic aortic
valve. The balloon is inflated to dilate the valve, and the catheter and
needle are removed. (Courtesy Dr. Stanton Perry, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA.)

disease. A, Situs solitus: On the right side there is a three-­lobed lung,
a right atrium (with superior and inferior vena cava entering), and the
liver; on the left side there is a two-­lobed lung, a left atrium (with pulmonary veins entering), the stomach, and the spleen. B, Situs inversus
totalis: All the structures are mirror-­image reversed: On the right side
there is a two-­lobed lung, a left atrium, the stomach, and the spleen;
on the left side there is a three-­lobed lung, a right atrium, and the liver.
C, Left isomerism (polysplenia): There are two left sides: On the right
side there is a two-­lobed lung and a structure that resembles the left
atrium; on the left side there is also a two-­lobed lung and a structure
that resembles the left atrium; there is usually a midline liver and stomach and multiple small spleens. D, Right isomerism (asplenia): There
are two right sides: On the right side there is a three-­lobed lung and a
structure that resembles the right atrium; on the left side there is also a
three-­lobed lung and a structure that resembles the right atrium; there
is usually a midline liver and stomach and an absent spleen. (Adapted
from Fliegauf M, Benzing T, Omran H. When cilia go bad: cilia defects
and ciliopathies. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2007;8:880–893, Fig. 2.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 480 u Cyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Lesions Associated with Increased Pulmonary Blood Flow 2823

Apex

DAo
Liver

Liver

A

B

Fig. 480.17 A, Coronal T1-­weighted MRI of a patient with heterotaxy
syndrome (polysplenia) demonstrates a bilateral hyparterial bronchial
branching pattern (arrows) and left upper quadrant spleens. B, More
posterior coronal T1-­weighted MRI shows left azygos-­hemiazygos continuation to the left superior vena cava and right thoracic aorta. (From
Applegate KE, Goske MJ, Pierce G, Murphy D. Situs revisited: imaging
of the heterotaxy syndrome. Radiographics. 1999;19:837–852, Fig. 4.)

S

Fig. 480.15 X-ray from asplenic male neonate with right isomerism.
The liver is transverse, the stomach (S) is on the right, and the heart is
midline, but the base to apex axis points to the left. DAo, Descending
aorta. (Modified from Perloff JK, Marelli AJ. Perloff’s Clinical Recognition of Congenital Heart Disease, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2012:
Fig. 3-­31, p. 32.)

a

A
R

L

A
A

L

R

S

L
S

S
C

C

S

L

C

S

S
S

B
Fig. 480.18 Left isomerism with polysplenia. Contrast-­
enhanced

B
Fig. 480.16 Right isomerism with asplenia. Noncontrast-­enhanced

CT scan of a female with primary ciliary dyskinesia demonstrates features of right isomerism with asplenia. A, Large azygous vein arch is
noted, which compensates for the inferior vena cava interruption. B, CT
scan through the upper abdomen demonstrates midline liver (L), dextrogastria (s), and absent spleen. Bilateral renal cysts (C) are also noted.
(From Chmura K, Chan ED, Noone PG, Zariwala M, Winn RA, Knowles
MR, Iseman MD, Gardner EM. A middle-aged woman with recurrent
respiratory infections. Respiration. 2005;72(4):427–430.)

computed tomography scan of a male with primary ciliary dyskinesia
demonstrates features of left isomerism with polysplenia. A, Note bilateral superior vena cavae at the level of the aortic arch (a). The right
superior vena cava is enhanced after intravenous contrast material administration through a right antecubital vein. Left-­sided superior vena
cava indicated by arrow. B, Upper abdomen image demonstrates left
upper quadrant splenules (S). (From Kennedy MP, Omran H, Leigh
MW, et al. Congenital heart disease and other heterotaxic defects in
a large cohort of patients with primary ciliary dyskinesia. Circulation.
2007;11:2814–2821, Fig. 3.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2824 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 480.2  Comparison of Cardiosplenic Heterotaxy Syndromes
FEATURE

ASPLENIA (RIGHT ISOMERISM)

POLYSPLENIA (LEFT ISOMERISM)

Spleen

Absent

Multiple

Sidedness (isomerism)

Bilateral right

Bilateral left

Lungs

Bilateral trilobar with eparterial bronchi

Bilateral bilobar with hyparterial bronchi

Sex

Male (65%)

Female ≥ male

Right-­sided stomach

Yes

Less common

Symmetric liver

Yes

Yes

Partial intestinal rotation or malrotation

Yes

Yes

Risk for midgut volvulus

Yes

Yes

Dextrocardia (%)

30–40

30–40

Pulmonary blood flow

Decreased (usually)

Increased (usually)

Severe cyanosis

Yes

No

Transposition of great arteries (%)

60–75

15

Total anomalous pulmonary venous return (%)

70–80

Rare

Common atrioventricular valve (%)

80–90

20–40

Single ventricle (%)

40–50

10–15

Absent inferior vena cava with azygos
continuation

No

Characteristic

Bilateral superior venae cavae

Yes

Yes

Other common defects

PA, PS, right-­sided aortic arch

Partial anomalous pulmonary venous return,
ventricular septal defect, double-­outlet right
ventricle

Risk of pneumococcal sepsis

Yes

Yes

Howell-­Jolly and Heinz bodies, pitted
erythrocytes

Yes

No

Risk of nosocomial infection

Yes

Yes

Absent gallbladder; biliary atresia

No

Yes

PA, Pulmonary atresia; PS, pulmonary stenosis.

development of heterotaxia syndromes (Fig. 480.19 and Table 480.3).
Diagnostic gene panels are available to identify a possible genetic basis.
The next segment is localization of the ventricles, which depends
on the direction of development of the embryonic cardiac loop. Initial protrusion of the loop to the right (d-­loop) carries the future RV
anteriorly and to the right, whereas the LV remains posterior and on
the left (the normal relationship). With situs solitus, a d-­loop yields
normal atrioventricular connections (right atrium connecting to
RV, left atrium to LV). Protrusion of the loop to the left (l-­loop)
carries the future RV to the left and the LV to the right. In this case,
in the presence of situs solitus, the right atrium connects with the
LV and the left atrium with the RV (ventricular inversion).
The final segment is that of the great vessels. With each type of
cardiac loop, the ventricular-­arterial relationships may be regarded as
either normal (RV to pulmonary artery, LV to aorta); transposed (RV
to aorta, LV to pulmonary artery); or in the event of a double-­outlet
ventricle, either normally related or malposed. A further classification can be based on the position of the aorta (normally to the right
and posterior) relative to the pulmonary artery. In transposition, the

aorta is usually anterior and either to the right of the pulmonary artery
(d-­transposition) or to the left (l-­transposition).
These segmental relationships can usually be determined by echocardiographic studies demonstrating both atrioventricular and ventriculoarterial relationships. The clinical manifestations of these
syndromes of abnormal cardiac position are determined primarily by
their associated cardiovascular anomalies.
Dextrocardia occurs when the heart is in the right side of the chest.
Levocardia (the normal situation) is present when the heart is in the
left side of the chest. Dextrocardia without associated situs inversus
or levocardia in the presence of situs inversus is most often complicated by other severe cardiac malformations. Surveys of older children
and adults indicate that dextrocardia with situs inversus and normally
related great arteries (“mirror-­image” dextrocardia) is often associated
with a functionally normal heart, although congenital heart disease of
a less severe nature is common.
Anatomic or functional abnormalities of the lungs, diaphragm,
and thoracic cage may result in displacement of the heart to the right
(dextroposition). In this case, however, the cardiac apex is pointed

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 480 u Cyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Lesions Associated with Increased Pulmonary Blood Flow 2825
Stages

Left
Nodal flow

First:
breaking of LR
symmetry at early
embryonic stages

RA
NVPs

Nodal
SHH

PKD2

LRD

crown cells

Notch

crown cells

pit cells
[Ca2+]

GDF1

Second:
transmission of
asymmetric signals
from the node
to LPM

ActRIIB

CFC1
AIK4

Smad2
Lefty1

Third:
asymmetric gene
expression in the left
LPM

FoxH1
nucleus
Nodal

right LPM

left LPM

Fourth:
LR asymmetric
morphogenesis of the
internal organs

Lefty2

Pitx2
(organ primordia)

Phenotypes

Genes with human variants

The embryonic LR development pathway
Right

DNAI1, DNAAF3, BNAH5, TXNDC3,
DNAH11, DNAI2, DNAAF2, DNAAF1,
CCDC39, CCDC40, DNAL1, CCDC103,
HEATR2, LRRC6, CCDC114, ZMYND10,
ARMC4, DYX1C1, D21ORF59, SPAG1
CCDC151
INVS, NPHP3, ANKS6
CEP290
PKD2
BBS2, BBS8, LZTFL1
ARL2BP
HES7
CCDC11
C1ORF88

PCD, SI or HTX

MEGF8
ZIC3
NEK8
NPHP4
EPB41L5
NEK2, ROCK2, TGFBR2
UVRAG, GALNT11
NODAL
GDF1
CFC1
ACVR2B
SMAD2

NPHP, SI or HTX
oculo-renal form of JSRD, SI
PKD2, SI or HTX
BBS, SI
RP, SI
SCDO4, SI
SI, HTX, CHD
SI, cystic kidneys and liver
fibrosis; DORV
CRPT2, SI, TGA, DEX
HTX, SI, TGA, CHD, VACTERL association
RHPD2, HTX
HTX, DEX, TGA, DORV, AVSD
HTX and holoprosencephaly
HTX
HTX
HTX, pulmonary valve atresia
RI
HTX, TGA, DORV
HTX
DEX, PS

NUP188

HTX

MED13L

TGA and mental retardation

FOXH1

TGA

SESN1

HTX

CITED2

DEX, CHD

NODAL

HTX, pulmonary valve atresia

LEFTY2

LI, CHD

NKX2-5

HTX, ASD
DEX
HTX, AVSD
DEX, TGA, PS, abdominal SI, bilateral
keratoconus and sensorineural hearing loss

GATA4
CRELD1
SHROOM3

Fig. 480.19 Pathway of left-­right (LR) development in the mouse embryo, list of genes associated with human LR asymmetry disorders, and correspond-

ing phenotypes in humans. LRD-­containing monocilia generate leftward nodal flow, and polycystin 2–containing cilia sense nodal flow and initiate an asymmetric calcium signal, which induces nodal expression around the node. Nodal signaling is involved in asymmetric morphogenesis by inducing expression
of the nodal-­responsive genes (NODAL, LEFTY2, and PITX2) in the left lateral plate mesoderm (LPM) and expression of LEFTY1 at the midline. Pathogenic
variants of genes associated with ciliopathies and nodal signal transduction pathway have been identified in human LR asymmetry disorders. Full arrows
indicate a direct positive effect on gene expression, dotted arrows indicate an indirect effect, and lines indicate inhibition. ASD, Atrial septal defect; AVSD,
atrioventricular septal defects; BBS, Bardet-­Biedl syndrome; CHD, congenital heart disease; CRPT2, Carpenter syndrome 2; DEX, dextrocardia; DORV,
double-­outlet right ventricle; HTX, heterotaxy; JSRD, Joubert syndrome–related disorders; LI, left isomerism; NPHP, nephronophthisis; NVPs, nodal vesicular parcels; PCD, primary ciliary dyskinesia; PKD2, polycystic kidney disease 2; PS, pulmonary stenosis; RA, retinoic acid; RHPD2, renal-­hepatic-­pancreatic
dysplasia 2; RI, right isomerism; RP, retinitis pigmentosa; SCDO4, spondylocostal dysostosis 4; SHH, sonic hedgehog; SI, situs inversus; TGA, transposition
of the great arteries. (From Deng H, Xia H, Deng S. Genetic basis of human left-­right asymmetry disorders. Expert Rev Mol Med. 2014;16:e19, Fig 1.)

Table 480.3  Ciliopathies with Heterotaxy Defects
CILIOPATHY

FEATURES

GENE(S)

Primary ciliary
dyskinesia

Bronchiectasis, sinusitis,
otitis media, infertility,
situs defects

AK7, ARMC4, C21orf59, CCDC103, CCDC114, CCDC151, Dextrocardia; heterotaxy
CCDC39, CCDC40, CCDC65, CCNO, DNAAF1,
spectrum heart defects in
DNAAF2, DNAAF3, DNAAF5, DNAH11, DNAH5,
∼12%; heterotaxy not thought
DNAH6, DNAI2, DNAL1, DNAJB13, DRC1, DYX1C1,
to occur with genes associated
GAS8, HEATR2, HYDIN, LRRC6, MCIDAS, NME8,
with central pair or radial spoke
PIH1D3, RPGR, TXNDC3, RSPH1, RSPH3, RSPH4A,
RSPH9, SPAG1, TTC25, ZMYND10

CARDIAC DEFECTS

Meckel-­Gruber
syndrome

Renal cysts, CNS anomalies
(encephalocele),
polydactyly, hepatic
fibrosis, congenital heart
defects

MKS1, TMEM216, TMEM67, CEP290, RPGRIP1L,
CC2D2A, NPHP3, TCTN2, B9D1, B9D2, TMEM231,
KIF14, TMEM107

Situs inversus; heterotaxy; HLHS

Joubert and related
syndromes

Hypoplasia of the
cerebellar vermis (molar
tooth sign), dysregulated
breathing pattern,
retinal dystrophy, renal
anomalies

AH1, C5ORF42, CC2D2A, CSPP1, TMEM216, NPHP1,
CEP290, TMEM67, RPGRIP1L, INPP5E, TCTN2, MKS1,
CEP104, CEP120, CEP41, KIAA0556, PDE6D, PIBF1,
TCTN1, TCTN3, ARL13B, CEP41, KIAA0586, TMEM237,
TMEM231, TMEM138, KIAA0753, TMEM107, KIF7,
OFD1, C2CD3, IFT172, ARL13B, ZNF423, TTC21B,
PDE60, POC18, B9D2, B9D1

Laterality defects; heart defects,
including septal defects, aortic
valve anomalies, coarctation;
in some cases, associated with
features of OFD

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2826 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 480.3  Ciliopathies with Heterotaxy Defects—cont’d
CILIOPATHY

FEATURES

GENE(S)

CARDIAC DEFECTS

Short rib thoracic
dysplasias,
including Jeune
chondrodysplasia,
Saldino-­Mainzer

Skeletal dysplasia; thoracic
deformities; polydactyly;
renal cysts; retinitis
pigmentosa

IFT80, DYNC2H1, TTC21B, WDR19, NEK1, WDR35,
WDR60, IFT140, IFT172, WDR34, CEP120, KIAA0586,
DYNC2LI1, IFT52, TCTEX1D2

Rare; septal defects, laterality
defects

Carpenter syndrome

Acrocephaly;
polysyndactyly,
hypogenitalism, obesity,
congenital heart defects

RAB23, MEGF8, RAB23

PDA, PS, VSD, situs inversus,
heterotaxy

HLHS, Hypoplastic left heart syndrome; OFD, oral-­facial-­digital; PDA, patent ductus arteriosus; PS, pulmonary stenosis; and VSD, ventricular septal defect.
Modified from Pierpont ME, Brueckner M, Chung WK, et al. Genetic basis for congenital heart disease: revisited: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association.
Circulation. 2018;138(21):e653–e711, Table 6.

normally to the left, as opposed to dextrocardia, where the cardiac apex
is pointed to the right or anteriorly. This anatomic position is less often
associated with congenital heart lesions, although hypoplasia of a lung
may be accompanied by anomalous pulmonary venous return from
that lung (scimitar syndrome; see Chapter 475.4).
The ECG is difficult to interpret in the presence of lesions with
discordant atrial, ventricular, and great vessel anatomy. Diagnosis
usually requires detailed echocardiographic and sometimes MRI,
CT, or cardiac catheterization studies. The prognosis and treatment
of patients with one of the cardiac positional anomalies are determined by the underlying defects and are covered in their respective chapters. Asplenia increases the risk of serious infections, such
as bacterial (usually pneumococcal) sepsis, and thus requires daily
antibiotic prophylaxis. Patients with polysplenia frequently have
poor splenic function and also require prophylaxis against bacterial sepsis. Patients with heterotaxia are also at increased risk of
intestinal malrotation and volvulus and of ciliary dyskinesia and
associated pulmonary complications (see Chapters 101.3 and 455).

esophagogram, MRI, or CT scan, the esophagus is indented on its
right border at the level of the aortic arch.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Clinical Manifestations

Chapter 481

Other Congenital
Heart and Vascular
Malformations
481.1 Anomalies of the Aortic Arch
Daniel Bernstein

RIGHT AORTIC ARCH

In this abnormality, the aorta curves to the right and, if it descends
on the right side of the vertebral column, is usually associated with
other cardiac malformations. It is found in 20% of cases of tetralogy of Fallot and is also common in truncus arteriosus. A right
aortic arch without other cardiac anomalies is not associated with
symptoms. It can often be visualized on the chest radiograph. The
trachea is deviated slightly to the left of the midline rather than
to the right, as in the presence of a normal left arch. On a barium

VASCULAR RINGS

Congenital abnormalities of the aortic arch and its major branches result
in the formation of vascular rings around the trachea and esophagus with
varying degrees of compression (Table 481.1). The origin of these lesions
can best be appreciated by reviewing the embryology of the aortic arch (see
Fig. 469.1). The most common anomalies include (1) double aortic arch
(Fig. 481.1A), (2) right aortic arch with a left ligamentum arteriosum, (3)
anomalous innominate artery arising farther to the left on the arch than
usual, (4) anomalous left carotid artery arising farther to the right than
usual and passing anterior to the trachea, (5) anomalous right subclavian
artery, and (6) anomalous left pulmonary artery (vascular sling). In the latter anomaly, the abnormal vessel arises from an elongated main pulmonary
artery or from the right pulmonary artery. It courses between and compresses the trachea and the esophagus. Associated congenital heart disease
may be present in 5–50% of patients, depending on the vascular anomaly.
If the vascular ring produces compression of the trachea and/or esophagus, symptoms are frequently present during infancy. Chronic wheezing is exacerbated by crying, feeding, and flexion of the neck. Extension
of the neck tends to relieve the noisy respiration. Choking on solid
food and vomiting may also be symptoms. Affected infants may have
a brassy cough, pneumonia, or rarely, sudden death from aspiration.

Diagnosis

Standard radiographic examination is not usually helpful. In the past,
performing a barium esophagogram was the standard method of diagnosis (Fig. 481.2), which has been replaced by echocardiography in
combination with either MRI or CT (Fig. 481.3). Cardiac catheterization is reserved for cases with associated anomalies or in rare cases
where these other modalities are not diagnostic. Bronchoscopy is helpful in more severe cases to determine the extent of airway narrowing
and whether additional surgery is required on the airway.

Treatment

Surgery is advised for symptomatic patients who have evidence of tracheal compression. The anterior vessel is usually divided in patients with
a double aortic arch (see Fig. 481.1B). Compression produced by a right
aortic arch and left ligamentum arteriosum is relieved by division of
the latter. Anomalous innominate or carotid arteries cannot be divided;
attaching the adventitia of these vessels to the sternum usually relieves
the tracheal compression. An anomalous left pulmonary artery is corrected by division at its origin and reanastomosis to the main pulmonary
artery after it has been brought in front of the trachea. Severe tracheomalacia, if present, may require reconstruction of the trachea as well.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 481 u Other Congenital Heart and Vascular Malformations

2827

Table 481.1  Vascular Rings
LESION

SYMPTOMS

PLAIN FILM

Stridor
Respiratory
distress
Swallowing
dysfunction
Reflex apnea

AP—wider base of
heart
Lat.—narrowed
trachea
displaced
forward at C3-­C4

BARIUM
SWALLOW

BRONCHOSCOPY

MRI ECHO

TREATMENT

Bilateral indentation
of esophagus

Bilateral tracheal
compression—
both pulsatile

Diagnostic

Ligate and divide
smaller arch
(usually left)

RIGHT ARCH AND LIGAMENTUM/DUCTUS
Respiratory
AP—tracheal
distress
deviation to left
Swallowing
(right arch)
dysfunction

Bilateral indentation
of esophagus R > L

Bilateral tracheal
compression—
r. pulsatile

Diagnostic

Ligate ligamentum
or ductus

ANOMALOUS INNOMINATE
Cough
Stridor
Reflex apnea

AP—normal
Lat.—anterior
tracheal
compression

Normal

Pulsatile anterior
tracheal
compression

Unnecessary

Conservative
apnea, then
suspend

Normal

AP—oblique defect
upward to right
Lat.—small defect
on right posterior
wall

Usually normal

Diagnostic

Ligate artery

AP—low l. hilum,
r. emphysema/
atelectasis
Lat.—anterior
bowing of right
bronchus and
trachea

±Anterior
indentation above
carina between
esophagus and
trachea

Tracheal
displacement to
left
Compression
of right main
bronchus

Diagnostic

Detach and
reanastomose to
main pulmonary
artery in front of
trachea

DOUBLE ARCH

ABERRANT RIGHT SUBCLAVIAN
Occasional
swallowing
dysfunction

PULMONARY SLING
Expiratory stridor
Respiratory
distress

AP, Anteroposterior; L and l., left; Lat., lateral; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; R and r., right.
From Kliegman RM, Greenbaum LA, Lye PS. Practical Strategies in Pediatric Diagnosis and Therapy, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2004:88.

L. common
carotid artery
Innomin.
artery

L. subclavian a.
Ant. segment
of aortic arch

Aorta
Pulm

art

L. common
carotid artery
Innominate
artery

L. subclavian art.

Sutured
stumps

Aorta

Pulm.

a

Obliterated
duct. arterios.

Fig. 481.1 Double aortic arch. A, Small anterior

A

B

segment of the double aortic arch (most common
type). B, Operative procedure for release of the vascular ring. L., Left; a. and art., artery; ant., anterior;
innom., innominate; duct. arterios., ductus arteriosus; pulm., pulmonary.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2828 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 481.2  Congenital Anomalies of Coronary Arteries
Unassociated with Congenital Heart Disease

A

B

Fig. 481.2 Double aortic arch in an infant age 5 mo. A, Anteroposte-

rior view. The barium-­filled esophagus is constricted on both sides. B,
Lateral view. The esophagus is displaced forward. The anterior arch was
the smaller and was divided at surgery.

ANOMALOUS AORTIC ORIGIN
• Eccentric ostium within an aortic sinus
• Ectopic ostium above an aortic sinus
• Conus artery from the right aortic sinus
• Circumflex coronary artery from the right aortic sinus or from the
right coronary artery
• Origin of left anterior descending and circumflex coronary arteries
from separate ostia in the left aortic sinus (absence of left main
coronary artery)
• Atresia of the left main coronary artery
• Origin of the left anterior descending coronary artery from the
right aortic sinus or from the right coronary artery
• Origin of the right coronary artery from the left aortic sinus, from
posterior aortic sinus, or from left coronary artery
• Origin of a single coronary artery from the right or left aortic sinus
• Anomalous origin from a noncardiac systemic artery
ANOMALOUS AORTIC ORIGIN WITH ANOMALOUS PROXIMAL
COURSE
• Acute proximal angulation
• Ectopic right coronary artery passing between aorta and
pulmonary trunk
• Ectopic left main coronary artery
• Between aorta and pulmonary trunk
• Anterior to the pulmonary trunk
• Posterior to the aorta
• Within the ventricular septum (intramyocardial)
• Ectopic left anterior descending coronary artery that is anterior,
posterior, or between the aorta and pulmonary trunk
ANOMALOUS ORIGIN OF A CORONARY ARTERY FROM THE
PULMONARY TRUNK
• Left main coronary artery
• Left anterior descending coronary artery
• Right coronary artery
• Both right and left coronary arteries
• Circumflex coronary artery
• Accessory coronary artery

*

RMSB

From Perloff JK, Marelli J. Perloff’s Clinical Recognition of Congenital Heart Disease,
6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2012: Table 32-3, p. 532.

LMSB

ANOMALOUS ORIGIN OF THE LEFT CORONARY
ARTERY FROM THE PULMONARY ARTERY
Fig. 481.3 Double aortic arch in a 12-year-old. Superior (bird’s eye

view) three-dimensional volume-rendered CT image shows the larger
dominant arch (arrowhead) on the right side, coursing over the right
mainstem bronchus (RMSB). There is mild indentation of the trachea.
The smaller left arch (asterisk) courses over the left mainstem bronchus
(LMSB). (From Madueme PC: Computed tomography and magnetic
resonance imaging of vascular rings and other things: a pictorial review.
Pediatr Radiol 2022;52:1839–1848.(Fig. 2, p. 1840.)

481.2 Anomalous Origin of the Coronary
Arteries
Daniel Bernstein
Table 481.2 provides a classification system for coronary artery anomalies. Although many of these are isolated, congenital anomalies of the
coronary arteries may also be seen in patients with congenital heart
disease (tetralogy of Fallot, transposition of the great arteries, congenitally corrected transposition of the great arteries, single ventricle,
tricuspid atresia, truncus arteriosus, quadricuspid or bicuspid aortic
valves, double-­outlet ventricle). In addition, acquired lesions of the
coronary arteries associated with existing congenital heart disease may
develop because of alterations in blood flow or postoperative stenoses,
especially in patients whose surgery involves the aortic root.

In anomalous origin of the left coronary artery from the pulmonary
artery (ALCAPA), the blood supply to the left ventricular (LV) myocardium is severely compromised. Soon after birth, as pulmonary
artery pressure falls, perfusion pressure to the left coronary artery
(LCA) becomes inadequate; myocardial ischemia, infarction, and
fibrosis result. In some cases, interarterial collateral anastomoses
develop between the right coronary artery (RCA) and LCA. Blood flow
in the LCA is then reversed, and it empties into the pulmonary artery,
a condition known as myocardial steal syndrome. The LV becomes
dilated, and its performance is decreased. Mitral insufficiency is a frequent complication secondary to a dilated valve ring or infarction of
a papillary muscle. Localized aneurysms may also develop in the LV
free wall. Rare patients have adequate myocardial blood flow during
childhood and, later in life, a continuous murmur and a small left-­to-­
right shunt via the dilated coronary system (aorta to RCA to LCA to
pulmonary artery).

Clinical Manifestations

Evidence of heart failure becomes apparent within the first few months
of life and may be exacerbated by respiratory infection. Recurrent
attacks of discomfort, restlessness, irritability, sweating, dyspnea, and
pallor occur and represent an infantile version of angina pectoris.
Diagnosis is often made only after a chest x-­ray is obtained looking
for other sources of irritability and rapid breathing. Cardiac enlargement ranges from moderate to massive. A gallop rhythm is common.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 481 u Other Congenital Heart and Vascular Malformations

I

aVR

V1

V4

II

aVL

V2

V5

III

aVF

V3

V6

2829

Fig. 481.4 Electrocardiogram of a 2-­mo-­old with anomalous origin of the left coronary artery from the pulmonary artery. Myocardial infarction is
evidenced by abnormal Q waves in leads I and aVL and in the anterolateral precordial leads (V3, V4, V5, V6). There is also ST elevation in leads V4 and
V5, a sign of ongoing ischemia. Another sign of ALCAPA is the diminution or loss of R waves in the midprecordial leads (V2, V3).

Murmurs may be of the nonspecific ejection type or may be holosystolic because of mitral insufficiency. Older patients with abundant
intercoronary anastomoses may have continuous murmurs and less LV
dysfunction. However, during older childhood and adolescence, they
may experience angina during exercise. Rare patients with an anomalous RCA may also have such clinical findings, especially if the RCA
supplies the inferoposterior portion of the LV (right dominant system).

includes standard therapy for heart failure (diuretics, angiotensin-­
converting enzyme inhibitors, and β blockers).
Surgical treatment consists of detaching the anomalous coronary
artery from the pulmonary artery and anastomosing it to the aorta to
establish normal myocardial perfusion. In patients who have already
sustained a significant myocardial infarction, cardiac transplantation
may be the only option (see Chapter 492.1).

Diagnosis

ANOMALOUS ORIGIN OF THE RIGHT CORONARY
ARTERY FROM THE PULMONARY ARTERY

Radiographic examination confirms cardiomegaly. The electrocardiogram (ECG) can resemble the pattern described in anterolateral wall
myocardial infarction in adults, although this pattern can vary over the
first weeks of life. A QR pattern followed by flattened or inverted T
waves is typically seen in leads I and aVL (Fig. 481.4). The anterolateral precordial leads (V3-­V6) may show deep Q waves or elevated ST
segments and inverted T waves (the more typical adult findings of a
lateral myocardial infarction) or may be relatively normal. Decreased
or absent R waves may be seen over the mid-­precordial leads (V3, V4).
Given the subtlety of these ECG findings and that an infarct pattern
is not usually expected in infants, a high index of suspicion should be
maintained for patients with the symptoms described earlier. Two-­
dimensional (2D) echocardiography with color Doppler usually confirms the diagnosis; however, in rare cases, echocardiography may not
be definitive in diagnosing this condition. On 2D imaging alone, the
LCA may appear as though it is arising from the aorta. Color Doppler
ultrasound has improved the accuracy of diagnosis of this lesion, demonstrating the presence of retrograde flow in the LCA. If needed, CT or
MRI can confirm the origin of the coronary arteries. Cardiac catheterization is also diagnostic; aortography shows immediate opacification
of the RCA only. In patients who have developed collaterals, this vessel
is large and tortuous. After filling of the intercoronary anastomoses,
the LCA is opacified, and contrast can be seen to enter the pulmonary artery. Pulmonary arteriography should opacify the origin of the
anomalous LCA. Selective left ventriculography usually demonstrates a
dilated LV that empties poorly and mitral regurgitation.

Treatment and Prognosis

Untreated, death often occurs from heart failure within the first 6
months of life. Those who survive without surgery generally have
abundant intercoronary collateral anastomoses. Medical management

Anomalous origin of the RCA from the pulmonary artery is not usually manifested in infancy or early childhood. The LCA is enlarged,
whereas the RCA is thin walled and mildly enlarged. In early infancy,
perfusion of the RCA is from the pulmonary artery, whereas later, perfusion is from collaterals of the left coronary vessels. Angina and sudden death can occur in adolescence or adulthood. When recognized,
this anomaly should be repaired by reanastomosis of the RCA to the
aorta.

ANOMALOUS AORTIC ORIGIN OF A CORONARY
ARTERY

In anomalous aortic origin of a coronary artery (AAOCA), one or both
coronary arteries arise from their nonusual sinus (e.g., LCA from the
right sinus of Valsalva) or high on the aorta, above the sinotubular
junction. There are multiple anatomic variations, with different physiologic consequences, and therefore with different risks of coronary
ischemia, arrhythmia, and potentially sudden death. Fortunately, most
variants of AAOCA are benign, and the challenge for clinicians is to
recognize which variants place their patient at a greater risk of a life-­
threatening event.
The aberrant artery may be a left, right, or major branch coronary artery.
The site of origin may be the wrong sinus of Valsalva (anomalous origin of a
coronary artery from the opposite sinus, ACAOS) or a proximal coronary
artery. The ostium may be hypoplastic, slitlike, or of normal caliber. The
aberrant vessel may pass anteriorly, posteriorly, or between the aorta and
right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT); it may take an intramural course,
tunneling in the conal or interventricular septal tissue. Obstruction resulting from hypoplasia of the ostia, tunneling between the aorta and RVOT
or interventricular septum, and acute angulation produce myocardial ischemia and infarction. Although unobstructed vessels usually produce no

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2830 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 481.3  Classification of Coronary Anomalies Based
on Ischemia
ISCHEMIA

CLASSIFICATION

Absence of ischemia

Most anomalies (split RCA,
ectopic RCA from right cusp;
ectopic RCA from left cusp)

Episodic ischemia

Anomalous origin of a coronary
artery from the opposite sinus
(ACAOS); coronary artery
fistulas; myocardial bridge

Typical ischemia

Anomalous left coronary artery
from the pulmonary artery
(ALCAPA); coronary ostial
atresia or severe stenosis

RCA, Right coronary artery.
From Mehran R, Dangas GD. Coronary angiography and intravascular imaging.
In: Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, et al., eds. Braunwald’s Heart Disease, 11th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019: Fig. 20.8, p. 385.

symptoms (Table 481.3), patients with coronary obstruction may initially
present with an acute coronary event, either acute myocardial infarction,
ventricular arrhythmias, angina pectoris, or syncope; sudden death may
occur, especially in young athletes.
Diagnostic modalities include ECG, 2D echocardiography, CT or MRI,
radionuclide perfusion scan, and cardiac catheterization with selective
coronary angiography. Exercise stress testing can play an important role
in assessing risk (e.g., in patients who present only with chest pain), but
is usually contraindicated in those who present with a sudden cardiac
arrest, documented ischemia, or ventricular arrhythmia.
Treatment is indicated for obstructed vessels, for patients with symptoms, and for those who present with a sudden cardiac event and consists of reanastomosis of the aberrant vessel to the correct aortic sinus.
The management of asymptomatic patients with ectopic coronary origin without obstruction remains controversial, as the ability to predict
risk is still incompletely understood. Management decisions should be
based on the specific anatomy, results of laboratory investigations, and
shared decision-­making with patients and their families after careful
explanation of risks and benefits. Surgery is not without complications
and should be performed at centers experienced in AAOCA surgery.
The risk appears to be highest with anomalous LCA from the right
sinus of Valsalva with interarterial course (see Table 481.3); however,
there are patients with anomalous RCA who are also at risk.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

481.3 Pulmonary Arteriovenous Fistula
Daniel Bernstein
Fistulous vascular communications in the lungs may be large and localized
or multiple, scattered, and small. The most common form of this unusual
condition is Osler-­Weber-­Rendu syndrome (hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia type I), which is also associated with angiomas of the nasal and
buccal mucous membranes, gastrointestinal (GI) tract, or liver. Pathogenic
variants in the endoglin gene, a cell surface component of the transforming growth factor (TGF)-­β receptor complex, cause this syndrome. The
usual communication is between the pulmonary artery and pulmonary
vein; direct communication between the pulmonary artery and left atrium
is extremely rare. Desaturated blood in the pulmonary artery is shunted
through the fistula into the pulmonary vein, thus bypassing the lungs, and
then enters the left side of the heart, resulting in systemic arterial desaturation and sometimes clinically detectable cyanosis. The shunt across the
fistula is at low pressure and resistance, so pulmonary artery pressure is
normal; cardiomegaly and heart failure are not present.
The clinical manifestations depend on the magnitude of the shunt.
Large fistulas are associated with dyspnea, cyanosis, clubbing, a continuous murmur, and polycythemia. Hemoptysis is rare, but when it
occurs, it may be massive. Features of Osler-­Weber-­Rendu syndrome

are seen in approximately 50% of patients (or other family members)
and include recurrent epistaxis and GI tract bleeding. Transitory dizziness, diplopia, aphasia, motor weakness, or convulsions may result
from cerebral thrombosis, abscess, or paradoxical emboli. Soft systolic
or continuous murmurs may be audible over the site of the fistula. The
ECG is normal. Chest radiographs may show opacities produced by
large fistulas; multiple small fistulas may be visualized by fluoroscopy
(as abnormal pulsations), MRI, or CT. Selective pulmonary arteriography demonstrates the site, extent, and distribution of the fistulas.
Treatment consisting of excision of solitary or localized lesions by
lobectomy or wedge resection results in complete disappearance of
symptoms. In most patients, fistulas are so widespread that surgery
is not possible. Any direct communication between the pulmonary
artery and the left atrium can be obliterated.
Patients who have undergone a Glenn cavopulmonary anastomosis for cyanotic congenital heart disease (see Chapter 479.4) are also
at risk for the development of pulmonary arteriovenous malformations (AVMs). In these patients the AVMs are usually multiple, and the
risk increases over time after the Glenn procedure. Pulmonary AVMs
rarely occur after full palliation by completion of the Fontan operation. This finding suggests that the pulmonary circulation requires
an as-­yet-­undetermined hepatic factor to suppress the development
of AVMs. The hallmark of the development of pulmonary AVMs is a
gradual decrease in the patient’s oxygen saturation, which is usually
lower than normal to begin with. The diagnosis can often be made with
contrast echocardiography; cardiac catheterization is the definitive
test. Completion of the Fontan circuit, so that inferior vena cava blood
flow (containing hepatic venous drainage) is routed through the lungs,
usually results in improvement or resolution of the malformations.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

481.4 Ectopia Cordis
Daniel Bernstein
In the most common thoracic form of ectopia cordis, the sternum is
split and the heart protrudes outside the chest. In other forms, the heart
protrudes through the diaphragm into the abdominal cavity or may be
situated in the neck. Associated intracardiac anomalies are seen in 40%
(tetralogy of Fallot, conotruncal lesions). Pentalogy of Cantrell consists
of ectopia cordis, midline supraumbilical abdominal defect, deficiency
of the anterior diaphragm, defect of the lower sternum, and an intracardiac defect (ventricular septal defect, tetralogy of Fallot, or diverticulum
of the left ventricle). Death may occur early in life, usually from infection, cardiac failure, or hypoxemia. Surgical therapy for neonates without
overwhelmingly severe cardiac anomalies consists of covering the heart
with skin without compromising venous return or ventricular ejection.
Repair or palliation of associated defects is also necessary.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

481.5 Diverticulum of the Left Ventricle
Daniel Bernstein
Left ventricular diverticulum is a rare anomaly in which the diverticulum protrudes into the epigastrium. The lesion may be isolated or
associated with complex cardiovascular anomalies. A pulsating mass
is usually visible and palpable in the epigastrium. Systolic or systolic-­
diastolic murmurs produced by blood flow into and out of the diverticulum may be audible over the lower part of the sternum and the
mass. The ECG shows a pattern of complete or incomplete left bundle
branch block. The chest radiograph may or may not show the mass.
Associated abnormalities include defects of the sternum, abdominal
wall, diaphragm, and pericardium (see earlier). Surgical treatment
of the diverticulum and associated cardiac defects can be performed
in selected cases. Occasionally, a diverticulum may be small and not
associated with clinical signs or symptoms. These small diverticula are
diagnosed at echocardiographic examination for other indications.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 482 u Pulmonary Hypertension

Chapter 482

Pulmonary Hypertension
482.1 Primary Pulmonary Hypertension
Daniel Bernstein and Rachel K. Hopper
Pulmonary hypertension (PH) refers to an elevated pressure in the pulmonary arteries and is associated with significant morbidity and mortality in children. The etiologies of PH are varied, but all lead to similar
symptoms and can ultimately result in right-­sided heart failure (Tables
482.1 and 482.2). PH is often characterized by progressive vascular
disease of the pulmonary arteries (pulmonary arterial hypertension
[PAH], previously called primary PH). PH occurs at any age, although
in pediatric patients the mean age at diagnosis is 7-­10 years. In patients
with idiopathic or familial PAH, females outnumber males 1.7:1; in
other patients, both genders are represented equally. Pathogenic variants in the BMPR2 gene, a member of the transforming growth factor
(TGF)-­β receptor family, on chromosome 2q33 have been identified
in 70% of patients with familial pulmonary arterial hypertension
and in 10–20% with idiopathic sporadic PAH (see Table 482.2). Other
potential disease-­causing genes include ALK1 and ENG (both associated with hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia) and SMAD9, CAV1,
KCNK3, and SOX17 (associated with congenital heart disease and
PAH). TBX4 is associated with developmental lung disease and PAH.
Viral infection, such as with the vasculotropic human herpesvirus 8,
has been suggested as a trigger factor in some patients.
PAH is associated with precapillary obstruction of the pulmonary
vascular bed as a result of hyperplasia of the muscular and elastic tissues and a thickened intima of the small pulmonary arteries and arterioles (Fig. 482.1). Secondary remodeling may be found in the larger
pulmonary arteries as well. Pulmonary venoocclusive disease, mixed
precapillary and postcapillary vascular disease, may account for some
cases of PAH. Before a diagnosis of PAH can be made, other causes of
elevated pulmonary artery pressure must be eliminated; these include
chronic pulmonary parenchymal disease, persistent obstruction of the
upper airway, congenital cardiac malformations, left-­sided heart disease, recurrent pulmonary emboli, developmental lung disease, liver
disease, autoimmune disease, and moyamoya disease (see Table 482.1).
PAH accounts for nearly half of all pediatric PH (45%), with PAH associated with congenital heart disease being the most common in pediatric patients, followed by idiopathic or familial disease. PH associated
with chronic lung disease is growing to encompass a larger portion of
new cases, nearly half of all pediatric PH (49%). Bronchopulmonary
dysplasia related to prematurity and other developmental lung diseases
are increasingly recognized as contributing to PH in children (see
Table 482.2).
PH places an afterload burden on the right ventricle, which results in
right ventricular hypertrophy (RVH). Dilation of the pulmonary artery
is present, and pulmonary valve insufficiency may occur. In the later
stages of the disease, the right ventricle dilates, tricuspid insufficiency
develops as the tricuspid valve leaflets are pulled apart, and cardiac output is decreased. Arrhythmias, syncope, and sudden death are known
complications.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The predominant symptoms include exercise intolerance (dyspnea) and
fatigability; occasionally, precordial chest pain, dizziness, or headaches
are noted. Syncope may be noted in approximately 30% of pediatric
patients. Patients often undergo an incorrect evaluation and are treated
for asthma or seizures before a proper diagnosis is made. Peripheral
cyanosis may be present, especially during exercise or in patients with
a patent foramen ovale or other intracardiac communication through
which blood can shunt from right to left. In the late stages of disease,
patients may have cold extremities and a gray appearance associated

2831

with low cardiac output. Arterial oxygen-­hemoglobin saturation is
usually normal unless there is an associated intracardiac shunt. If right-­
sided heart failure has supervened, jugular venous pressure is elevated,
and hepatomegaly and edema are present. Jugular venous a waves are
present, and in those with functional tricuspid insufficiency, a conspicuous jugular cv wave and systolic hepatic pulsations are manifested.
The heart is moderately enlarged, and a right ventricular heave can be
noted. The first heart sound is often followed by an ejection click emanating from the dilated pulmonary artery. The second heart sound (S2)
is narrowly split, with a loud pulmonic component that is sometimes
booming in quality; it is frequently palpable at the upper left sternal
border. A presystolic (S4) gallop rhythm may be audible at the lower
left sternal border. The systolic murmur is soft and short and is sometimes followed by a blowing decrescendo diastolic murmur caused by
pulmonary insufficiency. In later stages, a holosystolic murmur of tricuspid insufficiency is appreciated at the lower left sternal border.

DIAGNOSIS

Chest radiographs reveal a prominent pulmonary artery and right ventricle (Fig. 482.2). The pulmonary vascularity in the hilar areas may
be prominent, in contrast to the peripheral lung fields in which pulmonary markings are decreased. The electrocardiogram (ECG) shows
RVH, often with spiked P waves. Echocardiography is used to screen
for any congenital cardiac malformations and assess right ventricular
size and function. Doppler evaluation of the tricuspid valve, if insufficiency is present, will allow estimation of the right ventricular (and
thus pulmonary arterial) systolic pressure.
At cardiac catheterization, the presence of left-­sided obstructive
lesions (pulmonary venous stenosis, mitral stenosis, restrictive cardiomyopathy) that result in pulmonary venous hypertension can be evaluated (see Chapters 476.9, 480.7, and 488.3). Elevated pulmonary artery
pressures with a normal pulmonary capillary wedge pressure and high
vascular resistance is diagnostic of PAH. If the wedge pressure is elevated and left ventricular end-­diastolic pressure (LVEDP) is normal,
obstruction at the level of the pulmonary veins, left atrium, or mitral
valve should be suspected. If LVEDP is also elevated, the diagnosis of
restrictive cardiomyopathy should be entertained. The risks associated
with cardiac catheterization are increased in severely ill patients with
PAH and should occur at centers with expertise in pediatric PH.

PROGNOSIS AND TREATMENT

Many forms of PAH are progressive, and no cure is currently available.
Figure 482.3 provides a general treatment approach to PH. Current
medical therapies are pulmonary vasodilatory agents, which relieve
symptoms, improve quality of life, and delay clinical worsening; however, they do not stop the progression of the disease. Some success
has been reported with oral calcium channel blockers (CCBs) such
as nifedipine in children who demonstrate pulmonary vasoreactivity
when these agents are administered during catheterization. Continuous intravenous infusion of the arachidonic acid metabolite prostacyclin (epoprostenol) provides relief as long as the infusion is continued
and has been shown to improve survival in children with PAH. Treprostinil, a prostacyclin analog with a longer half-­life, has also been shown
to be effective. Nebulized and oral forms of prostacyclin, as well as
other oral pulmonary vasodilators, such as endothelin receptor antagonists and phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors, have been used with
success in adults and in a small number of clinical studies in children
(Table 482.3). In patients with PH secondary to left-­sided heart disease or lung disease, pulmonary vasodilators should only be considered after optimization of the underlying condition and in consultation
with a PH expert.
Anticoagulation may be of value in patients with previous pulmonary thromboemboli; some of these patients may respond to balloon
angioplasty of narrowed pulmonary artery segments. Riociguat, a soluble guanylate cyclase stimulator, with vasorelaxation, antiproliferation,
and antifibrotic properties, has proved effective in adults with chronic
thromboembolic or idiopathic PH. Diuretics are often used to manage
right heart failure. Despite many advances, definitive therapy is still
lung transplantation (see Chapter 492.2). Palliative interventions may

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2832 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 482.1  Classification of Pulmonary Hypertension
(PH)*
1.	Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH)
1.1	Idiopathic PAH
1.2	Heritable PAH
1.3	Drug-­ and toxin-­induced PAH
1.4	PAH associated with:
1.4.1	Connective tissue disease
1.4.2	HIV infection
1.4.3	Portal hypertension
1.4.4	Congenital heart disease
1.4.5	Schistosomiasis
1.5	PAH long-­term responders to calcium channel blockers
1.6	PAH with overt features of venous/capillaries (PVOD/PCH)
involvement
1.7	Persistent PH of the newborn syndrome
2.	Pulmonary hypertension due to left heart disease
2.1	PH due to heart failure with preserved LVEF
2.2	PH due to heart failure with reduced LVEF
2.3	Valvular heart disease
2.4	Congenital/acquired cardiovascular conditions leading to
postcapillary PH
3.	Pulmonary hypertension due to lung diseases and/or hypoxia
3.1	Obstructive lung disease
3.2	Restrictive lung disease
3.3	Other lung disease with mixed restrictive/obstructive pattern
3.4	Hypoxia without lung disease
3.5	Developmental lung disorders
4.	PH due to pulmonary artery obstructions
4.1	Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension
4.2	Other pulmonary artery obstructions
5.	Pulmonary hypertension with unclear and/or multifactorial
mechanisms
5.1	Hematologic disorders
5.2	Systemic and metabolic disorders
5.3	Others
5.4	Complex congenital heart disease.
*Modified as compared with the Nice 2013 classification.
HIV, Human immunodeficiency virus; PVOD, pulmonary venoocclusive disease; PCH,
pulmonary capillary hemangiomatosis, LVEF, left ventricular ejection fraction.
From Simonneau G, Montani D, Celermajer DS, et al. Haemodynamic definitions
and updated clinical classification of pulmonary hypertension. Eur Respir J.
2019;53(1):1801913.

include atrial septostomy or a surgical Potts shunt to create a right-­to-­
left shunt as a pop-­off to allow decompression of the right ventricle (see
Fig. 482.3). In patients with severe PH and low cardiac output, the terminal event is often sudden and related to a lethal arrhythmia. Patients
with PH diagnosed in infancy, especially those in premature infants
with chronic lung disease, have a high risk of early mortality, but PH
generally improves over time if lung growth and protection from infection and injury are achieved. Infants with PH caused by pulmonary
vein stenosis often have rapid progression and high mortality.

482.2 Pulmonary Vascular Disease
(Eisenmenger Syndrome)
Daniel Bernstein and Rachel K. Hopper
The term Eisenmenger syndrome refers to patients with an intracardiac
defect or aortopulmonary connection through which blood is shunted

New vascular intimal
formation

Table 482.2  Developmental and Genetic Lung Diseases
Associated with Pulmonary Hypertension
Congenital diaphragmatic hernia
Bronchopulmonary dysplasia
Down syndrome
Noonan syndrome
Alveolar capillary dysplasia (ACD) with “misalignment of veins”
(FOXF1)
Cobalamin C deficiency
Lung hypoplasia, acinar dysplasia
Surfactant protein abnormalities
Surfactant protein B deficiency
Surfactant protein C deficiency
ATP-­binding cassette A3 variants
Thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1)/Nkx2.1 homeobox pathogenic
variants
T-­box transcription factor 4 (TBX4)
Pulmonary interstitial glycogenosis
Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis
Pulmonary lymphangiectasia
Other pathogenic variants (BMPR2, ACVRL1, EIF2AK4, CAV1, ENG,
KCNK3, SMAD9, SOX17)
Adapted with data from Rosenzweig EB, Abman SH, Adatia I, et al. Paediatric
pulmonary arterial hypertension: updates on definition, classification, diagnostics and
management. Eur Respir J. 2019;53(1):1801916; and Ivy DD, Abman SH, Barst RJ et al.
Pediatric pulmonary hypertension. J Amer Coll Cardiol. 2013;62(25):Suppl D, D118–
D126, 2013.

Fig. 482.1 Vascular abnormalities associated with pulmonary arterial

hypertension: abnormal muscularization of distal and medial precapillary arteries, loss of precapillary arteries, thickening of large pulmonary
arterioles, and new vascular intimal formation that is occlusive in vessels <500-­100 μM and in plexiform lesions therein. Adv. adventitial; EC,
endothelial cell; SMC, smooth muscle cell. (From Rabinovitch M. Molecular pathogenesis of pulmonary arterial hypertension. J Clin Invest.
2012;122:4306–4313, Fig 1.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 482 u Pulmonary Hypertension
partially or totally from right to left as a result of the development of
pulmonary vascular disease. This physiologic abnormality can occur
with unrepaired ventricular or atrioventricular septal defects, patent
ductus arteriosus, aortopulmonary window, or any other communication between the aorta and pulmonary artery and in many forms of
complex congenital heart disease with unrestricted pulmonary blood
flow. Pulmonary vascular disease with an isolated atrial septal defect
can occur, but this is less common and usually does not occur until late
in adulthood.

2833

In Eisenmenger syndrome, pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR)
after birth either remains high or, after having decreased during
early infancy, rises thereafter because of chronic increased shear
stress on pulmonary arterioles. Factors playing a role in the rapidity of development of pulmonary vascular disease include increased
pulmonary artery pressure, increased pulmonary blood flow, and
the presence of hypoxia or hypercapnia. Early in the course of disease, PH is the result of markedly increased pulmonary blood flow
(hyperkinetic PH). This form of PH decreases with the administration of pulmonary vasodilators such as nitric oxide, or oxygen,
or both. With the development of Eisenmenger syndrome, PH is
the result of pulmonary vascular disease (obstructive pathologic
changes in the pulmonary vessels). This form of PH is usually only
minimally responsive to pulmonary vasodilators or oxygen or may
be totally unresponsive.

PATHOLOGY AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
PT

RA
RV

A

B

Fig. 482.2 A, Radiograph from a 3-­yr-­old child with pulmonary ar-

terial hypertension. Pulmonary vascularity is reduced. The pulmonary
trunk (PT), right atrium (RA), and right ventricle (RV) are considerably
enlarged. B, Histology of an intrapulmonary artery at necropsy shows
medial hypertrophy (arrow). (From Perloff JK, Marelli AJ. Perloff’s Clinical Recognition of Congenital Heart Disease, 6th ed. Philadelphia:
Saunders; 2012: Fig. 14-­17, p. 207.)

The pathologic changes of Eisenmenger syndrome occur in the
small pulmonary arterioles and muscular arteries (<300 μm) and are
graded on the basis of histologic characteristics (Heath-­Edwards
classification):
• Grade I change involves medial hypertrophy alone.
• Grade II consists of medial hypertrophy and intimal hyperplasia.
• Grade III involves near-­obliteration of the vessel lumen.
• Grade IV includes arterial dilation.
• Grades V and VI include plexiform lesions, angiomatoid formation,
and fibrinoid necrosis.
Grades IV-­VI indicate irreversible pulmonary vascular obstructive disease. Eisenmenger physiology is usually defined by an absolute
elevation in pulmonary arterial resistance to >12 Wood units (resistance units indexed to body surface area) or by a ratio of pulmonary-­
to-­systemic vascular resistance of ≥1.0.
Pulmonary vascular disease occurs more rapidly in patients with
trisomy 21 who have left-­to-­right shunts. It also complicates the
natural history of patients with elevated pulmonary venous pressure secondary to mitral stenosis or left ventricular dysfunction,

Expert referral

General: Consider diuretics,
oxygen, anticoagulation, digoxin

Acute vasoreactivity testing
+

Positive

–

Negative

Oral CCB

Lower risk

Higher risk

Improved and
sustained
reactivity

ERA or PDE5i (oral)
Oral/inhaled prostacyclin/prostacyclin agonist
Consider combination therapy
(sequential or upfront)

Epoprostenol or
treprostinil (i.v./s.c.)
Consider early combination

No

Yes
Continue
CCB

Serial reassessment#

Atrial
septostomy

Potts shunt
Lung
transplant

Fig. 482.3 6th World Symposium on Pulmonary Hypertension Consensus pediatric idiopathic/familial PAH treatment algorithm. Use of all agents

is considered off-­label in children aside from sildenafil in Europe and bosentan in age >3 yr in the United States. CCB, Calcium channel blocker;
ERA, endothelin receptor antagonist; PAH, pulmonary arterial hypertension; IV, intravenous; PDE-­5i, phosphodiesterase-­5 inhibitor; SC, subcutaneous; PO, by mouth; #, deterioration or not meeting treatment goals. (From Rosenzweig EB, Abman SH, Adatia I, et al. Paediatric pulmonary arterial
hypertension: updates on definition, classification, diagnostics and management. Eur Respir J. 2019;53[1]:1801916.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2834 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 482.3  Summary of Drugs Used to Treat Pulmonary Hypertension*
DRUG AND MECHANISM OF ACTION

DOSES USED IN PEDIATRIC STUDIES

COMMON SIDE EFFECTS

Epoprostenol (prostacyclin [PGI2], a
potent vasodilator; also inhibits platelet
aggregation)

1-­2 ng/kg/min initially
Increase based on clinical course and
tolerance to 5-­80 ng/kg/min
Some patients may require even higher doses
Must be given by continuous infusion that is
not interrupted

Flushing, headache, nausea, diarrhea,
hypotension, chest pain, jaw pain, foot and
bone pain

Iloprost (synthetic analog of PGI2)

2.5-­5.0 μg 6-­9 times daily (limited data in
children ) via inhalation

Flushing, headache, diarrhea, hypotension, jaw
pain, exacerbation of pulmonary symptoms
(cough, wheezing)

Treprostinil (synthetic analog of PGI2)

1-­2 ng/kg/min initially
Target dose ranges from 20-­80 ng/kg/min
Given either IV or SC via continuous infusion
Longer half-­life than epoprostenol
Inhaled: 6-­54 mcg (1-­9 patient activated
breaths) every 6 hr
Oral: initially 0.125 mg 3 times daily
Target dose ranges from 1 to 10 mg 3 times
daily

Flushing, headache, diarrhea, hypotension,
jaw pain
Pain at infusion site when given SC
Inhaled form can exacerbate reactive airway
symptoms
Increased gastrointestinal side effects with oral
formulation

Selexipag (prostacyclin IP receptor agonist)

50-­1600 mcg PO twice daily; limited data in
children

Headache, pain in jaw, joints or limbs,
myalgias, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea,
flushing

Ambrisentan (selective endothelin EtA
receptor antagonist)

Target dose ranges from 1.25 to 10 mg daily;
use ½ dose for first mo

Flushing, headache, hypotension, fluid
retention/edema, nasopharyngitis/
congestion, vomiting; teratogenicity risk

Bosentan (nonselective endothelin receptor
EtA and EtB antagonist)

Starting dose: 0.3-­1 mg/kg/dose twice daily
PO for first mo
For patients <10 kg: max. 2 mg/kg/dose twice
daily; 10-­20 kg: max. 2 mg/kg/dose twice
daily (32 mg tablets); 20-­40 kg: 62.5 mg/dose
twice daily; >40 kg: 125 mg/dose twice daily

Flushing, headache, hypotension,
nasopharyngitis/congestion, fluid retention,
edema, vomiting, anemia, elevated
transaminases (monthly LFTs required);
teratogenicity risk.
Caution in concomitant use of CYP3A4
inducers and inhibitors

Macitentan (nonselective endothelin receptor
EtA and EtB antagonist)

5-­10 mg daily PO; limited data in children

Flushing, headache, fluid retention/edema,
anemia, nasopharyngitis/congestion;
teratogenicity risk.

Sildenafil (phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitor)

0.5-1 mg/kg/dose given 3-­4 times daily PO
For 10-­20 kg, use 10 mg 3 times daily; >20 kg,
20 mg 3 times daily
Initial dosing should be ½ final target dose to
evaluate for hypotension

Flushing, headache, dyspepsia, diarrhea,
hypotension, priapism, visual disturbance
(blue coloration), tinnitus

Tadalafil (phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitor)

1 mg/kg/dose given daily PO
Maximum adult dose 40 mg daily
Initial dosing should be ½ final target dose to
evaluate for hypotension

Similar to sildenafil

Riociguat (soluble guanylate cyclase
stimulator)

Limited pediatric data
Starting adult dose 1 mg tid, can increase to
maximum 2.5 mg tid

Hypotension, headache, dizziness, dyspepsia
Use with PDE5 inhibitors contraindicated

Calcium channel blockers (amlodipine,
diltiazem, nifedipine)

Previously widely used, now indicated only
for patients who show a strong response to
nitric oxide during cardiac catheterization

Flushing, headache, edema, arrhythmia,
headache, hypotension, rash, nausea,
constipation, elevated LFTs

*Modified as compared with the Nice 2013 classification.
Note: These medications should only be administered under the direction of a specialist in pulmonary hypertension.
cGMP, Cyclic guanosine monophosphate; IV, Intravenously; LFT, liver function test; SC, subcutaneously.

especially in those with restrictive cardiomyopathy (see Chapter
488.3). Pulmonary vascular disease can also occur in any patient
with transmission of systemic pressure to the pulmonary circulation via a shunt at the interventricular or great vessel level and
in patients chronically exposed to low partial pressure of oxygen
(because of high altitude). Patients with cyanotic congenital heart
lesions associated with unrestricted pulmonary blood flow are at
particularly high risk.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Symptoms do not usually develop until the second or third decade
of life, although a more fulminant course may occur. Intracardiac
or extracardiac communications that would normally shunt from
left to right are converted to right-­to-­left shunting as PVR exceeds
systemic vascular resistance. Cyanosis becomes apparent, and dyspnea, fatigue, and a tendency toward dysrhythmias begin to occur.
In the late stages of the disease, heart failure, chest pain, headaches,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 483 u General Principles of Treatment of Congenital Heart Disease
syncope, and hemoptysis may be seen. Physical examination reveals
a right ventricular heave and a narrowly split S2 with a loud pulmonic component. Palpable pulmonary artery pulsation may be
present at the left upper sternal border. A holosystolic murmur of
tricuspid regurgitation may be audible along the left sternal border.
An early decrescendo diastolic murmur of pulmonary insufficiency
may also be heard along the left sternal border. The degree of cyanosis depends on the stage of the disease. Clubbing of the distal
digits may be seen in late disease as a result of chronic hypoxia.

DIAGNOSIS

On chest radiograph, the heart varies in size from normal to greatly
enlarged; the latter usually occurs late in the course of the disease. The
main pulmonary artery is generally prominent, similar to other causes
of PAH (see Fig. 482.2A). The pulmonary vessels are enlarged in the
hilar areas and taper rapidly in caliber in the peripheral branches. The
right ventricle and atrium are prominent. The ECG shows marked
RVH. The P wave may be tall and spiked. Cyanotic patients have various degrees of polycythemia that depend on the severity and duration
of hypoxemia.
The echocardiogram shows a thick-­walled right ventricle and
demonstrates the underlying congenital heart lesion. 2D echocardiography assists in eliminating from consideration lesions such
as obstructed pulmonary veins, supramitral membrane, mitral
stenosis, and restrictive cardiomyopathy. Doppler studies demonstrate the direction of the intracardiac shunt and the presence of a
typical hypertension waveform in the main pulmonary artery. Tricuspid and pulmonary regurgitation can be used in the Doppler
examination to estimate pulmonary artery systolic and diastolic
pressures.
Cardiac catheterization usually shows a bidirectional shunt at the
site of the defect. Systolic pressure is generally equal in the systemic
and pulmonary circulations. Pulmonary capillary wedge pressure is
normal unless a left-­sided heart obstructive lesion or left ventricular
failure is the cause of the PAH. Arterial oxygen-­hemoglobin saturation is decreased depending on the magnitude of the right-­to-­left
shunt. The response to vasodilator therapy (oxygen, prostacyclin,
nitric oxide) may identify patients with less severe disease. Selective
pulmonary artery injections may be necessary if pulmonary venous
obstruction is suspected because of high wedge pressure and low
LVEDP.

TREATMENT

The best management for patients who are at risk for the development of late pulmonary vascular disease is prevention by early
surgical elimination of large intracardiac or great vessel communications during infancy. Some patients may be missed because they
have not shown early clinical manifestations. Rarely, PVR never
decreases at birth in these infants, and therefore they never acquire
enough left-­to-­right shunting to become clinically apparent. Such
delayed recognition is a particular risk in patients with congenital
heart disease who live at high altitude. It is also a risk in infants
with trisomy 21, who have a propensity for earlier development of
pulmonary vascular disease. Because of the high incidence of congenital heart disease associated with trisomy 21, routine echocardiography is recommended at the time of initial diagnosis, even in
the absence of other clinical findings.
Medical treatment of Eisenmenger syndrome is primarily symptomatic. Many patients benefit substantially from either oral (CCBs,
endothelin antagonist, phosphodiesterase inhibitors) or chronic
continuous intravenous (prostacyclin) therapy. Combined heart-­
lung or bilateral lung transplantation is the only surgical option for
many of these patients (see Chapter 492.2). Heart-­lung transplantation may be the option if there is associated complex congenital
heart disease.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

2835

Chapter 483

General Principles of
Treatment of Congenital
Heart Disease
Daniel Bernstein
Most patients who have minor congenital heart lesions do not require
treatment. The parents and child should be made aware that a normal
life is expected and that no restriction of the child’s activities is necessary. Overprotective parents may use the presence of a minor congenital heart lesion or even a functional heart murmur as a means to
exert excessive control over their child’s activities. Although fears may
not be expressed overtly, the child may become anxious regarding early
death or debilitation, especially when an adult member of the family
acquires unrelated symptomatic heart disease. The family may have
an unexpressed fear of sudden death, and the rarity of this manifestation should be emphasized in discussions directed at improving their
understanding of the child’s congenital heart defect. General health
maintenance, including a well-­balanced “heart-­healthy” diet, aerobic
exercise, and avoidance of smoking, should be encouraged.
Even patients with moderate to severe congenital heart disease
(CHD) need not be restricted from all physical activity, although many
will tend to limit their own activities. Physical education should be
modified appropriately to the child’s capacity to participate; the extent
of such modification can be guided by formal exercise testing in an
appropriately equipped pediatric exercise laboratory. Although competitive sports for some patients may need to be discouraged, decisions are made on an individual basis. The influence of coach and peer
pressure should be considered when recommending competitive vs
noncompetitive athletics. Many cardiologists will also prohibit certain
high-­impact activities (“collision sports”) such as tackle football or
contact martial arts in patients who have had prior open heart surgery.
Routine immunizations should be given, with the inclusion of
influenza vaccine during the appropriate season. Vaccination against
the SARS-­CoV-­2 virus has been recommended for children with heart
disease who are eligible based on age. Prophylaxis against respiratory
syncytial virus (RSV) is recommended during RSV season in young
infants with unrepaired CHD and significant hemodynamic abnormalities or in those with cardiomyopathy and heart failure. Careful
consideration of the timing of administration of live-­virus vaccination
is required in patients who are potential candidates for heart or heart-­
lung transplantation, and these patients cannot receive live-­virus vaccines after they have received their transplant.
Bacterial infections should be treated vigorously. Prophylaxis
against bacterial endocarditis should be carried out during dental
procedures for appropriate patients (see Chapter 486).
Cyanotic patients need to be monitored for noncardiac manifestations of oxygen deficiency (Table 483.1); however, it is rare today for a
patient to remain significantly cyanotic beyond the first few years of life,
although mild degrees of cyanosis may be seen in patients with a single
ventricle (e.g., hypoplastic left heart) who have a fenestration in their
Fontan conduits allowing right-­to-­left shunting. These patients should
be carefully observed for excessive polycythemia. Cyanotic patients
should avoid situations where dehydration may occur, which leads to
increased viscosity and increases the risk of stroke. Diuretics may need
to be decreased or temporarily discontinued during episodes of acute
gastroenteritis or during excessively hot weather. High altitudes and
sudden changes in the thermal environment should also be avoided.
Treatment of iron deficiency is important in cyanotic patients, who

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2836 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 483.1  Extracardiac Complications of Cyanotic Congenital Heart Disease and Eisenmenger Physiology
PROBLEM

ETIOLOGY

THERAPY

Polycythemia

Persistent hypoxia

Phlebotomy if symptomatic

Relative anemia

Nutritional deficiency

Iron replacement

CNS abscess

Right-­to-­left shunting

Antibiotics, drainage

CNS thromboembolic stroke

Right-­to-­left shunting or polycythemia

Anticoagulation, phlebotomy

Low-­grade DIC, thrombocytopenia

Polycythemia

None for DIC unless bleeding, then
phlebotomy

Hemoptysis

Pulmonary infarct, thrombosis, or rupture of
pulmonary artery plexiform lesion

Embolization

Plastic bronchitis

Fontan procedure

Bronchoscopy, vascular coiling, lymphatic
ablation

Gum disease

Polycythemia, gingivitis, bleeding

Dental hygiene

Gout

Polycythemia, diuretic agent

Allopurinol

Arthritis, clubbing

Hypoxic osteoarthropathy

None

Pregnancy complications: miscarriage, fetal
growth retardation, prematurity increase,
maternal illness

Poor placental perfusion, poor ability to
increase cardiac output

Pregnancy prevention counseling, high-­risk
obstetric management

Infections

Associated asplenia, DiGeorge syndrome,
endocarditis

Antibiotics

Fatal RSV pneumonia with pulmonary
hypertension

RSV monoclonal antibodies* (prevention)

Failure to thrive

Increased oxygen consumption, decreased
nutrient intake

Treat heart failure; correct defect early;
increase caloric intake

Protein-­losing enteropathy

s/p Fontan; high right-­sided pressures

Oral budesonide or sildenafil

Chylothorax

Injury to thoracic duct

Medium-­chain triglyceride diet
Octreotide
Surgical ligation of thoracic duct

Neurodevelopmental disabilities

Chronic hypoxia, cardiac surgery, genetic

Early school-­based evaluation and intervention

Psychosocial adjustment

Limited activity, cyanotic appearance, chronic
disease, multiple hospitalizations

Counseling

*Palivizumab, nirsevimab.
CNS, Central nervous system; DIC, disseminated intravascular coagulation; RSV, respiratory syncytial virus; s/p, status post (after).

may have a low mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration despite
polycythemia. The risk of stroke for these patients can be reduced if the
red blood cells are not microcytic. Phlebotomy with partial exchange
transfusion is carried out only in symptomatic patients with severe
polycythemia (usually those with hematocrit >65%).
Patients with moderate to severe forms of CHD or a history of
rhythm disturbance should be carefully monitored during anesthesia
for even routine surgical or dental procedures. Consultation with an
anesthesiologist experienced in the care of children with CHD is recommended even if the surgical procedure is not cardiac related.
Females with unrepaired severe CHD should be counseled on the risks
associated with childbearing and on the use of contraceptives and other
methods to prevent pregnancy (see Chapter 483.1). Females with mild
to moderate CHD and many who have had corrective surgery can have
normal pregnancies, although those with residual hemodynamic derangements or with systemic right ventricles (RVs) should be followed by a high-­
risk perinatologist and a cardiologist with expertise in caring for adults
with CHD. Pregnancy may be highly dangerous to both mother and fetus
for patients with palliated (rather than repaired) complex CHD, chronic
cyanosis, or pulmonary arterial hypertension; for patients with a Fontan
circulation, the miscarriage rate has been reported as ranging from 27% to
50% and the rate of prematurity at 69%. Risks to the mother include heart
failure, thromboembolism, and arrhythmia. Several risk stratification
schemes have been developed for pregnant women with CHD, including
the Cardiac Disease in Pregnancy (CARPREG) score, the Zwangerschap bij Aangeboren HARtAfwijkingen (ZAHARA) score, and the World

Health Organization (WHO) classification. Based on the WHO system,
patients for whom pregnancy is associated with increased risk of mortality
or morbidity include those with a systemic RV (e.g., corrected transposition with good function), Fontan circulation, repaired coarctation of the
aorta bicuspid aortic valve with enlarged aortic root of 45-­50 mm, Marfan
syndrome with enlarged aortic root of 40-­45 mm, atrioventricular septal
defects, moderate mitral stenosis, severe aortic stenosis, and mechanical
valve replacement. Patients for whom pregnancy is considered contraindicated include those with pulmonary arterial hypertension, Ehlers-­Danlos
syndrome, severe recoarctation of the aorta, Fontan circulation with any
complications, severe aortic or mitral stenosis, severe aortic dilation, and
systemic ventricular dysfunction with ejection fraction <30%.

POSTOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT

After successful open heart surgery, the severity of the congenital heart
defect, the age and condition (nutritional status) of the patient before surgery, the events in the operating room (OR), and the quality of the postoperative care influence the patient’s course. Intraoperative factors that
influence survival and that should be noted when a patient returns from
the OR include the duration of cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB), duration
of aortic cross-­clamping (time the heart is not being perfused), and duration of profound hypothermia (used in some newborns; time the entire
body is not being perfused). Surgical techniques to provide ongoing perfusion to the upper body and brain even during surgery on the aortic arch
(e.g., in hypoplastic left heart syndrome [HLHS]) have eliminated the use
of profound hypothermia in many centers.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 483 u General Principles of Treatment of Congenital Heart Disease
Immediate postoperative care should be provided in an intensive
care unit (ICU) staffed by a team of physicians, nurses, and technicians
experienced with the unique problems encountered after open heart
surgery in childhood. In most major centers, this occurs in a dedicated
pediatric cardiovascular ICU. Preparation for postoperative monitoring begins in the OR, where the anesthesiologist or surgeon places an
arterial catheter to allow direct arterial pressure measurements and
arterial sampling for blood gas determination. A central venous catheter is also placed for measuring central venous pressure and for infusions of cardioactive medications. In more complex cases, right or left
atrial or pulmonary artery catheters may be inserted directly into these
cardiac structures and used for pressure monitoring purposes. Temporary pacing wires are placed on the atrium or ventricle, or both, in case
temporary postoperative heart block occurs. Transcutaneous oximetry provides for continuous monitoring of arterial oxygen saturation.
Near-­infrared spectroscopy is used to monitor cerebral and other end-­
organ perfusion in the perioperative period.
Functional failure of one organ system may cause profound physiologic
and biochemical changes in another. Respiratory insufficiency, for example, leads to hypoxia, hypercapnia, and acidosis, which in turn compromise cardiac, vascular, and renal function. The latter problems cannot be
managed successfully until adequate ventilation is reestablished. Thus it is
essential that the primary source of each postoperative problem be identified and treated.
Respiratory failure is a serious postoperative complication encountered after open heart surgery. CPB performed in the presence of
pulmonary congestion results in decreased lung compliance, copious
tracheal and bronchial secretions, atelectasis, and increased breathing
effort. Because fatigue and subsequently hypoventilation and acidosis
may rapidly ensue, mechanical positive pressure endotracheal ventilation is usually continued after open heart surgery for a minimum of
several hours in relatively stable patients and for up to 2-­3 days or longer in severely ill patients, especially infants. Protocols for early extubation have been successfully used in older children with uncomplicated
intraoperative courses. Patients with certain congenital heart lesions,
particularly those with DiGeorge syndrome, may also have airway
abnormalities (micrognathia, tracheomalacia, bronchomalacia) that
can make both ventilation and extubation more difficult.
The electrocardiogram (ECG) should be monitored continuously
during the postoperative period. A change in heart rate, even without
arrhythmia, may be the first indication of a serious complication such
as hemorrhage, hypothermia, hypoventilation, or heart failure. Cardiac rhythm disorders must be diagnosed quickly because a prolonged
untreated arrhythmia may add a severe hemodynamic burden to the
heart in the critical early postoperative period (see Chapter 484). Injury
to the heart’s conduction system during surgery can result in postoperative complete heart block. This complication is usually temporary and
is treated with surgically placed pacing wires that can later be removed.
Occasionally, complete heart block is permanent. If heart block persists
beyond 10-­14 days postoperatively, insertion of a permanent pacemaker
is required. Tachyarrhythmias are a common problem in postoperative
patients. Junctional ectopic tachycardia (JET) can be a particularly troublesome rhythm to manage, although it usually responds to antiarrhythmic medications such as intravenous amiodarone.
Heart failure with poor cardiac output after cardiac surgery may be
secondary to respiratory failure, serious arrhythmias, myocardial injury,
blood loss, hypovolemia, a significant residual hemodynamic abnormality,
or any combination of these factors. Treatment specific to the cause should
be instituted. Catecholamines, phosphodiesterase inhibitors, nitroprusside and other afterload-­reducing agents, and diuretics are the cardioactive
agents most often used in patients with myocardial dysfunction in the early
postoperative period (see Chapter 491). Postoperative pulmonary hypertension can be managed with hyperventilation and inhaled nitric oxide
(iNO). In the rare patients who are unresponsive to standard pharmacologic treatment, various ventricular assist devices are available, depending
on the patient’s size. If pulmonary function is adequate, a left ventricular
assist device (LVAD) may be used. If pulmonary function is inadequate,
biventricular assist devices (BVAD) or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) may be used. These extraordinary measures are helpful

2837

in maintaining the circulation until cardiac function improves, usually
within 2-­5 days. They have also been used as a bridge to transplantation in
patients with severe nonremitting postoperative cardiac failure.
Acidosis secondary to low cardiac output, renal failure, or hypovolemia
must be prevented or, if present, promptly corrected. Serial monitoring
of arterial blood gases (ABGs) and lactate concentrations is performed.
A low arterial pH may be a sign of decreased perfusion, and acidosis can
worsen cardiac function and may be the forerunner of arrhythmias or cardiac arrest.
Renal function may be compromised by congestive heart failure and
further impaired by prolonged CPB. Blood and fluid replacement, cardiac inotropic agents, and vasodilators will usually reestablish normal
urine flow in patients with hypovolemia or cardiac failure. Renal failure
secondary to tubular injury contributes to postoperative fluid overload
and may require temporary peritoneal or hemodialysis or hemofiltration. With attention paid to renal injury during the perioperative period,
the incidence and severity of chronic renal failure can be reduced.
Neurologic abnormalities can develop after CPB, especially in the
neonatal period. Seizures may occur when the patient awakens from sedation and can usually be controlled with anticonvulsant medications. In
the absence of other neurologic signs, self-­limited isolated seizures in the
immediate postoperative period usually carry a good long-­term prognosis.
Thromboembolism and stroke are rarer but serious complications of open
heart surgery. In the long term, both subtle and more substantial learning
disabilities may develop. Patients who have undergone surgery entailing
CPB, especially in the newborn period, should be watched carefully during
their early school years for signs of mild to moderate learning disabilities
or attention deficit disorders, which are often amenable to early remedial
intervention. The risk is higher in patients who have undergone repair
using hypothermic total circulatory arrest than in those where systemic
blood flow is maintained using CPB. With the increased recognition of the
genetic link between CHD and moderate or greater neurodevelopmental
delay, many of these cases may have multifactorial etiologies.
Postpericardiotomy syndrome may occur toward the end of the
first postoperative week or may sometimes be delayed until weeks or
months after surgery (Table 483.2). This febrile illness is characterized by fever, decreased appetite, listlessness, nausea, and vomiting.
Chest pain is not always present, so a high index of suspicion should
be maintained in any recently postoperative patient. Echocardiography is diagnostic. In most instances, postpericardiotomy syndrome is
self-­limited; when pericardial fluid accumulates rapidly, the potential
danger of cardiac tamponade should be recognized (see Chapter 489).
Table 483.2  Postpericardiotomy Syndrome (PPS)
Findings
FINDING

PERCENTAGE

SYMPTOMS
Pleuritic or pericarditic chest pain
Intermittent, low-­grade fever

>50
∼50

CLINICAL FINDINGS
Pericardial friction rub
Elevated C-­reactive protein (CRP)
Elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)
Leukocytosis
Electrocardiogram (ECG): low voltage of
the QRS, T-­wave inversion, ST elevation or
depression
IMAGING
Chest x-­ray: pleural effusion
Heart echocardiography: pericardial effusion
Mild (<10 mm)
Moderate (10-­20 mm)
Large (>20 mm)
Pleuropericardial involvement

20–30
80–90
80–90
80–90
∼50

>90
∼90
∼75*
∼10*
∼5
>80

*Of all PPS patients
From Lehto J, Kiviniemi T. Postpericardiotomy syndrome after cardiac surgery. Ann
Med. 2020;52(6):243–264, Table 1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2838 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Rarely, arrhythmias may also occur. Symptomatic patients usually
respond to salicylates, indomethacin, or colchicine and bed rest. Occasionally, corticosteroid therapy or pericardiocentesis is required. Late
recurrences are rare and can lead to chronic pericarditis.
Hemolysis of mechanical origin is seen, although rarely, after repair
of certain cardiac defects, for example, atrioventricular septal defects
(AVSDs), or after the insertion of a mechanical prosthetic valve. It is
caused by unusual turbulence of blood at increased pressure. Reoperation
may be necessary in rare patients with severe and progressive hemolysis
who require frequent blood transfusions, but in most cases the problem
slowly regresses.
Infection is another potentially serious postoperative problem.
Patients usually receive a broad-­spectrum antibiotic for the initial
postoperative period. Potential sites of infection include the lungs
(generally related to postoperative atelectasis), the subcutaneous tissues at the incision site, the sternum, and the urinary tract (especially
after an indwelling catheter has been in place). Sepsis with infective
endocarditis is an infrequent complication and can be difficult to manage, especially if prosthetic material was placed at surgery (see Chapter
486). Patients who undergo CPB during a viral infection, even if mild,
can develop severe complications; therefore many anesthesiologists
will postpone elective surgery if a child presents with a viral infection,
either upper respiratory or gastrointestinal.

INTERSTAGE MANAGEMENT

One group of infants at particularly high risk for both morbidity and
mortality are those who have completed their first-­stage Norwood
or Sano palliation for HLHS and are awaiting the next stage (Glenn
shunt) of their three-­stage palliation. Mortality in this group of infants
had been reported as high as 10–15%, motivating the National Pediatric Cardiology Quality Improvement Collaborative (NPC-­QIC) to
develop an interstage home monitoring program that has been successful in reducing interstage mortality by 44%.

Physical limitations in patients with CHD are variable, ranging from
minimal to none in patients with physiologic correction to mild to
moderate in patients with palliative procedures. The extent to which a
patient should be allowed to participate in athletics, both recreational
and competitive, can best be determined by the cardiologist, often with
formal cardiopulmonary exercise testing (see Chapter 472.5).
Long-­term morbidities affecting neurologic function and behavior
are influenced by many factors, including the effects of any genetic
alterations on the developing central nervous system (CNS). There may
be a greater role for prenatal CNS abnormalities (anatomic, genetic, or
secondary lesions caused by alterations in fetal cerebral blood flow or
oxygenation); these include microcephaly, cerebral atrophy, and altered
cerebral biochemistry. Chronic hypoxemia and failure to thrive may
also influence the developing brain, and there is evidence that the type
of intervention required (CPB, hypothermic total circulatory arrest,
catheter-­based therapy) plays a substantial role. Data from the Pediatric Cardiac Genomics Consortium have shown that there is also
a genetic component to these learning disabilities. Performing exome
sequencing on patients and their parents (trios), de novo gene variants were found in 2% of patients with CHD but in 20% of patients
with CHD and neurodevelopmental delay. The identity of these gene
variants and their mechanism of action is under study. In general, in
the absence of a significant genetic syndrome or major perioperative
complication, most children function at a fairly high level after repair
of congenital heart defects and are able to attend regular school. Group
mean scores on standard cognitive tests are no different from the general population; however, some areas appear to be more at risk than
others, including certain aspects of motor function, speech, visual-­
motor tracking, and phonologic awareness. Awareness of these potential issues is critical to obtaining prompt remedial assistance if a child
is found to be struggling in school.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

LONG-­TERM MANAGEMENT

Patients who have undergone surgery for CHD can be divided into
three major categories: lesions for which total repair has been achieved;
lesions for which both anatomic and physiologic corrections have been
achieved; and lesions for which only palliation, although potentially
long term, has been achieved. There is some disagreement among cardiologists as to exactly in which category a particular congenital heart
lesion might fall, and to some degree every case should be considered
individually. Many argue that only for isolated patent ductus arteriosus
(PDA) is total repair really achieved, with no requirement for long-­term
follow-­up. Patients who are able to undergo anatomic and physiologic
correction include many of the left-­to-­right shunt lesions (atrial and
ventricular septal defects) and milder forms of obstructive lesions (e.g.,
valvar pulmonic stenosis, some forms of valvar aortic stenosis, coarctation of aorta) and some forms of cyanotic heart disease (e.g., uncomplicated tetralogy of Fallot, simple transposition of great arteries). These
patients usually have achieved total or near-­total physiologic correction
of their lesion; however, they are still at some risk of long-­term sequelae,
including late heart failure or arrhythmia, or recurrence of a significant
physiologic abnormality (e.g., recoarctation of aorta, worsening mitral
regurgitation in patients with AVSDs, long-­standing pulmonary regurgitation in patients with tetralogy of Fallot repaired with transannular
patch). These patients require regular follow-­up with a pediatric cardiologist (and, when old enough, with an adult congenital heart disease specialist; see Chapter 483.1); however, their long-­term prognosis
is generally very good, although some will require repeat surgeries or
catheter-­based interventions. Patients with more complex lesions, such
as those with single-­ventricle physiology (e.g., hypoplastic left or right
heart syndrome), are at much higher risk of long-­term sequelae and
require even closer follow-­up. These patients, particularly those who
have undergone the Fontan procedure, are at risk long-­term for arrhythmia, thrombosis, protein-­losing enteropathy, plastic bronchitis, hepatic
dysfunction (Fontan-­associated liver disease or FALD), renal dysfunction, and heart failure. Some may eventually require heart, heart-­liver, or
heart-­kidney transplantation.

483.1 Congenital Heart Disease in Adults
Salil Ginde and Michael G. Earing
Approximately 90% of children with CHD survive to adulthood. More
adults than children are living with CHD in the United States, with a
5% increase every year. In the past decade, 35% of hospitalizations for
CHD were patients older than 18 years (mean age: 55 years).

LONG-­TERM MEDICAL CONSIDERATIONS

Approximately 25% of adults with CHD have a mild form that has
allowed them to survive into adulthood without surgical or interventional cardiac catheterization. The most common lesions in this
category include mild aortic valve stenosis (usually in the setting of
a bicuspid aortic valve), small restrictive ventricular septal defects
(VSDs), mild pulmonary valve stenosis, and mitral valve prolapse
(Table 483.3). These patients need less frequent follow-­up to assess
for progression of disease and to identify associated complications.
Many adults with CHD living in the United States are patients who
have had previous intervention (Table 483.4). Although most children
who undergo surgical intervention will survive to adulthood, with few
exceptions, total correction is not the rule. The few exceptions include
PDA, VSDs, and atrial septal defects (ASDs); this is true only if they are
closed early, before the development of irreversible pulmonary vascular changes, and if no residual lesions exist.
It has become apparent that even the simplest congenital heart lesions
can be associated with long-­term complications, including both cardiac
and noncardiac problems (Tables 483.5 and 483.6 and Fig. 483.1). Cardiac
complications include arrhythmias and conduction defects, ventricular
dysfunction, residual shunts, valvular lesions (regurgitation and stenosis), hypertension, and aneurysms. Noncardiac sequelae (comorbidities)
include pulmonary, renal, and hepatic dysfunction that is caused either
directly or indirectly by the underlying CHD. Abnormal pulmonary function most often presents as restrictive lung physiology and likely results

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 483 u General Principles of Treatment of Congenital Heart Disease

2839

Table 483.3  Congenital Heart Defects Associated with
Survival into Adulthood Without Surgery or
Interventional Cardiac Catheterization

Table 483.6  Adolescent Transition Issues Requiring
Coordination of Patient Care Between the
Cardiologist and Primary Care Physician

Mild pulmonary valve stenosis
Bicuspid aortic valve
Small to moderate-­sized atrial septal defect
Small ventricular septal defect
Small patent ductus arteriosus
Mitral valve prolapse
Partial atrioventricular canal (ostium primum atrial septal defect and
cleft mitral valve)
Marfan syndrome
Ebstein anomaly
Congenitally corrected transposition (atrioventricular and
ventriculoarterial discordance)

Antibiotic prophylaxis for endocarditis
Medications and drug interactions
Anticoagulation with prosthetic valves
Exercise and sports participation
Educational and vocational planning
Contraception and pregnancy
Drug, alcohol, and tobacco use
Noncardiac surgical planning
Anesthetic issues
New symptoms or acute illnesses
Comorbid conditions
Travel

Table 483.4  Most Common Congenital Heart Defects
in Patients Surviving to Adulthood After
Surgery or Interventional Catheterization
Aortic valve disease after balloon valvuloplasty or surgical valvotomy
Pulmonary valve stenosis after balloon valvuloplasty or surgical
valvotomy
Tetralogy of Fallot
Ventricular septal defect
Complete atrioventricular canal defect
Transposition of the great arteries
Coarctation of the aorta
Complex single ventricles after the modified Fontan procedure

Table 483.5  Risks in Adults Who Have Congenital Heart
Disease
RHYTHM DISORDERS
Supraventricular tachycardia (including atrial fibrillation)
Right bundle branch block
Heart block
Ventricular tachycardia
Sudden death
COARCTATION OF AORTA
Essential hypertension
Recoarctation
Aneurysm formation
RESIDUAL LESIONS (SHUNTS)
Ventral septal defect
Atrial septal defect
Patent ductus arteriosus
ACQUIRED LESIONS
Subacute bacterial endocarditis
Subvalvular stenosis
Supravalvular stenosis
Valvular insufficiency
Valvular restenosis
Eisenmenger complex
PREGNANCY RISK
See Figs. 483.2 and 483.3

from prior sternotomy or thoracotomy, scoliosis, diaphragmatic dysfunction, or parenchymal lung disease. Reduced pulmonary function contributes to reduced exercise tolerance and is a risk factor for mortality in adults
with CHD. Renal dysfunction may result from chronic cyanosis, multiple surgeries requiring CPB, or from other comorbid conditions, such
as hypertension and diabetes mellitus. Hepatic injury from chronic liver
congestion in patients with elevated central venous pressures, particularly
patients palliated with the Fontan procedure, can result in hepatic fibrosis,
cirrhosis, hepatic dysfunction, and rarely, hepatocellular carcinoma. Adults

Assess annually
Anemia history
Symptoms of hyperviscosity
Measure oxygen saturation
Laboratory measures:
hemoglobin, packed cell volume,
red-cell indices, serum ferritin,
transferrin saturation

Serum ferritin 15 µg/L
Transferrin saturation 15%

Serum ferritin 15 µg/L
Transferrin saturation 15%

Patient iron-deficient

Patient iron-replete

Patient iron-replete

Iron supplementation
Address other causes of iron
deficiency as identified from
history

No symptoms of
hyperviscosity

Symptoms of
hyperviscosity

Assess for other causes
of symptoms and treat
accordingly: e.g.,
Hypovolaemia
Gout
Brain abscess
Hypothyroidism
Depression

Reassess symptoms
Repeat laboratory tests
Consider cessation of iron
supplementation when iron
replete (serum ferritin 15 µg/L
and transferrin saturation 15%)
Some patients will require
chronic iron supplementation
for steady-state erythrocytosis
Regularly reassess symptoms
and laboratory tests

Resolution of
symptoms
Patient remains
iron-replete

Reassess every
6-12 months

Persistent moderatesevere hyperviscosity
symptoms
Packed cell volume
65%
Trial of phlebotomy
with fluid
replacement

Fig. 483.1 Algorithm detailing crucial issues to address at transition

to adulthood in patients with cyanotic congenital heart disease. (From
Spence MS, Balaratnam MS, Gatzoulis MA. Clinical update: cyanotic
adult congenital heart disease. Lancet. 2007;370:1531.)

with CHD are at risk for developmental abnormalities such as intellectual
impairment, somatic abnormalities such as facial dysmorphism (cleft
palate/lip), CNS abnormalities such as seizure disorders from previous
thromboembolic events or cerebrovascular accidents, and impairments of
hearing or vision loss. Psychosocial problems involving employment, life
and health insurance, participation in sports, sexual activity, and contraception are common. Mental health issues, such as anxiety and depression, are common in adults with CHD and are often underrecognized and
significantly affect quality of life. As a result of these long-­term complications, the majority of adults with CHD need lifelong follow-­up, ideally in
an integrated, collaborative, and multidisciplinary program. When adults
with CHD are hospitalized, it is usually for heart failure or an arrhythmia;
others may require catheterization or another cardiac surgical procedure.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2840 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
SPECIFIC LESIONS
Left-­to-­Right Shunts

In general, the long-­term outcomes of adults with a history of shunt lesions
that underwent repair early in life are good with near-­normal life expectancy and relatively low risk for cardiac complications. However, if the initial lesion has a shunt that is large and nonrestrictive (allowing transmission
of near-­systemic pressure to the pulmonary arteries) and is unrepaired,
irreversible pulmonary vascular changes can occur, resulting in pulmonary
hypertension at systemic levels with reversed or bidirectional shunting at
the level of the defect (Eisenmenger syndrome; see Chapter 482.2).

Atrial Septal Defects

See Chapter 475.1.
Although most individuals with an ASD are diagnosed during childhood after a murmur is noted, a minority of patients present with symptoms for the first time as adults. Most patients are asymptomatic during
the first and second decades of life. In the third decade, an increasing number of patients then develop exercise intolerance, palpitations from atrial
arrhythmias, and cardiac enlargement. If untreated, survival into adulthood is the rule; life expectancy is reduced, however, and there is significant long-­term morbidity. After age 40 the mortality rate increases by 6%
per year, and >20% of patients will have developed atrial fibrillation (AF).
By age 60 the number of patients with AF increases to >60%.

Late Outcome After Closure of Atrial Septal Defect

Most patients who have undergone early ASD closure will have excellent
long-­term survival with low morbidity if repair is undertaken before age
25 years. Older age at repair is associated with decreased late survival
with an associated increased risk for the development of atrial arrhythmias, thromboembolic events, and pulmonary hypertension. Long-­term
late complications and survival after transcatheter device closure remain
unknown; early and intermediate results are excellent, with a high rate of
ASD closure and few major complications.

Ventricular Septal Defects

See Chapter 475.6.
Although isolated VSDs are among the most common forms of CHD,
the diagnosis of a VSD in an adult is rare. The primary reason is that most
patients with a hemodynamically significant VSD will have undergone
repair in childhood or will have died earlier in life. As result, the spectrum of isolated VSD in adults is limited to (1) those with small restrictive defects, (2) those with Eisenmenger syndrome, and (3) those who had
their defects closed in childhood.
For patients with small restrictive VSD, long-­term survival is excellent, with estimated 25-­year survival of 96%. In addition, the long-­term
morbidity for patients with a restrictive VSD also appears to be low. Their
clinical course is not completely benign. Reported long-­term complications include endocarditis, progressive aortic regurgitation secondary to
prolapse of the aortic valve into the defect (highest risk is with supracristal type but also can occur in setting of perimembranous defect), and
the development of both right and left outflow tract obstruction from a
double-­chamber RV or a subaortic membrane. For patients who develop
Eisenmenger syndrome, survival into the third decade is common.
With increasing age, the long-­term complications of right-­sided heart
failure, paradoxical emboli, and polycythemia usually result in progressive decline in survival, with death at an average age of 37 years.
Adults with previous VSD closure, without pulmonary hypertension
or residual defects, live a normal life expectancy. Because patients with
small VSDs are asymptomatic, these patients should be managed conservatively. Given the long-­term risks, they do need intermittent follow-­up for
life to monitor for the development of late complications. The exception to
this rule is patients with small supracristal or perimembranous VSD with
associated prolapse of the aortic cusp into the defect resulting in progressive aortic regurgitation. These patients should be considered for surgical
repair at diagnosis to prevent progressive aortic valve damage.

Complete Atrioventricular Canal

See Chapter 475.5.
The natural history for patients with complete AVSD is characterized by the early development of pulmonary vascular disease, leading

to irreversible damage often by age 1 year (especially in children with
Down syndrome). Thus patients who present in adulthood can be categorized into two groups: those with Eisenmenger syndrome and those
who had their defects closed in childhood.
Overall, for those patients who underwent early repair before the development of pulmonary vascular disease, the long-­term prognosis is good.
The most common long-­term complication is left atrioventricular valve
regurgitation, with approximately 5–10% of patients requiring surgical
revision for left atrioventricular valve repair or replacement during follow­up. The second most common long-­term complication for this patient
group is subaortic stenosis, occurring in up to 5% of patients after repair.
Other long-­term complications include residual atrial-­or ventricular-­
level shunts, complete heart block, atrial and ventricular arrhythmias, and
endocarditis.
For patients who have developed Eisenmenger syndrome, all are
symptomatic with exertional dyspnea, fatigue, palpitations, edema,
and syncope. Survival is similar to other forms of Eisenmenger syndrome, with a mean age at death of 37 years. Strong predictors for
death include syncope, age at presentation of symptoms, poor functional class, low oxygen saturation (<85%), elevated serum creatinine
and uric acid concentrations, and Down syndrome.
Patients who underwent previous repair and develop significant left
atrioventricular valve regurgitation causing symptoms, atrial arrhythmias, or deterioration in ventricular function should undergo elective
valve repair or replacement. Those previously repaired patients who
develop significant subaortic stenosis (defined as a peak cardiac catheterization or echo gradient of >50 mm Hg) should undergo surgical
repair.

Patent Ductus Arteriosus

See Chapter 475.8.
A PDA is usually an isolated lesion in the adult patient. The size of
the defect is the primary determinant of clinical course in the adult
patient. These clinical courses can be grouped into five main categories:
silent PDAs; small, hemodynamically insignificant PDAs; moderate-­
size PDAs; large PDAs; and previously repaired PDAs.
A silent PDA is a tiny defect that cannot be heard by auscultation
and is only detected by other means such as echocardiography. Life
expectancy is always normal in this population, and the risk for endocarditis is extremely low.
Patients with a small PDA have an audible long-­ejection or continuous murmur heard best at the left upper sternal border that radiates to
the back. In addition, they have normal peripheral pulses. Because there is
negligible left-­to-­right shunting these patients have normal left atrial and
left ventricle (LV) size and normal pulmonary artery pressure by echocardiography and chest x-­ray film. These patients, like those with silent PDAs,
are asymptomatic and live a normal life expectancy. They have a higher
risk for endocarditis.
Patients with moderate-­size PDAs may present during adulthood.
These patients often will have wide, bounding peripheral pulses and an
audible continuous murmur. These patients all have significant volume
overload and develop some degree of left atrial and LV enlargement
and some degree of pulmonary hypertension. These patients are symptomatic with dyspnea, palpitations, and heart failure.
Patients with large PDAs typically present with signs of severe pulmonary hypertension and Eisenmenger syndrome. By adulthood, the
continuous murmur is typically absent and there is differential cyanosis (lower-­extremity saturations lower than the right arm saturation).
These patients have a similar prognosis as other patients with Eisenmenger syndrome.
Patients who underwent repair of a PDA before the development
of pulmonary hypertension have a normal life expectancy without
restrictions.
All patients with clinical evidence of a PDA are at increased risk for
endocarditis. As result, all PDAs except for small silent PDAs and those
patients with severe irreversible pulmonary hypertension should be considered for closure. Catheter device closure is the preferred method in
most centers today. Surgical closure is reserved for patients with PDA too
large for device closure or when the anatomy is distorted, as in the setting
of a large ductal aneurysm.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 483 u General Principles of Treatment of Congenital Heart Disease
Cyanotic Heart Disease

See Chapters 478, 479, and 480.
Unlike the acyanotic forms of CHD, the majority of patients with
cyanotic CHD will have had at least one and often several previous
interventions before adulthood. The most frequent defects seen in the
outpatient adult CHD setting are tetralogy of Fallot, complete transposition of the great arteries (TGA, also known as d-­transposition),
pulmonary valve stenosis, and various forms of functional single
ventricles. Other defects include total anomalous pulmonary venous
return, truncus arteriosus, and double-­outlet RV.

Tetralogy of Fallot

See Chapter 479.1.
In the developed world, the unoperated adult patient with tetralogy
of Fallot is a rarity because the majority of patients will have undergone
palliation or, more often, repair in childhood. Only 11% of unoperated
patients are alive by age 20 and only 3% by age 40.
Late survival after repair of tetralogy of Fallot is excellent. Repair is typically performed at 3-­12 months of age and consists of patch closure of the
VSD and relief of the pulmonary outflow tract obstruction by patch augmentation of the right ventricular outflow tract, pulmonary valve annulus,
or both. Survival rates at age 32 and 35 years have been reported to be 86%
and 85%, respectively, compared with 95% in age-­and sex-­matched controls. Most patients live an unrestricted life. Many patients do develop late
symptoms that include exertional dyspnea, palpitations, syncope, and sudden cardiac death. Late complications include endocarditis, aortic regurgitation with or without aortic root dilation (typically caused by damage to
the aortic valve during VSD closure or secondary to an intrinsic aortic root
abnormality), left ventricular dysfunction (secondary to inadequate myocardial protection during previous repair or chronic LV volume overload
caused by long-­standing palliative arterial shunts), residual pulmonary
valve obstruction, residual pulmonary valve regurgitation, RV dysfunction (as a result of pulmonary regurgitation or pulmonary stenosis), atrial
arrhythmias (typically atrial flutter), ventricular arrhythmias, and heart
block.
Reintervention is necessary in approximately 10% of patients after
reparative surgery at 20-­year follow-­up. With longer follow-­up, the
incidence of reintervention continues to increase. The most common indication for reintervention is pulmonary valve replacement for
severe pulmonary valve regurgitation. Pulmonary valve replacement,
either surgical or transcatheter, is indicated when severe pulmonary
valve regurgitation is associated with RV or LV systolic dysfunction,
severe RV dilation, and/or progressive reduction in objective exercise
tolerance. Although pulmonary valve replacement is associated with
improved functional status, it has not been shown to improve mortality
or risk for ventricular arrhythmias and sudden cardiac death in adults
with tetralogy of Fallot. Implantable cardioverter defibrillators may be
considered in patients with a history of recurrent ventricular arrhythmias or other risk factors such as ventricular dysfunction.

Transposition of the Great Arteries

See Chapter 480.1.
The natural history of patients with unrepaired TGA is so poor that
very few patients survive past childhood without intervention. The first
definitive operations for TGA was the atrial switch procedure, where the
systemic and pulmonary venous returns are rerouted in the atrium by
constructing baffles. The systemic venous return from the superior and
inferior venae cavae is directed through the mitral valve and into the left
ventricle (connected to the pulmonary artery). The pulmonary venous
return is then directed through the tricuspid valve into the RV (connected
to the aorta). The procedure results in physiologic correction and can be
performed with low mortality but leave the left as the pulmonary ventricle
and the right as the systemic ventricle. Long-­term follow-­up studies after
the atrial switch procedure show a small but ongoing attrition rate with
numerous other intermediate-­and long-­term complications. Two specific
problems are most concerning: loss of sinus rhythm with development of
atrial arrhythmias, occurring in 50% of TGA patients by age 25, and development of systemic ventricular dysfunction, occurring in 50% by age 35.
Other long-­term complications include endocarditis, baffle leaks, baffle
obstruction, tricuspid valve regurgitation, and sinus node dysfunction
requiring pacemaker placement.

2841

The arterial switch operation is the procedure of choice to treat
TGA. The great arteries are transected and reanastomosed to the correct ventricle (LV to aorta, RV to pulmonary artery) with coronary
artery transfer. Operative survival after the arterial switch procedure
in the current surgical era is very good, with a surgical mortality rate of
2–5%. Long-­term data on survival and complications are not available,
but intermediate results are promising. Reported intermediate complications include endocarditis, pulmonary outflow tract obstruction (at
the supravalvular level or at the takeoff of the peripheral pulmonary
arteries), aortic valve regurgitation, and coronary artery compromise
(ranging from minor stenosis to complete occlusion).
The Rastelli operation represents a third type of repair for TGA,
typically when there is associated VSD and pulmonary outflow tract
obstruction. This operation involves the creation of an intracardiac
baffle that closes the VSD in a way that directs flow from the LV to the
aorta. The pulmonary valve is oversewn, and a valved conduit placed
between the RV and pulmonary artery. Operative mortality is low, but
patients require multiple reoperations for replacement of the pulmonary conduit during long-­term follow-­up. Other complications include
complete heart block and left ventricular outflow tract obstruction.
Because of the high incidence of observed and potential medical problems, all patients who have had atrial, arterial, or Rastelli repair of TGA
should have lifelong follow-­up by a cardiologist at a center specializing in
adult CHD.

Pulmonary Valve Stenosis

See Chapter 476.1.
Most patients with pulmonary valve stenosis are asymptomatic and
present with a cardiac murmur. Survival into adult life and the need for
intervention, however, are directly correlated to the degree of obstruction. Patients with trivial stenosis (defined as a peak gradient <25 mm
Hg) followed for 25 years remain asymptomatic and have no significant
progression of obstruction over time. For those patients with moderate pulmonary valve stenosis (defined as a peak gradient of 25-­49 mm
Hg), there is an approximately 20% chance of requiring intervention
by age 25. For those patients with severe stenosis (defined as a peak
gradient >50 mm Hg), the majority ultimately require an intervention,
either surgery or balloon valvuloplasty, by age 25.
After surgical valvotomy for isolated pulmonary stenosis, long-­term
survival is excellent. With longer follow-­up, the incidence of late complications and the need for reintervention do increase. The most common
indication for reintervention is pulmonary valve replacement for severe
pulmonary regurgitation. Other long-­term complications include recurrent atrial arrhythmias, endocarditis, and residual right ventricular outflow tract obstruction.
Patients with moderate to severe pulmonary stenosis (defined as a
peak gradient >50 mm Hg) should be considered for intervention even
in the absence of symptoms. Percutaneous balloon valvuloplasty has
been the accepted treatment for patients of all ages. Previously, surgical
valvotomy had been the gold standard. Surgical valvotomy is reserved
for patients who are unlikely to have successful results from balloon valvuloplasty, such as those with an extremely dysplastic or calcified valve.

Left-­Sided Obstructive Lesions
Coarctation of the Aorta

See Chapter 476.6.
The clinical presentation of coarctation of the aorta depends on the
severity of obstruction and the associated anomalies. Unrepaired coarctation typically presents with symptoms before adulthood. These symptoms
include headaches related to hypertension, leg fatigue or cramps, exercise
intolerance, and systemic hypertension (may be asymptomatic). Those
untreated patients surviving to adulthood thus typically have only mild
coarctation of the aorta. In the era before surgery, without treatment, the
mean age of death was 32 years. Causes of death included left ventricular
failure, intracranial hemorrhage, endocarditis, aortic rupture/dissection,
and premature coronary artery disease (CAD).
After surgical repair, long-­term survival is good but is directly correlated with the age at repair, with those repaired after age 14 years having
a lower 20-­year survival than those who were repaired earlier: 91% vs
79%. With longer follow-­up, the incidence of long-­term complications

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2842 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
continues to rise. The most common long-­term complication is persistent or new systemic hypertension at rest or during exercise. Other long-­
term complications include aneurysms of the ascending or descending
aorta, recoarctation at the site of previous repair, CAD, aortic stenosis
or regurgitation (in the setting of an associated bicuspid aortic valve),
rupture of an intracranial aneurysm, and endocarditis.
Patients with significant native or residual coarctation of the aorta
(symptomatic patients with a peak gradient across the coarctation >20
mm Hg) should be considered for intervention, either surgery or catheter intervention with balloon angioplasty, with or without stent placement. Surgical repair in the adult patient is technically difficult and
is associated with high morbidity. Catheter-­based intervention is the
preferred method in most experienced adult CHD centers.

Aortic Valve Stenosis

See Chapter 476.5.
The natural history of aortic valve stenosis in adults is quite variable but
is characterized by progressive stenosis over time. By age 45 years, approximately 50% of bicuspid aortic valves will have some degree of stenosis.
Most patients with aortic valve stenosis are asymptomatic and are
diagnosed after a murmur is detected. The severity of obstruction at
diagnosis correlates with the pattern of progression. Symptoms are rare
until patients have severe aortic valve stenosis (mean gradient by echocardiography >40 mm Hg). Symptoms include chest pain, exertional
dyspnea, near-­syncope, and syncope. When any of these symptoms
is present, the risk of sudden cardiac death is quite high, so surgical
intervention is mandated. For patients requiring surgical valvotomy to
relieve the stenosis before adulthood, the majority of patients do well.
However, at 25-­year follow-­up, up to 40% of patients will have required
a second operation for residual stenosis or regurgitation.
Patients with symptoms and severe aortic valve stenosis should be
considered for intervention. Treatment involves manipulating the valve
to reduce stenosis. This can be accomplished by balloon dilation of the
valve, open surgical valvotomy, or valve replacement. In absence of significant aortic regurgitation, most centers favor balloon dilation or surgical valvotomy for children and young adults who have pliable valves
with fusion of commissures. In older adults, aortic valve replacement is
the treatment of choice. Typically, surgery is performed for aortic valve
replacement in younger adults with congenital aortic valve stenosis; however, transcatheter aortic valve replacement is increasingly commonly
performed in older adults who may be higher-­risk surgical candidates.

Endocarditis Prophylaxis

See Chapter 486.
Only patients with cardiac conditions associated with the highest risk
for adverse outcomes should continue antibiotic prophylaxis before surgery: previous endocarditis, prosthetic valves (biological and mechanical), unrepaired cyanotic CHD, including palliative shunts and conduits,
completely repaired congenital heart defects with prosthetic material or
device, surgically placed or by catheter intervention during the first 6
months after the procedure, and repaired CHD with residual defects at
or adjacent to the site of a prosthetic patch or prosthetic device (which
inhibits endothelialization). Except for the conditions just listed, antibiotic prophylaxis is no longer recommended for other forms of CHD.

categorization of risk stratification is shown in Figures 483.2 and 483.3.
Pulmonary artery hypertension presents a serious risk during pregnancy,
particularly when the pulmonary pressure exceeds 70% of systemic pressure, regardless of functional class. Other contraindications to pregnancy
include severe obstructive left-­sided lesions (coarctation of the aorta, aortic valve stenosis, mitral valve stenosis, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy),
Marfan syndrome with coexisting dilated ascending aorta (defined as >4
cm), persistent cyanosis, and systemic ventricular dysfunction (ejection
fraction of ≤40%). The need for full anticoagulation during pregnancy,
although not a contraindication, poses an increased risk to both mother
and fetus. The relative risks and benefits of the different anticoagulant
approaches need to be discussed fully with the mother.
Pregnancy counseling should begin early in adolescence and should be
part of the routine cardiac follow-­up visit. Counseling should include a
discussion about the risk of CHD in the offspring. In the general population, the incidence of CHD is 1%. In the offspring of a mother with CHD,
the risk increases to 5–6%. Often the cardiac lesion in the offspring is not
the same as that in the mother, except in the case of a syndrome with autosomal dominant inheritance (i.e., Marfan syndrome, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy). Risk stratification should include the specific CHD lesion but
also needs to consider the maternal functional class. Although the specific
CHD lesion is important, multiple studies demonstrate that the maternal
functional class before pregnancy is highly predictive of both maternal and
fetal outcomes, with those in the best functional class having the best outcomes. A cardiopulmonary exercise test performed before conception can
predict maternal and neonatal outcomes in pregnant women with CHD.
A blunted heart rate response to exercise is associated with a higher risk
for adverse maternal and neonatal events. It is recommended that women
with CHD at higher risk for pregnancy-­related complications based on
anatomy, functional status, and exercise testing be managed collaboratively
during pregnancy by adult CHD cardiologists, obstetricians, and anesthesiologists with specialized experience in adults with CHD.
Risk of cardiac event during pregnancy per mWHO class
based on CARPREG II and ROPAC data

mWHO IV
mWHO III
mWHO II-III
mWHO II
mWHO I
0%

20%

30%

Predictors of cardiac event during pregnancy
CARPREG II Prior cardiac event or arrhythmia
NYHA III or IV or cyanosis

PREGNANCY AND CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE

CHD is the most common form of heart disease encountered during
pregnancy in developed countries. Heart disease does not preclude a
successful pregnancy but increases the risk to both the mother and
the baby. During pregnancy, substantial hemodynamic changes occur.
The hemodynamic changes in pregnancy result in a steady increase in
cardiac output during pregnancy until the 32nd week of gestation, at
which time the cardiac output reaches a plateau at 30–50% above the
prepregnancy level. At delivery, with uterine contractions, an additional 300-­500 mL of blood enters the circulation. This, in conjunction
with increased blood pressure and heart rate during labor, increases the
cardiac output at delivery to 80% of the prepregnancy level.
Despite these hemodynamic changes, the outcome of pregnancy
is favorable in most women with CHD, provided that functional class
and systemic ventricular function are good. The WHO modified

10%

ZAHARA

50%

OR in study
cohort

60%

Event rate in
study cohort

5.9

33%

4.9

46%

Mechanical valve

4.2

38%

Ventricular dysfunction

2.3

30%

High risk left-sided valve disease/left ventricular
outflow tract obstruction

2.1

22%

Pulmonary hypertension

3.3

32%

Coronary artery disease

3.0

29%

High risk aortopathy

2.7

18%

No prior cardiac intervention

1.6

18%

Late pregnancy assessment

1.6

20%

Cardiac medication, other than anticoagulation
Atrioventricular valve regurgitation

ROPAC

40%

Atrial fibrillation at pre-pregnancy visit
Signs of heart failure at pre-pregnancy visit

4.2

26%

2.0–2.3

17%

5.1

52%

3.3–4.2

63%

Fig. 483.2 Risk tools modified WHO (mWHO), CARdiac disease in

PREGnancy (CARPREG), Zwangerschap bij Aangeboren HARtAfwijking
(ZAHARA), Registry of Pregnancy and Cardiac disease (ROPAC). ORs
and rates are derived from cohorts consisting of approximately 60%
of patients with congenital heart disease (63% in CARPREG II and 58%
in ROPAC). OR, Odds ratio. (From van Hagen IM, Roos-­Hesselink JW.
Pregnancy in congenital heart disease: risk prediction and counselling.
Heart. 2020;106:1853–1861, Fig. 1.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 483 u General Principles of Treatment of Congenital Heart Disease
CONTRACEPTION

A critical part of caring for adults with CHD is to provide (or make
available) advice on contraception. Unfortunately, data are limited on
the safety of various contraceptive techniques in adult CHD patients.
The estrogen-­containing oral contraceptives (OCs) can be used in
many adult CHD patients but are not recommended in adult CHD
patients at risk for thromboembolism, such as those with cyanosis,
prior Fontan procedure, AF, or pulmonary artery hypertension. In
addition, OCs may disrupt anticoagulation control. Although slightly
less effective than OCs containing combined estrogen/progesterone,
medroxyprogesterone, the progesterone-­only pills, and levonorgestrel
are good options for most adult CHD patients. Medroxyprogesterone
and levonorgestrel, however, can cause fluid retention and thus need to
be used with caution in patients with heart failure. These medications
are also associated with depression and often breakthrough bleeding.
Tubal ligation, although the most secure method of contraception, can
be a high-­risk procedure in patients with complex CHD or those with
pulmonary hypertension. Hysteroscopic sterilization (Essure) may
be reasonable for high-­risk patients. In the past, intrauterine devices
(IUDs) were seldom used in cardiac patients because of the associated risk of bacteremia, pelvic inflammatory disease, and endocarditis.
IUDs such as Mirena appear to be safe and effective and are rapidly
becoming one of the most common forms of contraception in the adult
CHD population.

WHO I

WHO II

Pulmonary stenosis (small/mild)

Unrepaired ASD or VSD

Patent ductus arteriosus (small/mild)

Repaired tetralogy of Fallot

Mitral valve prolapse (small/mild)

Turner syndrome without aortic dilatation

Successfully repaired simple shunt defects
(ASD, VSD, PDA, APVR)
Follow-up during pregnancy: Once or twice in
local hospital

Follow-up during pregnancy: Every
trimester in local hospital

Delivery: Local hospital

Delivery: Local hospital

WHO II-III

WHO III

Mild left ventricular impairment (EF>54%)

Left ventricular impairment (30–45%)

Native or tissue valve disease not considered

Mechanical valve

WHO I or IV

Systemic right ventricle with good or mildly
impaired function

Marfan or other HTAD syndrome without aortic
dilatation

Fontan (if otherwise well)

Aorta <45mm in bicuspid aortic valve

Unrepaired cyanotic disease

Repaired coarctation

Moderate mitral stenosis

AVSD

Severe asymptomatic aortic stenosis
Moderate aortic dilatation

Follow-up during pregnancy: Bimonthly in
expert center

Follow-up during pregnancy: (Bi)monthly
in expert center

Delivery: Expert center

Delivery: Expert center

WHO IV: Pregnancy not recommended
Pulmonary arterial hypertension
Severe systemic ventricular dysfunction (EF<30%)
Moderate systemic right ventricular dysfunction
Severe mitral stenosis
Severe symptomatic aortic stenosis
Severe aortic dilatation
Vascular Ehlers-Danlos
Severe (re)coarctation
Fontan with any complication
Follow-up during pregnancy: Monthly in
expert center
Delivery: Expert center

Fig. 483.3 Advised counseling for pregnancy in congenital heart dis-

ease. APVR, Anomalous pulmonary venous return; ASD, atrial septal
defect; AVSD, atrioventricular septal defect; EF, ejection fraction; ESC,
European Society of Cardiology; HTAD, hereditary thoracic aorta disease; PDA, persistent ductus arteriosus; VSD, ventricular septal defect;
WHO, World Health Organization. (From van Hagen IM, Roos-­Hesselink
JW. Pregnancy in congenital heart disease: risk prediction and counselling. Heart. 2020;106:1853–1861, Fig. 2.)

2843

ADOLESCENT TRANSITION

It is well recognized that as part of the process of obtaining independence,
adolescents or young adults must develop a forward-­looking, independent
approach to their medical care. For children with heart disease, the transition process must begin during early adolescence and should be encouraged by both the primary care provider and the pediatric cardiologist, who
must identify an appropriate adult CHD program to which transition and
transfer will be made at an appropriate time (see Table 483.6).
A successful transition program includes the following elements:
• Development of a written transition plan that should begin by age
14 years
• B ecause adolescents and young adults are frequently unaware of
the details of their cardiac diagnosis and history, a complete, concise, portable medical record, including all pertinent aspects of
cardiac care, should be shared with adolescents and their family
and prepared for transmittal to the eventual adult care destination.
• The primary care provider and cardiologist must address unique
adolescent medical issues as they affect the cardiovascular system. In
addition to medical problems, education, vocational planning, psychosocial issues, and access to medical care should be discussed with
adolescents and their families.
Young adults tend to avoid medical care because of lack of education, denial, or difficulty with access to the medical care system. Thus a
critical goal of the adolescent transition process is to identify an appropriate site for ongoing medical care and ensure maintenance of the
medical record and continuity of care for the young adult. The site of
care for a young adult with CHD may be a pediatric program or facility
or a specialized center or program for the adult with CHD. The critical
issues are the continuity of care, the preparation of the patient, and the
patient’s participation in the process.

HEART FAILURE AND TRANSPLANT

Heart failure is increasingly prevalent in adults with CHD and is
associated with increased morbidity and mortality. Causes for heart
failure in this population include unrepaired or residual valve dysfunction, shunts, arrhythmias, venous obstruction, and systolic and/
or diastolic ventricular dysfunction. Data on medical and device
therapy to treat heart failure in adults with CHD are limited because
of the relatively small study populations and heterogenous heart
defects. Concomitant failure of noncardiac organs, such as lung,
kidney, and liver failure, is common in adult CHD patients with
heart failure and further complicates the management. Currently,
management of symptomatic CHD patients with systolic ventricular dysfunction is primarily extrapolated from data in adults with
heart failure in the setting of acquired heart disease and includes:
• Medical therapy that includes angiotensin-­converting enzyme inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers, β blockers, aldosterone antagonists, and diuretics
• Electrical device therapies such as implantable cardioverter defibrillators to reduce the risk for sudden cardiac death and permanent
pacemaker placement for cardiac resynchronization therapy to improve symptoms of heart failure
• Mechanical circulatory support, such as ventricular assist devices,
for patients with severe, refractory heart failure symptoms
• Referral to adult CHD heart failure/transplant specialist and center
Proper timing for heart transplantation in adults with CHD is
unclear and may vary for individual lesions. Patients with single
ventricle anatomy and complex anatomy often have lower priority
with the current transplant allocation system, and therefore often
have longer wait times before receiving a heart transplant. Early
posttransplant mortality is higher in adults with CHD compared
with adults with acquired heart disease because of increased perioperative mortality. However, once beyond the perioperative period,
patients with ACHD do as well as or better than those with acquired
heart disease, with expected 10-­year survival equivalent to or better
than that of adults without CHD.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2844 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

Section 4

Cardiac Arrhythmias
Chapter 484

Disturbances of Rate and
Rhythm of the Heart
Aarti S. Dalal and George F. Van Hare
The term arrhythmia refers to a disturbance in heart rate or rhythm.
Such disturbances can lead to heart rates that are abnormally fast, slow,
or irregular. They may be transient or incessant; congenital or acquired;
or caused by infection, a toxin, or drugs. They may be associated with
particular forms of congenital heart disease (CHD), may be a complication after surgical repair of CHD, may be a result of genetic causes,
or may be the result of a maternal connective tissue disease. Arrhythmias, either slow or fast, may lead to acutely decreased cardiac output.
If incessant, they may lead to a cardiomyopathy. Initially stable and
organized arrhythmias can degenerate into a more dangerous arrhythmia such as ventricular fibrillation. Arrhythmias may lead to syncope
or to sudden death (see Chapter 485). When a patient has an arrhythmia, it is important to determine whether the rhythm is likely to lead to
symptoms or to deteriorate into a life-­threatening condition. Rhythm
abnormalities such as single premature atrial and ventricular beats are
common, and in children without heart disease, usually pose no risk
to the patient.
A number of pharmacologic agents are available for treating
arrhythmias; many have not been studied extensively in children.
Insufficient data are available regarding pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, and efficacy in the pediatric population, and therefore
the selection of an appropriate agent is based on the judgement and
experience of the clinician. Fortunately, most rhythm disturbances
in children can be reliably controlled with a single agent (Table
484.1). Transcatheter ablation is acceptable therapy not only for
life-­threatening or drug-­resistant arrhythmias but also for the cure
of arrhythmias. For patients with bradycardia, implantable pacemakers are small enough for use in all ages, even in premature
infants. Implantable cardioverter-­defibrillators are available for use
in high-­risk patients with malignant ventricular arrhythmias and an
increased risk of sudden death.

484.1 Principles of Antiarrhythmic Therapy
Aarti S. Dalal and George F. Van Hare
Many antiarrhythmic agents are available for rhythm control. The
majority are not approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) for use in children; their use is therefore considered “off-­label.”
Pediatric cardiologists have experience with these drugs, with well-­
recognized standards for dosing.
With the availability of potentially curative ablation procedures,
medical therapy has become less important. Intolerable drug side
effects, as well as the potential for an arrhythmia induced by an antiarrhythmic drug, can seriously limit medical therapy and will lead the
physician and family toward a potentially curative ablation procedure.
Antiarrhythmic drugs are frequently categorized using the
Vaughan-­Williams classification. This system comprises four classes:
class I includes agents that primarily block the sodium channel, class
II drugs are the β blockers, class III includes agents that prolong repolarization by blocking potassium channels, and class IV drugs are the

calcium channel blockers. Class I is further divided by the strength of
the sodium channel blockade (see Table 484.1).

484.2 Sinus Arrhythmias and Extrasystoles
Aarti S. Dalal and George F. Van Hare
Phasic sinus arrhythmia represents a normal physiologic variation
in impulse discharges from the sinus node related to respirations. The
heart rate slows during expiration and accelerates during inspiration.
Occasionally, if the sinus rate becomes slow enough, an escape beat
arises from the atrioventricular (AV) junction region (Fig. 484.1). Normal phasic sinus arrhythmia is caused by the activity of the parasympathetic nervous system and can be quite prominent in healthy children.
It may mimic frequent premature contractions, but the relationship to
the phases of respiration can be appreciated with careful auscultation.
Drugs that increase vagal tone, such as digoxin, may exaggerate sinus
arrhythmia; it is usually abolished by exercise. Other irregularities in
sinus rhythm, especially bradycardia associated with periodic apnea,
are common in premature infants.
Sinus bradycardia is a result of slow discharge of impulses from
the sinus node, the heart’s “natural pacemaker.” A sinus rate <90 beats/
min in neonates and <60 beats/min in older children is considered
sinus bradycardia. Sinus bradycardia is commonly seen in highly conditioned athletes. In healthy individuals without symptoms, it has no
clinical significance. Sinus bradycardia may occur in systemic disease
(hypothyroidism, anorexia nervosa), and it resolves when the disorder
is under control. It may also be seen in association with conditions in
which there is high vagal tone, such as gastrointestinal obstruction or
intracranial processes. Low birthweight infants display great variation
in sinus rate. Sinus bradycardia is common in these infants, in conjunction with apnea, and may be associated with junctional escape beats;
premature atrial contractions are also frequent. These rhythm changes,
especially bradycardia, appear more often during sleep and are not
associated with symptoms. Usually, no therapy is necessary.
A wandering atrial pacemaker is defined as an intermittent shift in
the pacemaker of the heart from the sinus node to another part of the
atrium. It is not uncommon in childhood and usually represents a normal variant. It may also be seen in association with sinus bradycardia in
which the shift in atrial focus is an escape phenomenon.
Extrasystoles are produced by the premature discharge of an ectopic focus that may be situated in the atrium, the AV junction, or the
ventricle. Usually, isolated extrasystoles are of no clinical or prognostic
significance. Under certain circumstances, however, premature beats
may be caused by organic heart disease (inflammation, ischemia, fibrosis) or drug toxicity.
Atrial extrasystoles, also known as premature atrial contractions or complexes (PACs), are common in childhood, usually in the
absence of cardiac disease. Depending on the degree of prematurity
of the beat (coupling interval) and the preceding R-­R interval (cycle
length), PACs may result in a normal, a prolonged (aberrancy), or an
absent (blocked PAC) QRS complex. Blocked PACs occur when the
premature impulse cannot conduct to the ventricle because of refractoriness of the AV node or distal conducting system (Fig. 484.2). Atrial
extrasystoles must be distinguished from premature ventricular contractions. Careful scrutiny of the electrocardiogram (ECG) for a premature P wave preceding the QRS will show either a premature P wave
superimposed on and deforming the preceding T wave or a P wave that
is premature and has a different contour from that of the other sinus
P waves. PACs usually reset the sinus node pacemaker, leading to an
incomplete compensatory pause, but this feature is not always present
and so is not regarded as a completely reliable means of differentiating
atrial from ventricular premature complexes in children.
Ventricular extrasystoles, also known as premature ventricular
contractions or complexes (PVCs), may arise in any region of either
ventricle. PVCs are characterized by premature, widened, bizarre QRS
complexes that are not preceded by a premature P wave (Fig. 484.3).
When all premature beats have identical contours, they are classified

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 484 u Disturbances of Rate and Rhythm of the Heart 2845
Table 484.1  Antiarrhythmic Drugs Commonly Used in Pediatric Patients, by Class
DRUG

INDICATIONS

DOSING

SIDE EFFECTS

CLASS IA: INHIBITS NA+ FAST CHANNEL, PROLONGS REPOLARIZATION
Quinidine
SVT, atrial fibrillation,
Oral: 30-­60 mg/
Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea,
atrial flutter, VT; in
kg/24 hr divided
fever, cinchonism, QRS
atrial flutter, an AV
q6h (sulfate) or q8h
and QT prolongation,
node–blocking drug
(gluconate)
AV nodal block, asystole,
(digoxin, verapamil, 200 mg q6 (1-1.5 g/
syncope, thrombocytopenia,
propranolol) must
day divided q6),
hemolytic anemia, SLE,
be given first
sulfate; 324 mg
blurred vision, convulsions,
to prevent 1:1
q8-12h (1.5 g/day
allergic reactions,
conduction
divided q8-12h),
exacerbation of periodic
gluconate
paralysis
Max dose: 2.4 g/24 hr
Procainamide

SVT, atrial fibrillation,
atrial flutter, VT

Oral: 15-­50 mg/kg/day
divided q3-6h
Max dose: 4 g/24 hr
IV: 10-­15 mg/kg over
30-­60 min load
followed by 20-­80
μg/kg/min
Max dose: 2 g/24 hr

PR, QRS, QT interval
prolongation, anorexia,
nausea, vomiting, rash,
fever, agranulocytosis,
thrombocytopenia,
Coombs-­positive hemolytic
anemia, SLE, hypotension,
exacerbation of periodic
paralysis, proarrhythmia

Disopyramide

SVT, atrial fibrillation,
atrial flutter

Oral (immediate
release):
<1 yr: 10-30 mg/kg/
day divided q6h
1-4 yr: 10-20 mg/kg/
day divided q6h
>4-12 yr: 10-15 mg/
kg/day divided q6h
>12- ≤18 yr: 6-15 mg/
kg/day divided q6h
Max dose: 1.6 g/day
Adults: <50 kg: 100
mg q6h; >50kg:150
mg q6h
Long-acting dosing is
200-300 q12h

Anticholinergic effects,
urinary retention, blurred
vision, dry mouth, QT and
QRS prolongation, hepatic
toxicity, negative inotropic
effects, agranulocytosis,
psychosis, hypoglycemia,
proarrhythmia

CLASS IB: INHIBITS NA+ FAST CHANNEL, SHORTENS REPOLARIZATION
Lidocaine
VT, VF
IV: 1 mg/kg repeat
CNS effects, confusion,
q 5 min 2 times
convulsions, high-­grade
followed by 20-­
AV block, asystole, coma,
50 μg/kg/min (max
paresthesias, respiratory
dose: 3 mg/kg)
failure
Adult infusion rate:
1-4 mg/min

DRUG INTERACTIONS

DRUG
LEVEL

Enhances digoxin, may
increase PTT when
given with warfarin

2-­6 μg/mL

Toxicity increased by
amiodarone and
cimetidine

4-­8 μg/mL
With NAPA
<40 μg/mL

2-­7 μg/mL

Propranolol,
cimetidine, increases
toxicity

1.5-5.0 μg/
mL

Mexiletine

VT

Oral: 6-­15 mg/kg/24 hr
divided q8h
Max dose: 15 mg/kg/
day or 1.2 g/day.
Adults: 150-300 mg
q8-12h (max 1.2 g/
day)

GI upset, skin rash, neurologic

Cimetidine

0.5-­2 mcg/mL

Phenytoin

Digitalis intoxication

Oral: 4-8 mg/kg/24 hr
divided q12h
Max dose: 300-600
mg/day
IV: 10-­15 mg/kg over
1 hr load

Rash, gingival hyperplasia,
ataxia, lethargy, vertigo,
tremor, macrocytic anemia,
bradycardia with rapid push

Amiodarone, oral
anticoagulants,
cimetidine,
nifedipine,
disopyramide,
increase toxicity

10-­20 μg/mL

BSA dosing: 50-200
mg/m2/day divided
q8-12h
Weight based: 3-6 mg/
kg/day divided q8h
Max dosing: 8 mg/
kg/day
Max adult dosing: 400
mg/day

Blurred vision, nausea,
decrease in contractility,
proarrhythmia

Amiodarone increases
toxicity

0.2-­1 μg/mL

CLASS IC: INHIBITS NA+ CHANNEL
Flecainide
SVT, atrial tachycardia,
VT

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2846 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 484.1  Antiarrhythmic Drugs Commonly Used in Pediatric Patients, by Class—cont’d
DRUG

INDICATIONS

DOSING

SIDE EFFECTS

DRUG INTERACTIONS

Propafenone

SVT, atrial tachycardia,
atrial fibrillation, VT

Oral: 150-­300 mg/
m2/24 hr divided
q8h

Hypotension, decreased
contractility, hepatic toxicity,
paresthesia, headache,
proarrhythmia

Increases digoxin
levels

Oral: 1-­4 mg/kg/24 hr
divided q6h
Max dose 60 mg/24
hr
IV: 0.01-­0.15 mg/kg/
dose SLOW over
5-10 min
Max dose: 1-3 mg/dose

Bradycardia, loss of
concentration, school
performance problems,
bronchospasm,
hypoglycemia, hypotension,
heart block, CHF

Co-­administration
with disopyramide,
flecainide, or
verapamil may
decrease ventricular
function

CLASS II: β BLOCKERS
Propranolol
SVT, long QT

DRUG
LEVEL
0.2-­1 μg/mL

Atenolol

SVT

Oral: 0.5-­1 mg/
kg/24 hr once daily
or divided q12h

Bradycardia, loss of
concentration, school
performance problems

Co-­administration
with disopyramide,
flecainide, or
verapamil may
decrease ventricular
function

Nadolol

SVT, long QT

Oral: 1-­2 mg/kg/24 hr
given once daily

Bradycardia, loss of
concentration, school
performance problems,
bronchospasm,
hypoglycemia, hypotension,
heart block, CHF

Co-­administration
with disopyramide,
flecainide, or
verapamil may
decrease ventricular
function

Oral: 10-15 mg/kg/day
IV: 2.5-­5 mg/kg over
30-­60 min, may
repeat 3 times, then
5-20 mg/kg/day
continuous infusion
Max daily dose: 2.2
g/day

Hypothyroidism or
hyperthyroidism, elevated
triglycerides, hepatic
toxicity, pulmonary fibrosis

Digoxin (increases
levels), flecainide,
procainamide,
quinidine, warfarin,
phenytoin

1-­2.5 mg/L

PAC, PVC, bradycardia, AV
block, nausea, vomiting,
anorexia, prolongs PR
interval

Quinidine
Amiodarone,
verapamil, increase
digoxin levels

1-­2 mg/mL

Use with β blocker
or disopyramide
exacerbates CHF,
increases digoxin
level and toxicity

CLASS III: PROLONGS REPOLARIZATION
Amiodarone
SVT, JET, VT

CLASS IV AND MISCELLANEOUS MEDICATIONS
Digoxin
SVT (not WPW),
Oral/load instructions:
atrial flutter, atrial
Premature: 20 μg/kg
fibrillation
Newborn: 30 μg/kg
>6 mo: 40 μg/kg
Give 1/2 total dose
followed by 1/4 q8-­
12h × 2 doses
Maintenance: 10 μg/
kg/24 hr divide q12h
Max dose: 0.5 mg
IV: 3/4 PO dose
Max dose: 0.5 mg
Verapamil

SVT (not WPW)

Oral: 2-­8 mg/kg/day
divided q8h
Max dose: 480 mg/
day
IV: 0.1-­0.3 mg/kg/
dose
Max dose: 5-­10 mg/
dose

Bradycardia, asystole,
high-­degree AV block, PR
prolongation, hypotension,
CHF

Adenosine

SVT

IV: 50-­300 μg/kg by
need rapid IV push
Begin with 50 μg/kg
and increase by 50-­
100 μg/kg/dose
Max dose: 18 mg

Chest pain, flushing, dyspnea,
bronchospasm, atrial
fibrillation, bradycardia,
asystole

AV, Atrioventricular; CHF, congestive heart failure; CNS, central nervous systems; GI, gastrointestinal; IV, intravenous; JET, junctional ectopic tachycardia; NAPA, N-­acetyl
procainamide; PAC, premature atrial contraction; PTT, partial thromboplastin time; PVC, premature ventricular contraction; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus–like illness; SVT,
supraventricular tachycardia; VF, ventricular fibrillation; VT, ventricular tachycardia; WPW, Wolff-­Parkinson-­White syndrome.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 484 u Disturbances of Rate and Rhythm of the Heart 2847

I

aVR

V1

V4

II

aVL

V2

V5

III

aVF

V3

V6

II

Fig. 484.1 Phasic sinus arrhythmia. Note the variation in P-­P interval with no significant change in P-­wave morphology or PR interval. This rhythm
is normal.

I

aVR

V1

V4

II

aVL

V2

V5

III

aVF

V3

V6

II

Fig. 484.2 Premature atrial contraction (PAC). The second and tenth beats are premature, and deformation of the previous T wave identifies the
presence of a premature atrial contraction.

as uniform or monomorphic, suggesting origin from a common site.
When PVCs vary in contour, they are designated as multiform or
polymorphic, suggesting origin from more than one ventricular site.
Ventricular extrasystoles are often, but not always, followed by a full
compensatory pause because of a lack of resetting of the sinus node.
The presence of fusion beats, that is, complexes with morphologic features that are intermediate between those of normal sinus beats and
those of PVCs, proves the ventricular origin of the premature beat.

Extrasystoles produce a smaller stroke and pulse volume than normal
and, if quite premature, may not be audible with a stethoscope or palpable at the radial pulse. When frequent, extrasystoles may assume a
definite rhythm, for example, alternating with normal beats (bigeminy) or occurring after two normal beats (trigeminy). Most patients
are unaware of single PVCs, although some may be aware of a “skipped
beat” over the precordium. This sensation is caused by the increased
stroke volume of the normal beat after a compensatory pause. Anxiety,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2848 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

I

aVR

V1

V4

V3R

II

aVL

V2

V5

V4R

III

aVF

V3

V6

V7

II

Fig. 484.3 Premature ventricular contractions in a bigeminal rhythm. Note that the premature beat is wide and has a completely different mor-

phology from that of the sinus beat. The premature beat is not preceded by a discernible premature P wave or any appreciable deformation of the
preceding T wave.

a febrile illness, or ingestion of various drugs or stimulants may make
PVCs more frequent.
It is important to distinguish PVCs that are benign from those that
are likely to lead to more severe arrhythmias. The former usually disappear (or are “suppressed) at higher sinus rates, as seen during exercise.
If they persist or become more frequent during exercise, the arrhythmia may have greater significance. The following criteria are indications for further investigation of PVCs that could require suppressive
therapy: (1) ≥2 PVCs in a row; (2) multiform PVCs; (3) increased
ventricular ectopic activity with exercise; (4) R-­on-­T phenomenon
(premature ventricular depolarization occurs on the T wave of the
preceding beat); (5) extreme frequency of beats (e.g., >20% of total
beats on Holter monitoring); and (6) most importantly, the presence
of underlying heart disease, a history of heart surgery, or both. The
best therapy for benign PVCs is reassurance that the arrhythmia is not
life threatening, although highly symptomatic individuals may benefit
from suppressive therapy.
Malignant PVCs are usually secondary to another medical problem
(electrolyte imbalance, hypoxia, drug toxicity, cardiac injury, or a channelopathy). Successful treatment includes correction of the underlying
abnormality if possible. An intravenous lidocaine bolus and drip is
the first line of therapy, with more effective drugs such as amiodarone
reserved for refractory cases or for patients with underlying ventricular
dysfunction or hemodynamic compromise.

484.3 Supraventricular Tachycardia
Aarti S. Dalal and George F. Van Hare
Supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) is a general term that includes
essentially all forms of paroxysmal or incessant tachycardia except
ventricular tachycardia. The category of SVT can be divided into three
major subcategories: reentrant tachycardias using an accessory pathway, reentrant tachycardias without an accessory pathway, and ectopic
or automatic tachycardias. Atrioventricular reciprocating tachycardia (AVRT) involves an accessory pathway and is the most common

mechanism of SVT in infants. Atrioventricular node reentry tachycardia (AVNRT) is rare in infancy but increases during childhood and
into adolescence. Atrial flutter is rarely seen in children with normal
hearts, whereas intraatrial reentry tachycardia (also known as atrial
flutter) is sometimes seen in patients after cardiac surgery. Atrial and
junctional ectopic tachycardias are more often associated with abnormal hearts (cardiomyopathy) and the immediate postoperative period
after surgery for CHD.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Reentrant SVT is characterized by an abrupt onset and termination;
it may occur when the patient is at rest or exercising, and in infants it
may be precipitated by an acute infection. Attacks may last only a few
seconds or may persist for hours. The heart rate usually exceeds 180
beats/min in older children and adolescents and 220 bpm in infants
and younger children. Rates of SVT are often as high as 300 beats/min
in newborns and infants. The only complaint may be awareness of the
rapid heart rate.
Many older children tolerate these episodes extremely well, and it is
unlikely that short paroxysms are a danger to life. If heart rate is exceptionally rapid or the episode is prolonged, precordial discomfort and
heart failure may occur. In children, SVT may be exacerbated by exposure to caffeine, nonprescription decongestants, or bronchodilators.
In young patients, the diagnosis may be more obscure because of
their inability to communicate their symptoms. The heart rate during
infancy is normally higher than in older children and increases greatly
with crying. Occasionally, infants with SVT initially present with heart
failure because the tachycardia may go unrecognized for a long time,
leading to tachycardia-­induced cardiomyopathy. The heart rate during SVT episodes is frequently in the range of 240-­300 beats/min. If the
episode lasts 6-­24 hours or more, heart failure may be recognized, and
the infant may present with poor feeding; an ashen color; and will be
restless and irritable, with tachypnea, poor pulses, and hepatomegaly.
When tachycardia occurs in the fetus, it can cause hydrops fetalis, the
in utero manifestation of heart failure.
In neonates, SVT is usually manifested as a narrow QRS complex
(<0.08 second). The P wave is visible on a standard ECG in only 50–60%

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 484 u Disturbances of Rate and Rhythm of the Heart 2849
of neonates with SVT, but it is detectable with a transesophageal lead
in most patients. Differentiation from sinus tachycardia may be difficult but is important because sinus tachycardia requires treatment of
the underlying problem (e.g., sepsis, hypovolemia) rather than antiarrhythmic medication. If the rate is >230 beats/min with an abnormal
P-­wave axis (a normal P wave is positive in leads I and aVF), sinus
tachycardia is not likely. The heart rate in SVT also tends to be relatively
fixed, whereas in sinus tachycardia the heart rate varies with changes
in parasympathetic and sympathetic tone. AVRT uses a bypass tract
that may be able to conduct bidirectionally (Wolff-­Parkinson-­White
[WPW] syndrome) or may be retrograde only (concealed accessory
pathway). Patients with WPW syndrome have a small but real risk of
sudden death. If the accessory pathway rapidly conducts in antegrade
fashion, the patient is at risk for atrial fibrillation begetting ventricular

I

aVR

V1

V4

II

aVL

V2

V5

III

aVF

V3

V6

I

aVR

V1

V4

II

aVL

V2

V5

III

aVF

V3

V6

II

A

B

fibrillation. Risk stratification, including 24-­hour Holter monitoring
and exercise study, may help differentiate patients at higher risk for
sudden death from WPW. However, it is important to note that intermittent preexcitation may not decrease a patient’s risk profile. Syncope
is an ominous symptom in WPW, and any patient with syncope and
WPW syndrome should have an electrophysiology study (EPS) and
consideration for catheter ablation.
The typical electrocardiographic features of WPW syndrome
are seen when the patient is not having tachycardia. These features
include a short P-­R interval and slow upstroke of a widened QRS
(delta wave) (Fig. 484.4). This may not be evident in every lead on
an ECG. Although most often presenting in patients with a normal
heart, WPW syndrome may also be associated with Ebstein anomaly
of the tricuspid valve, congenitally corrected transposition of the great

II

Fig. 484.4 A, Supraventricular tachycardia in a child with Wolff-­Parkinson-­White (WPW) syndrome. Note the normal QRS complexes during the

tachycardia, as well as clear retrograde P waves seen on the upstroke of the T waves. B, Later, the typical features of WPW syndrome are apparent
(short P-­R interval, wide QRS with slurred upstroke known as a delta wave).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2850 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
arteries, or certain forms of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. WPW may
also be associated with hypokalemic periodic paralysis, Danon disease,
tuberous sclerosis, and rarely with pathogenic variants in PRKAG2.
The critical anatomic structure is an accessory pathway consisting of
an electrically active myocardial fiber connecting atrium to ventricle on
either the right or the left side of the AV ring (Fig. 484.5). During sinus
rhythm, the impulse is carried over both the AV node and the accessory pathway; it produces some degree of fusion of the two depolarization fronts that results in an abnormal QRS complex. During AVRT, an
impulse is carried in antegrade fashion through the AV node (orthodromic tachycardia), which results in a normal QRS complex, and in
retrograde fashion through the accessory pathway to the atrium, thereby
perpetuating the tachycardia. In these cases, only after cessation of the
tachycardia is the typical ECG features of WPW syndrome recognized
(see Fig. 484.4). When rapid antegrade conduction occurs through
the accessory pathway during tachycardia and the retrograde reentry
pathway to the atrium is by the AV node (antidromic tachycardia), the
QRS complexes are wide and the potential for more serious arrhythmias
(ventricular fibrillation) is greater, especially if atrial fibrillation occurs.
AVNRT involves the use of two functional pathways within the
AV node: the slow and fast AV node pathways. This arrhythmia is
more often seen in adolescence and young adulthood. It is one of the
few forms of SVT that is occasionally associated with syncope. This
arrhythmia is often seen in association with exercise.

TREATMENT

In infants, vagal stimulation can be induced by transiently placing an
ice bag over the entire face to abort the attack for 15-­30 seconds (this
can be repeated if needed). Older children may be taught vagal maneuvers such as the Valsalva maneuver, straining, breath holding, or standing on their head. Ocular pressure must never be performed, and carotid
sinus massage is rarely effective. When these measures fail, several pharmacologic alternatives are available (see Table 484.1). In stable patients,
adenosine by rapid intravenous push is the treatment of choice (0.1
mg/kg, up to 6 mg) because of its rapid onset of action and minimal
effects on cardiac contractility. The dose may need to be increased (0.2
mg/kg, up to 12 mg) if no effect on the tachycardia is seen. Because of
the potential for adenosine to initiate atrial fibrillation, it should never
be administered without a means for direct current (DC) cardioversion near at hand. Calcium channel blockers such as verapamil have
also been used in the initial treatment of SVT in older children. Verapamil may reduce cardiac output and produce hypotension and cardiac
arrest in infants younger than 1 year and therefore is contraindicated
in this age-­group. In urgent situations when symptoms of severe heart
failure have already occurred, synchronized DC cardioversion (0.5-­2 J/
kg) is recommended as the initial management (see Chapter 79). Pace
termination using esophageal pacing catheter is also an option.
Once the patient has been converted to sinus rhythm, a longer-­
acting agent is selected for maintenance therapy. In patients without an

*
a

n
a

NSR

Fig. 484.5 Schematic representation of the heart with a right-­sided

accessory pathway (WPW syndrome). The asterisk indicates initiation of
the sinus beat. The arrows indicate the direction and spread of excitation. The electrocardiographic complex shown represents a fusion beat
that combines activation over the normal (n) and accessory (a) pathways. The latter inscribes the delta wave. NSR, Normal sinus rhythm.

antegrade accessory pathway (non-­WPW), the β-­adrenergic blockers
are the mainstay of drug therapy. Digoxin has been used for decades
and may be effective in infants, but less so in older children. In children with WPW, digoxin or calcium channel blockers may increase the
rate of antegrade conduction of impulses through the bypass tract, with
the possibility of ventricular fibrillation, and are therefore contraindicated. These patients are usually managed with β blockers. In patients
with resistant tachycardias, flecainide, propafenone, sotalol, and amiodarone are all acceptable next-­line agents. Most antiarrhythmic agents
have the potential of causing new dangerous arrhythmias (proarrhythmia) and decreasing heart function. Flecainide and propafenone
should be limited to use in patients with hearts having otherwise normal cardiac function.
If cardiac failure occurs because of prolonged tachycardia in an infant
with a normal heart, cardiac function usually returns to normal after
sinus rhythm is reinstituted, although it may take days to weeks. Infants
with SVT diagnosed within the first 3-­4 months of life have a lower incidence of recurrence than those initially diagnosed at a later age. These
patients have up to an 80% chance of resolution by the first year of life,
although approximately 30% will have recurrences later in childhood;
if medical therapy is required, it can be tapered by 12-­18 months and
the patient watched for signs of recurrence. Parents should be taught to
measure the heart rate in their infants, so that prolonged asymptomatic
episodes of SVT may be detected before heart failure occurs.
The use of 24-­
hour electrocardiographic (Holter) monitoring
assists in following the course of therapy and detecting brief runs
of asymptomatic tachycardia, particularly in younger children and
infants. Direct-­to-­consumer heart monitoring devices (“wearables”)
are beginning to replace traditional monitors as newer technology
allows for miniaturization and improved accuracy of at-­home monitoring devices. These devices have helped identify asymptomatic
tachycardia in infants and young children. Some centers use transesophageal pacing to evaluate the effects of therapy in infants. More
detailed electrophysiology studies performed in the cardiac catheterization laboratory are often indicated in patients with refractory SVT
who are candidates for catheter ablation. During an EPS, multiple electrode catheters are placed transvenously in different locations in the
heart. Pacing is performed to evaluate the conduction characteristics
of the accessory pathway and to initiate the tachyarrhythmia, and mapping is performed to locate the accessory pathway. Catheter ablation
of an accessory pathway is frequently used in children and teenagers
and in patients who require multiple agents or find drug side effects
intolerable or for whom arrhythmia control is poor. Ablation may be
performed either by radiofrequency ablation, which creates tissue
heating, or cryoablation, in which tissue is frozen (Fig. 484.6). The
overall initial success rate for catheter ablation in experienced pediatric
laboratories ranges from 90% to 98%, depending on the location of the
accessory pathway. Surgical ablation of bypass tracts is rarely done and
proposed only in carefully selected patients.
The management of SVT caused by AVNRT is almost identical to
that for AVRT. Children with AVNRT are not at increased risk of sudden death because they do not have a manifest accessory pathway. In
practice, their episodes are more likely to be brought on by exercise or
other forms of stress, and the heart rates can be quite fast, leading to
chest pain, dizziness, and occasionally syncope. If chronic antiarrhythmic medication is desired, β blockers are the drugs of choice; acutely,
AVNRT responds to adenosine. Less is known about the natural history, but patients with AVNRT are seen quite frequently in adulthood,
so spontaneous resolution seems unlikely. Patients are quite amenable
to catheter ablation, either using radiofrequency energy or cryoablation, with high success rates and low complication rates.
Atrial ectopic tachycardia is an uncommon tachycardia in childhood. It is characterized by a variable rate (seldom >200 beats/min),
identifiable P waves with an abnormal axis, and either a sustained
or incessant nonsustained tachycardia (Fig. 484.7). This form of
atrial tachycardia has a single automatic focus. Identification of this
mechanism is aided by monitoring the ECG while initiating vagal or
pharmacologic therapy. Unlike reentrant tachycardias, which “break”
suddenly, automatic tachycardias such as atrial tachycardia tend to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 484 u Disturbances of Rate and Rhythm of the Heart 2851

A

B
Fig. 484.6 Three-­dimensional electroanatomic map of focal atrial tachycardias. Focal site of early activation (red) is shown, with radial propaga-

tion away from that central site. The activation map was superimposed onto the patient’s cardiac CT scan, taken the day before the procedure and
imported into the mapping system. This patient had two separate atrial foci. A, Tachycardia #1: Earliest site of activation, mapped to the posterior
aspect of the LSPV ostium. Posterior external view (left side) and endoluminal or internal view looking posterior to anterior from within the left atrium
into the mouth of the LSPV (right side) are shown. B, Tachycardia #2: Earliest site mapped to the aortomitral continuity. The anatomic relation between the mitral annulus and the aortic root can be clearly appreciated (left side). The location of the ablation catheter at the site of earliest atrial
activation during atrial tachycardia is shown on the TEE image (right side). AMC, Aortomitral continuity; AoV, aortic valve; LA, left atrium; LAA, left
atrial appendage; LAO, left anterior oblique; LIPV, left inferior pulmonary vein; LMCA, left main coronary artery; LSPV, left superior pulmonary vein;
LV, left ventricle; MV, mitral valve; RIPV, right inferior pulmonary vein; RSPV, right superior pulmonary vein; TEE, transesophageal echocardiogram.
(From Lee G, Sanders P, Kalman JM. Catheter ablation of atrial arrhythmias: state of the art. Lancet. 2012;380:1509–1518, Fig 3.)

I

aVR

V1

V4

II

aVL

V2

V5

III

aVF

V3

V6

II

Fig. 484.7 Atrial ectopic tachycardia. Note the abnormal P waves and relative prolongation of the PR interval.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2852 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
“warm up” and “cool down” (i.e., rates tend to gradually increase and
decrease). Atrial ectopic tachycardias are usually more difficult to control pharmacologically than the more common reentrant tachycardias.
If pharmacologic therapy with a single agent is unsuccessful, catheter
ablation is suggested and has a high success rate, usually >90%. Long-­
term treatment or ablation may not be necessary in some cases, as atrial
ectopic tachycardia may resolve spontaneously in some patients.
Chaotic or multifocal atrial tachycardia is defined as atrial tachycardia with ≥3 ectopic P-­
wave morphologies, frequent blocked P
waves, and varying P-­R intervals of conducted beats. This arrhythmia
occurs most often in infants younger than 1 year of age, usually without
concomitant cardiac disease, although some evidence suggests an association with viral myocarditis or pulmonary disease. The goal of drug
treatment is rate control, or slowing of the ventricular rate, because
conversion to sinus rhythm may not be possible. Multiple agents are
often required. When this arrhythmia occurs in infancy, it usually terminates spontaneously by 3 years of age.
Accelerated junctional ectopic tachycardia (JET) is an automatic
(non-­reentry) arrhythmia in which the junctional rate exceeds that of
the sinus node and AV dissociation may result. This arrhythmia is most
often recognized in the early postoperative period after cardiac surgery
and may be extremely difficult to control. Reduction of the infusion
rate of exogenous catecholamines and mitigating causes of endogenous
catecholamines such as fever and pain are important adjuncts to management. Intravenous amiodarone and procainamide are effective in
the treatment of postoperative JET. Congenital JET may be seen in the
absence of surgery. It is often incessant, can be difficult to treat, and can
lead to a dilated cardiomyopathy. Patients who require chronic therapy
may respond to amiodarone or sotalol. Congenital JET can be cured by
catheter ablation, but long-­term AV block requiring a pacemaker is an
occasional important complication.
Atrial flutter, also known as intraatrial reentrant tachycardia, is an
atrial tachycardia characterized by atrial activity at a rate of 250-­300
beats/min in children and adolescents and 400-­600 beats/min in neonates. The mechanism of common atrial flutter consists of a reentrant
rhythm originating in the right atrium circling the tricuspid valve
annulus. Because the AV node cannot transmit such rapid impulses,

some degree of AV block is virtually always present, and the ventricles respond to every second to fourth atrial beat (Fig. 484.8). Occasionally, the response is variable, and the rhythm appears irregular.
In older children, atrial flutter usually occurs in the setting of CHD;
neonates with atrial flutter frequently have normal hearts. Atrial flutter
may occur during acute infectious illnesses but is most often seen in
patients with large stretched atria, such as those associated with long-­
standing mitral or tricuspid insufficiency, tricuspid atresia, Ebstein
anomaly, or rheumatic mitral stenosis. Atrial flutter can also occur
after any palliative or corrective cardiac surgery involving an atriotomy. Uncontrolled atrial flutter may precipitate heart failure. Vagal
maneuvers or adenosine may produce a temporary slowing of the heart
rate as a result of increased AV block, allowing a diagnosis to be made.
The diagnosis is confirmed by ECG, which demonstrates the rapid and
regular atrial saw-­toothed flutter waves. Atrial flutter usually converts
immediately to sinus rhythm by synchronized DC cardioversion, which is
most often the treatment of choice. If pacing wires or atrial pacemaker
leads are present, pace termination with atrial overdriving pacing may
be a treatment option. In infants, an esophageal pacing lead can also
be used, but care must be taken to avoid inadvertent ventricular pacing. Patients with chronic atrial flutter in the setting of CHD may be
at increased risk for thromboembolism and stroke and should thus
undergo anticoagulation before elective cardioversion. β Blockers or
calcium channel blockers may be used to slow the ventricular response
in atrial flutter by prolonging the AV node refractory period. Other
agents may be used to maintain sinus rhythm, including class I agents
such as procainamide or propafenone or class III agents such as amiodarone and sotalol. Catheter ablation has been used in patients with
normal hearts and those with CHD with moderate success. After cardioversion, neonates with normal hearts may be followed off antiarrhythmic therapy or may be treated with digoxin, propranolol, or
sotalol for 6-­12 months, after which the medication can usually be
discontinued, because neonatal atrial flutter generally does not recur.
Atrial fibrillation is uncommon in children and is rare in infants.
The atrial excitation is chaotic and more rapid (400-­700 beats/min)
and produces an irregularly irregular ventricular response and pulse
(Fig. 484.9). This rhythm disorder is often associated with atrial

I

aVR

V1

V4

II

aVL

V2

V5

III

aVF

V3

V6

V1

II

V5

Fig. 484.8 Neonatal atrial flutter. Note that there is variable AV conduction and the flutter waves have a cycle length of 160 msec, corresponding
to an atrial rate of 375 bpm.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 484 u Disturbances of Rate and Rhythm of the Heart 2853

I

aVR

V1

V4

II

aVL

V2

V5

III

aVF

V3

V6

II

Fig. 484.9 Atrial fibrillation, characterized by the absence of clear P waves and an irregularly irregular ventricular response. One can appreciate the

irregular, rapid undulations (F waves). Fibrillatory waves may not be visible in all leads and should be carefully sought in every tracing with irregular
R-­R intervals. Note that no two R-­R intervals are the same.

enlargement or disease. Atrial fibrillation may be seen in older children with rheumatic mitral valve stenosis. It is also seen rarely as a
complication of atrial surgery, in patients with left atrial enlargement
secondary to left AV valve insufficiency, and in patients with WPW
syndrome. Thyrotoxicosis, pulmonary embolism, pericarditis, or cardiomyopathy may be suspected in a previously normal older child
or adolescent who presents with atrial fibrillation. Very rarely, atrial
fibrillation may be familial and is usually an autosomal dominant
disorder often affecting the potassium or sodium channel genes. The
best initial treatment is rate control, most effectively with calcium
channel blockers, to limit the ventricular rate during atrial fibrillation. Digoxin is not given if WPW syndrome is present. Normal sinus
rhythm may be restored with intravenous procainamide, ibutilide, or
amiodarone; DC cardioversion is the first choice in hemodynamically
unstable patients. Patients with chronic atrial fibrillation are at risk
for thromboembolism and stroke and should undergo anticoagulation with warfarin. Patients being treated by elective cardioversion
should also undergo anticoagulation.

484.4 Ventricular Tachyarrhythmias
Aarti S. Dalal and George F. Van Hare
Ventricular tachycardia (VT) is much less common than SVT in pediatric patients. VT is defined as at least three PVCs at >120 beats/min
(Fig. 484.10). It may be paroxysmal or incessant. VT can be seen in
congenital or acquired heart disease, including inherited arrhythmia
syndromes secondary to channelopathies, myopathies, or laminopathies. VT may be associated with structural disease such as myocarditis, anomalous origin of a coronary artery, mitral valve prolapse,
primary cardiac tumors, arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy (previously
known as arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy), dilated or
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and cardiac laminopathies (associated
with lamin A/C gene pathogenic variants). Patients with laminopathies
associated with a variant in the lamin A/C gene (LMNA), as seen in
Emery Dreifuss muscular dystrophy or 1B limb girdle muscular dystrophy are at risk of primary ventricular arrhythmias in addition to
development of cardiomyopathies. VT can also be seen in patients with

channelopathies such as catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia, Brugada syndrome, TANGO2-­related encephalopathy
and arrhythmias, and long QT syndrome. A prolonged QT interval of
either congenital or acquired (proarrhythmic medication or hypokalemia, hypocalcemia, hypomagnesemia) causation can increase a patient’s
risk of arrhythmias. Other causes include WPW syndrome and drug use
(cocaine, amphetamines). VT may develop years after intraventricular
surgery (especially tetralogy of Fallot and related defects) or occur without obvious organic heart disease. VT must be distinguished from SVT
with aberrancy or rapid conduction over an accessory pathway (Table
484.2). The presence of clear capture and fusion beats confirms the diagnosis of VT. Although some children tolerate rapid ventricular rates for
many hours, this arrhythmia should be promptly treated because hypotension and degeneration into ventricular fibrillation may result. For
patients who are hemodynamically stable, intravenous amiodarone, lidocaine, and procainamide are the initial drugs of choice. If treatment is to
be successful, it is critical to search for and correct any underlying abnormalities, such as electrolyte imbalance, hypoxia, or drug toxicity. Amiodarone is the treatment of choice during cardiac arrest (see Chapter 79).
Hemodynamically unstable patients with VT should be immediately
treated with DC cardioversion. Overdrive ventricular pacing, through
temporary pacing wires or a permanent pacemaker, may also be effective, although it may cause the arrhythmia to deteriorate into ventricular
fibrillation. In the neonatal period, VT may be associated with an anomalous left coronary artery (see Chapter 481.2) or a myocardial tumor.
Unless a clearly reversible cause is identified, an electrophysiology
study is usually indicated for patients in whom VT has developed,
and depending on the findings, catheter ablation and/or implantable
cardioverter-­defibrillator (ICD) implantation may be indicated.
A related arrhythmia, ventricular accelerated rhythm, is occasionally seen in infants. It is defined the same way as VT, but the rate is only
slightly faster than the coexisting sinus rate (within 10%). It is generally
benign and resolves spontaneously.
Ventricular fibrillation (VF) is a chaotic rhythm that results in
death unless an effective ventricular beat is rapidly reestablished.
Usually, cardiopulmonary resuscitation and DC defibrillation are
necessary. If defibrillation is ineffective or VF recurs, amiodarone or
lidocaine may be given intravenously and defibrillation repeated (see
Chapter 79). After recovery from VF, a search should be made for the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2854 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

I

aVR

V1

V4

II

aVL

V2

V5

III

aVF

V3

V6

II

Fig. 484.10 Ventricular tachycardia. The QRS complexes are wide and abnormal. Atrioventricular dissociation can be best appreciated in the lead
II rhythm strip at the bottom.

Table 484.2  Diagnosis of Tachyarrhythmias: Electrocardiographic Findings
HEART RATE (BEATS/MIN)

P WAVE

QRS DURATION

REGULARITY

Sinus tachycardia

<230

Always present, normal axis

Normal

Rate varies with respiration

Atrial tachycardia

180-­320

Present
Abnormal P-­wave
morphology and axis

Normal or prolonged (with
aberration)

Usually regular, but
ventricular response may
be variable because of
Wenckebach conduction

Atrial fibrillation

120-­180

Fibrillatory waves

Normal or prolonged (with
aberration)

Irregularly irregular (no two
R-­R intervals alike)

Atrial flutter

Atrial: 250-­400
Ventricular response
variable: 100-­320

Saw-­tooth flutter waves

Normal or prolonged (with
aberration)

Regular ventricular
response (e.g., 2:1, 3:1,
3:2)

Junctional tachycardia

120-­280

Atrioventricular dissociation
with no fusion, and normal
QRS capture beats

Normal or prolonged (with
aberration)

Regular (except with
capture beats)

Ventricular tachycardia

120-­300

Atrioventricular dissociation
with capture beats and
fusion beats

Prolonged for age

Regular (except with
capture beats)

underlying cause. EPS is indicated for patients who have survived VF
unless a clearly reversible cause is identified. If WPW syndrome is
noted, catheter ablation should be performed. For patients in whom no
correctable abnormality can be found, an ICD is almost always indicated because of the high risk of sudden death.

484.5 Long QT Syndromes
Aarti S. Dalal and George F. Van Hare
Long QT syndrome is a genetic abnormality of ventricular repolarization, with an estimated incidence of about 1 per 10,000 births
(Table 484.3; also includes other genetic arrhythmia syndromes). It
presents as a long QT interval on the surface ECG and is associated
with malignant ventricular arrhythmias (torsades de pointes and

VF). Long QT syndrome can cause syncope and sudden death and
may be the cause of some cases of sudden infant death syndrome,
drowning, and intrauterine fetal demise (Fig. 484.11). In perhaps
80% of cases, there is an identifiable pathogenic variant. The distinction between dominant and recessive forms of the disease (Romano-­
Ward syndrome vs Jervell-­Lange-­Nielsen syndrome) is no longer
made because the latter recessive condition is known to result from
the homozygous state. Jervell-­L ange-­Nielsen syndrome is associated with congenital sensorineural deafness. Asymptomatic but at-­
risk patients carrying the gene variant may not all have a prolonged
QT duration. QT interval prolongation may become apparent with
exercise, position change or during catecholamine infusions.
Genetic studies have identified pathogenic variants in cardiac potassium and sodium channels (see Table 484.3). Additional forms (up to 13
variants) of long QT syndrome (LQTS) have been described, but these
are much less common. Genotype may predict clinical manifestations;

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 484 u Disturbances of Rate and Rhythm of the Heart 2855
LQTS type 1 (LQT1) events are usually induced by stress or exertion,
whereas events in LQT3 often occur at rest, especially during sleep
(see Fig. 484.11). LQT2 events have an intermediate pattern, often
occurring in the postpartum period or with auditory triggers. LQT3
has the highest probability for sudden death, followed by LQT2 and
then LQT1. Drugs may prolong the QT interval directly but more often
do so when drugs such as erythromycin or ketoconazole inhibit their
metabolism (Table 484.4).
The clinical manifestation of LQTS in children is most often a syncopal episode brought on by exercise, fright, or a sudden startle; some
events occur during sleep (LQT3). Patients can initially be seen with
seizures, presyncope, or palpitations; approximately 10% are initially
in cardiac arrest. The diagnosis is based on electrocardiographic and
clinical criteria. Not all patients with long QT intervals have LQTS, and
patients with normal QT intervals on a resting ECG may have LQTS. A
heart rate–corrected QT interval (QTc) of >0.47 second is highly indicative, whereas a QTc interval of >0.44 second is suggestive. Other features
include notched T waves in three leads, T-­wave alternans, a low heart
rate for age, a history of syncope (especially with stress), and a familial
history of either LQTS or unexplained sudden death. Exercise testing,
provocative drug testing, and 24-­hour Holter monitoring are adjuncts
to the diagnosis. Genotyping is available and can identify the pathogenic variant in approximately 80% of patients known to have LQTS by
clinical criteria. Genotyping is not useful in ruling out the diagnosis in
individuals with suspected disease, but when positive is very useful in
identifying asymptomatic affected relatives of the index case.
Short QT syndromes manifest with atrial or ventricular fibrillation
and are associated with syncope and sudden death (see Table 484.3).

They are often caused by a gain-­of-­function mutation in cardiac potassium channels.
Treatment of LQTS includes the use of β-­blocking agents at doses
that blunt sympathetic tone. Nonselective β blockers such as propranolol and nadolol seem to be more effective than atenolol and metoprolol for some genotypes. Some patients require a pacemaker because
of drug-­induced bradycardia. An implantable cardiac defibrillator
(ICD) is indicated in patients with continued syncope despite treatment with β blockers and those who have experienced cardiac arrest.
Genotype-­phenotype correlative studies suggest that β blockers are not
as effective in patients with LQT3, but these patients may respond to
mexiletine with shortening of the QT interval.

484.6 Sinus Node Dysfunction
Aarti S. Dalal and George F. Van Hare
Sinus arrest and sinoatrial block may cause a sudden pause in the
heartbeat. Sinus arrest is presumably caused by failure of impulse formation within the sinus node. Sinoatrial block results from a block
between the sinus pacemaker complex and the surrounding atrium.
These arrhythmias are rare in childhood except in patients who have
had extensive atrial surgery.
Sick sinus syndrome is the result of abnormalities in the sinus node
or atrial conduction pathways, or both. This syndrome may occur in
the absence of CHD and has been reported in siblings, but it is most
commonly seen after surgical correction of congenital heart defects,

Table 484.3  Heritable Arrhythmia Syndrome Susceptibility Genes
GENE

LOCUS

PROTEIN

LONG QT SYNDROME (LQTS)
Major LQTS Genes
KCNQ1 (LQT1)

11p15.5

IKs potassium channel alpha subunit (KVLQT1, Kv7.1)

KCNH2 (LQT2)

7q35-­36

IKr potassium channel alpha subunit (HERG, Kv11.1)

SCN5A (LQT3)

3p21-­p24

Cardiac sodium channel alpha subunit (Nav1.5)

Minor LQTS Genes (Listed Alphabetically)
AKAP9

7q21-­q22

Yotiao

CACNA1C

12p13.3

Voltage-­gated L-­type calcium channel (Cav1.2)

CALM1

14q32.11

Calmodulin 1

CALM2

2p21

Calmodulin 2

CALM3

19q13.2-­q13.3

Calmodulin 3

CAV3

3p25

Caveolin-­3

KCNE1

21q22.1

Potassium channel beta subunit (MinK)

KCNE2

21q22.1

Potassium channel beta subunit (MiRP1)

KCNJ5

11q24.3

Kir3.4 subunit of IKACH channel

SCN4B

11q23.3

Sodium channel beta4 subunit

SNTA1

20q11.2

Syntrophin-­alpha1

TRIADIN KNOCKOUT (TKO) SYNDROME
TRDN

6q22.31

Cardiac triadin

ANDERSEN-­TAWIL SYNDROME (ATS)
KCNJ2 (ATS1)

17q23

IK1 potassium channel (Kir2.1)

TIMOTHY SYNDROME (TS)
CACNA1C

12p13.3

Voltage-­gated L-­type calcium channel (Cav1.2)

Cardiac-­Only TS (COTS)
CACNA1C

12p13.3

Voltage-­gated L-­type calcium channel (Cav1.2)

SHORT QT SYNDROME (SQTS)
KCNH2 (SQT1)

7q35-­36

IKr potassium channel alpha subunit (HERG, Kv11.1)

KCNQ1 (SQT2)

11p15.5

IKs potassium channel alpha subunit (KVLQT1, Kv7.1)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Continued

2856 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 484.3  Heritable Arrhythmia Syndrome Susceptibility Genes—cont’d
GENE

LOCUS

PROTEIN

KCNJ2 (SQT3)

17q23

IK1 potassium channel (Kir2.1)

CACNA1C (SQT4)

12p13.3

Voltage-­gated L-­type calcium channel (Cav1.2)

CACNB2 (SQT5)

10p12

Voltage-­gated L-­type calcium channel beta2 subunit

CACN2D1 (SQT6)

7q21-­q22

Voltage-­gated L-­type calcium channel 2 delta1 subunit

CATECHOLAMINERGIC POLYMORPHIC VENTRICULAR TACHYCARDIA (CPVT)
RYR2 (CPVT1)
1q42.1-­q43
Ryanodine receptor 2
CASQ2 (CPVT2)

1p13.3

Calsequestrin 2

KCNJ2 (CPVT3)

17q23

IK1 potassium channel (Kir2.1)

CALM1

14q32.11

Calmodulin 1

CALM3

19q13.2-­q13.3

Calmodulin 3

TRDN

6q22.31

Cardiac triadin

BRUGADA SYNDROME (BRS)
SCN5A (BrS1)

3p21-­p24

Cardiac sodium channel alpha subunit (Nav1.5)

Minor Brs Genes (Listed Alphabetically)
ABCC9

12p12.1

ATP-­binding cassette, subfamily C member 9

CACNA1C

2p13.3

Voltage-­gated L-­type calcium channel (Cav1.2)

CACNA2D1

7q21-­q22

Voltage-­gated L-­type calcium channel 2 delta1 subunit

CACNB2

10p12

Voltage-­gated L-­type calcium channel beta2 subunit

FGF12

3q28

Fibroblast growth factor 12

GPD1L

3p22.3

Glycerol-­3-­phosphate dehydrogenase 1–like

KCND3

1p13.2

Voltage-­gated potassium channel (Ito) subunit Kv4.3

KCNE3

11q13.4

Potassium channel beta3 subunit (MiRP2)

KCNJ8

12p12.1

Inward rectifier K+ channel Kir6.1

HEY2

6q

Hes-­related family BHLH transcription factor with YRPW motif 2

PKP2

12p11

Plakophilin-­2

RANGRF

17p13.1

RAN guanine nucleotide release factor 1

SCN1B

19q13

Sodium channel beta1

SCN2B

11q23

Sodium channel beta2

SCN3B

11q24.1

Sodium channel beta3

SCN10A

3p22.2

Sodium voltage-­gated channel alpha10 subunit (Nav1.8)

SLMAP

3p14.3

Sarcolemma-­associated protein

EARLY REPOLARIZATION SYNDROME (ERS)
ABCC9
12p12.1

ATP-­binding cassette, subfamily C member 9

CACNA1C

2p13.3

Voltage-­gated L-­type calcium channel (Cav1.2)

CACNA2D1

7q21-­q22

Voltage-­gated L-­type calcium channel 2 delta1 subunit

CACNB2

10p12

Voltage-­gated L-­type calcium channel beta2 subunit

KCNJ8

12p12.1

Inward rectifier K+ channel Kir6.1

SCN5A

3p21-­p24

Cardiac sodium channel alpha subunit (Nav1.5)

SCN10A

3p22.2

Sodium voltage-­gated channel alpha10 subunit (Nav1.8)

IDIOPATHIC VENTRICULAR FIBRILLATION (IVF)
ANK2
4q25-­q27

Ankyrin B

CALM1

14q32.11

Calmodulin 1

DPP6

7q36

Dipeptidyl-­peptidase-­6

KCNJ8

12p12.1

Inward rectifier K+ channel Kir6.1

RYR2

1q42.1-­q43

Ryanodine receptor 2

SCN3B

11q23

Sodium channel beta3 subunit

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 484 u Disturbances of Rate and Rhythm of the Heart 2857
Table 484.3  Heritable Arrhythmia Syndrome Susceptibility Genes—cont’d
GENE

LOCUS

PROTEIN

SCN5A

3p21-­p24

Cardiac sodium channel alpha subunit (Nav1.5)

PROGRESSIVE CARDIAC CONDUCTION DISEASE/DEFECT (PCCD)
SCN5A
3p21-­p24

Cardiac sodium channel alpha subunit (Nav1.5)

TRPM4

19q13.33

Transient receptor potential cation channel, subfamily M, member 4

SICK SINUS SYNDROME (SSS)
ANK2

4q25-­q27

Ankyrin B

HCN4

15q24-­q25

Hyperpolarization-­activated cyclic nucleotide–gated channel 4

MYH6

14q11.2

Myosin, heavy chain 6, cardiac muscle, alpha

SCN5A

3p21-­p24

Cardiac sodium channel alpha subunit (Nav1.5)

“ANKYRIN-­B SYNDROME”
ANK2

4q25-­q27

Ankyrin B

FAMILIAL ATRIAL FIBRILLATION (FAF)
ANK2

4q25-­q27

Ankyrin B

GATA4

8p23.1-­p22

GATA-­binding protein 4

GATA5

20q13.33

GATA-­binding protein 5

GJA5

1q21

Connexin 40

KCNA5

12p13

IKur potassium channel (Kv1.5)

KCNE2

21q22.1

Potassium channel beta subunit (MiRP1)

KCNH2

7q35-­36

IKr potassium channel alpha subunit (HERG, Kv11.1)

KCNJ2

17q23

IK1 potassium channel (Kir2.1)

KCNQ1

11p15.5

IKs potassium channel alpha subunit (KVLQT1, Kv7.1)

NPPA

1p36

Atrial natriuretic peptide precursor A

NUP155

5p13

Nucleoporin 155 kD

SCN5A

3p21-­p24

Cardiac sodium channel alpha subunit (Nav1.5)

From Tester DJ, Ackerman MJ. Genetics of cardiac arrhythmias. In Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, et al., eds. Braunwald’s Heart Disease, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019, Table
33.1, p. 605.

KCNH2 (LQT2)

KCNQ1 (LQT1)

Swimming

35%

Exertion/emotion

C676

N1

30%

C1159

N1
Auditory
triggers
Postpartum
period

SCN5A (LQT3)
Sleep
Rest
10%

C2016

N1

Fig. 484.11 Genotype-­phenotype correlations in long QT syndrome (LQTS). About 75% of clinically strong LQTS is caused by mutations in three
genes (35% KCNQ1, 30% KCNH2, and 10% SCN5A) encoding for ion channels that are critically responsible for the orchestration of the cardiac
action potential. Observed genotype-­phenotype correlations include swimming/exertion/emotion and LQT1, auditory triggers/postpartum period
and LQT2, and sleep/rest and LQT3. (From Tester DJ, Ackerman MJ. Genetics of cardiac arrhythmias. In: Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, et al., eds.
Braunwald’s Heart Disease, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019: Fig 33-­3, p. 607.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2858 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 484.4  Acquired Causes of QT Prolongation*
DRUGS
Antibiotics—erythromycin, clarithromycin, azithromycin,
telithromycin, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, fluoroquinolones†
Antifungal agents†—fluconazole, itraconazole, ketoconazole
Antiprotozoal agents—pentamidine isethionate
Antihistamines—astemizole, terfenadine (Seldane; Seldane has been
removed from the market for this reason)
Antidepressants—tricyclics such as imipramine (Tofranil),
amitriptyline (Elavil), desipramine (Norpramin), and doxepin
(Sinequan)
Antipsychotics—haloperidol, risperidone, phenothiazines such as
thioridazine (Mellaril) and chlorpromazine (Thorazine), selective
serotonin uptake inhibitors
Antiarrhythmic agents
Class 1A (sodium channel blockers)—quinidine, procainamide,
disopyramide
Class III (prolong depolarization)—amiodarone (rare), bretylium,
dofetilide, N-­acetyl-­procainamide, sotalol
Lipid-­lowering agents—probucol
Antianginals—bepridil
Diuretics (through K+ loss)—furosemide (Lasix), ethacrynic acid
(bumetanide [Bumex])
Opiates—methadone, oxycodone
Oral hypoglycemic agents—glibenclamide, glyburide
Organophosphate insecticides
Motility agents—cisapride, domperidone
Vasodilators—prenylamine
Other drugs—ondansetron, HIV protease inhibitors, Chinese herbs
ELECTROLYTE DISTURBANCES
Hypokalemia—diuretics, hyperventilation
Hypocalcemia
Hypomagnesemia
UNDERLYING MEDICAL CONDITIONS
Bradycardia—complete atrioventricular block, severe bradycardia,
sick sinus syndrome
Myocardial dysfunction—anthracycline cardiotoxicity, congestive
heart failure, myocarditis, cardiac tumors
Endocrinopathy—hyperparathyroidism, hypothyroidism,
pheochromocytoma
Neurologic—encephalitis, head trauma, stroke, subarachnoid
hemorrhage
Nutritional—alcoholism, anorexia nervosa, starvation
*A more exhaustive updated list of medications that can prolong the QTc interval
is available at the University of Arizona Center for Education and Research of
Therapeutics website (www.crediblemeds.org).
†Combinations of quinolones plus azoles increase the risk of prolonged QT intervals.
From Park MY. Pediatric Cardiology for Practitioners, 5th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2008:
Box 24-­1, p. 433.

Continuous monitor lead

2.52 sec

2.0 sec

Fig. 484.12 The “tachy-­brady” syndrome with sinus node dysfunction. Note the bursts of supraventricular tachycardia, probably multifocal atrial in origin, followed by long periods of sinus arrest and by sinus
bradycardia. Often, symptoms are caused by the long sinus pauses after
termination of tachycardia, rather than by the tachycardia itself.

p

First Degree AV Block
Second Degree AV Block
Mobitz Type I
(Wenckebach Phenomenon)

Mobitz Type II

2:1 AV Block

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

R
p

p

p

p

R
Complete (Third Degree)
AV Block

p

p

p

p

p

p

R
p

p

p

R
p

p

p

Fig. 484.13 Atrioventricular (AV) block. (From Park MY. Pediatric Car-

diology for Practitioners, 5th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2008: Fig 25-­1,
p. 446.)

especially the Fontan procedure and the atrial switch (Mustard or
Senning) operation for transposition of the great arteries. Clinical
manifestations depend on the heart rate. Most patients remain asymptomatic without treatment, but dizziness and syncope can occur during periods of marked sinus slowing with failure of junctional escape.
Pacemaker therapy is indicated in patients who experience symptoms
such as exercise intolerance or syncope.
Patients with sinus node dysfunction may also have episodes of
SVT (“tachy-­brady” syndrome) with symptoms of palpitations, exercise intolerance, or dizziness (Fig. 484.12). Treatment must be individualized. Drug therapy to control tachyarrhythmias (propranolol,
sotalol, amiodarone) may suppress sinus and AV node function to
such a degree that further symptomatic bradycardia may be produced.
Therefore insertion of a pacemaker in conjunction with drug therapy
is usually necessary for such patients, even in the absence of symptoms
ascribable to low heart rate.

484.7 Atrioventricular Block
Aarti S. Dalal and George F. Van Hare
Atrioventricular block may be divided into three forms (Fig. 484.13).
In first-­degree AV block, the PR interval is prolonged but all the atrial
impulses are conducted to the ventricle. In second-­degree AV block,
not every atrial impulse is conducted to the ventricle. In the variant
of second-­degree block known as the Wenckebach type (also called
Mobitz type I), the PR interval increases progressively until a P wave
is not conducted. In the cycle following the dropped beat, the PR interval normalizes. In Mobitz type II there is no progressive conduction
delay or subsequent shortening of the PR interval after a blocked beat.
This conduction defect is less common but has more potential to cause
syncope and may be progressive. A related condition is high-­grade
second-­degree AV block, in which two or more P waves in a row fail
to conduct. This is even more dangerous. In third-­degree AV block
(complete heart block), no impulses from the atria reach the ventricles. An independent escape rhythm is usually present but may not be
reliable, leading to syncope or even sudden death.
Congenital complete AV block in children is presumed to be caused
by autoimmune injury of the fetal conduction system by maternally
derived immunoglobulin G antibodies (anti-­SSA/Ro, anti-­SSB/La) in a
mother with overt or, more often, asymptomatic systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) or Sjögren syndrome. Autoimmune disease accounts for
60–70% of all cases of congenital complete AV block and 80% of cases
in which the heart is structurally normal (Fig. 484.14). A pathogenic
variant in NKX2-­5 is associated with congenital AV block and an atrial
septal defect.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 484 u Disturbances of Rate and Rhythm of the Heart 2859

I

aVR

V1

V4

V3R

II

aVL

V2

V5

V4R

III

aVF

V3

V6

V7

II

Fig. 484.14 Congenital complete atrioventricular (AV) block. The ventricular rate is regular at 44 beats/min. The atrial rate is approximately 100
beats/min and completely dissociated from the ventricle. The QRS morphology is normal, which is common in congenital complete AV block.

Complete AV block is also seen in patients with complex CHD
and abnormal embryonic development of the conduction system.
It has been associated with myocardial tumors and myocarditis.
Acquired heart block (first, second, or third degree) is seen in Lyme
disease and COVID-­19–associated multisystem inflammatory syndrome. In these syndromes, first-­degree heart block may progress to
second-­or third-­degree heart block. Complete AV block is a known
complication of myocardial abscess secondary to endocarditis. It is
also seen in genetic conditions, including LQTS, Emery Dreifuss
muscular dystrophy, and Kearns-­Sayre syndrome. Postoperative AV
block can be a complication of CHD repair—in particular, those
repairs involving closure of a ventricular septal defect.
The incidence of congenital complete AV block is 1 per 20,000-­
25,000 live births; a high fetal loss rate may cause an underestimation
of its true incidence. In some infants of mothers with SLE, complete AV
block is not present at birth but develops within the first 3-­6 months
after birth. The arrhythmia is often diagnosed in the fetus (secondary
to the dissociation between atrial and ventricular contractions seen on
fetal echocardiography) and may produce hydrops fetalis. Maternal
treatment with corticosteroids to halt progression or reverse AV block
is controversial. Infants with associated CHD and heart failure have a
high mortality rate.
In older children with otherwise normal hearts, complete AV
block is often asymptomatic, although syncope and sudden death
may occur. Infants and toddlers may have night terrors, tiredness
with frequent naps, and irritability. The peripheral pulse is prominent because of the compensatory large ventricular stroke volume
and peripheral vasodilation; systolic blood pressure is elevated.
Jugular venous pulsations occur irregularly and may be large when
the atrium contracts against a closed tricuspid valve (cannon wave).
Exercise and atropine may produce an acceleration of 10-­20 beats/
min. Systolic murmurs are frequently audible along the left sternal
border, and apical mid-­diastolic murmurs are not unusual. The first

heart sound is variable because of variable ventricular filing with
AV dissociation. AV block may result in enlargement of the heart
because of slow rates and increased diastolic ventricular filling.
The diagnosis is confirmed by electrocardiography; the P waves
and QRS complexes have no constant relationship (see Fig. 484.14).
The QRS duration may be prolonged, or it may be normal if the
heartbeat is initiated high in the AV node or bundle of His.
The prognosis for congenital complete AV block is usually favorable; patients who have been observed to age 30-­40 have lived
normal, active lives. Some patients have episodes of exercise intolerance, dizziness, and syncope (Stokes-­Adams attacks); syncope
requires the implantation of a permanent cardiac pacemaker. Pacemaker implantation should be considered for patients who develop
symptoms such as progressive cardiac dilation, prolonged pauses,
or daytime average heart rates of ≤50 beats/min. In addition, prophylactic pacemaker implantation in adolescents is reasonable considering the low risk of the implant procedure and the difficulty in
predicting who will develop sudden severe symptoms.
Cardiac pacing is recommended in neonates with low ventricular rates (≤55 beats/min), evidence of heart failure, wide complex
rhythms, or CHD (with ventricular rates <70 beats/min). Isoproterenol, atropine, or epinephrine may be tried to increase the heart rate
temporarily until pacemaker placement can be arranged. Transthoracic
epicardial pacemaker implants have traditionally been used in infants;
transvenous placement of pacemaker leads is available for young children. Postsurgical complete AV block can occur after any open heart
procedure requiring suturing near the AV valves or crest of the ventricular septum. Postoperative heart block is initially managed with
temporary pacing wires. The likelihood of a return of normal conduction after 10-­14 days is low; a permanent pacemaker is recommended
after that time.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2860 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
(dilated or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, long QT interval, arrhythmogenic [right ventricular] cardiomyopathy, Brugada or Marfan
syndromes) or sudden unexplained death. Death often follows exertion or exercise. Some patients with sudden death during sports have
anatomically normal hearts at autopsy; these patients should undergo
genetic testing for hereditary arrhythmia syndromes.

Chapter 485

Sudden Death
Aarti S. Dalal and George F. Van Hare

MECHANISM OF SUDDEN DEATH

Sudden death other than sudden infant death syndrome is rare in
children. The causes of sudden death can be divided into traumatic
versus nontraumatic in origin. Traumatic causes of sudden death are
the most common in children; these include motor vehicle crashes,
violent deaths, recreational deaths, and occupational deaths. Nontraumatic sudden deaths are often the result of specific cardiac causes.
The incidence of sudden death varies from 0.8 to 6.2 per 100,000 per
year in children and adolescents, in contrast to the higher incidence
of sudden cardiac death (SCD) in adults of 1 per 1,000. Approximately 65% of sudden deaths are a result of heart-­related problems
in patients with either normal or congenitally (repaired, palliated,
or unoperated) abnormal hearts. Competitive high school sports
(basketball, soccer, football) are high-­risk environmental factors.
Common identifiable causes of death in competitive athletes include
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, with or without obstruction to left
ventricular outflow, other cardiomyopathies, channelopathies, and
anomalous coronary arteries; most are sudden unexplained deaths
(Fig. 485.1). Table 485.1 lists other potential causes. These can be
classified as structural abnormalities, including aortic stenosis and
coronary artery abnormalities; myocardial disease, such as myocarditis; conduction system disease, including long QT syndrome; and
miscellaneous causes, including seizures, pulmonary hypertension,
and commotio cordis. Symptoms may be absent before the event but,
if present, include syncope, chest pain, dyspnea, exercise intolerance,
and palpitations. Patients may have a family history of heart disease

WPW
3%

DCM
3%

Long QT
1% Commotio
2%

There are three recognized mechanisms of sudden death: arrhythmic,
nonarrhythmic cardiac (circulatory and vascular causes), and noncardiac. Ventricular fibrillation (VF), although the most common final
cause of sudden death in adults, is only the final cause in 10–20% of
children with SCD. More often, bradycardia leads either to VF or asystole (see Chapter 484).

CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE

Valvar aortic stenosis is the congenital defect most often associated
with sudden death in children. Historically, approximately 5% of children with this disease die, although this has become quite rare in the
modern era. A history of syncope, chest pain, and evidence of severe
obstruction and left ventricular hypertrophy are risk factors (see Chapter 476.5).
Coronary artery anomalies are also frequently associated with
sudden death in children and adolescents. The most common
abnormality associated with sudden death is the origin of the left
main coronary artery from the right sinus of Valsalva. The coronary artery takes an interarterial course between the aorta and
pulmonary artery and may also have an intramural course, traveling within the ventricular myocardium. Exercise results in a rise in
pulmonary and aortic pressure, and this is thought to compress the
left main coronary artery and results in ischemia caused by compression or kinking. Anomalous origin of the right coronary artery
from the left sinus of Valsalva is much more common, but only
rarely is a cause of sudden death.

Kawasaki
disease
2%

Anomalous coronary

Aortic dissection
5%

Aortic dissection
Male non-exertional death

ARVC
ARVC
5%

SUD
25%

Cardiomyopathy NOS

Male unknown death

CAD
9%
Idiopathic
LVH/possible
SCT
1%

Female non-exertional death
Female exertional death

DCM

Anomalous
coronary
11%

Cardiomyopathy
NOS
8%

A

Male exertional death

Commotio cordis

HCM
8%

Idiopathic
LVH/possible
cardiomyopathy
8%

CAD

HCM

Female unknown death

Idiopathic LVH/possible cardiomyopathy
Idiopathic LVH/SCT

Myocarditis
9%

Kawasaki disease
Long QT
Myocarditis
AN-SUD

B

WPW

Fig. 485.1 A, Causes of sudden cardiac death in adolescent and young adult athletes. B, Cause and activity at time of death. One person figure

equals one death; female figures follow male figures unless no male deaths were present. AN-­SUD, Autopsy-­negative sudden unexplained death;
ARVC, arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy; CAD, coronary artery disease; DCM, dilated cardiomyopathy; HCM, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; LVH, left ventricular hypertrophy; NOS, not otherwise specified; SCT, sickle cell trait; SUD, sudden unexplained death; WPW, Wolff-­
Parkinson-­White syndrome. (From Harmon KG, Asif I, Maleszewski JJ, et al. Incidence, cause, and comparative frequency of sudden cardiac death
in National Collegiate Athletic Association athletes. Circulation. 2015;132:10–19, Fig. 2.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 485 u Sudden Death
CARDIOMYOPATHY

All three major types of cardiomyopathy (hypertrophic, dilated, and
restrictive) are associated with sudden death in the pediatric population; cardiac arrest or sudden death may be the initial manifestation of
the cardiomyopathy (see Chapter 488.1).
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is the most common cause
of sudden death in the athletic adolescent in the United States. The
annual risk of sudden death in young patients with HCM is 2% per year.
Risk factors for sudden death include a history of syncope, symptoms,
Table 485.1  Potential Causes of Sudden Death in Infants,
Children, and Adolescents
SIDS AND SIDS “MIMICS”
SIDS
Long QT syndromes*
Inborn errors of metabolism
Child abuse
Myocarditis
Ductal-­dependent CHD
CORRECTED OR UNOPERATED CHD
Aortic stenosis
Tetralogy of Fallot
Transposition of great vessels (postoperative atrial switch)
Mitral valve prolapse
Hypoplastic left heart syndrome
Eisenmenger syndrome
CORONARY ARTERIAL DISEASE
Anomalous origin*
Anomalous tract (tunneled)
Kawasaki disease
Periarteritis
Arterial dissection
AORTOPATHIES (DISSECTION, RUPTURED AORTA)
Marfan syndrome
Loeys-­Dietz syndrome
Takayasu aortitis
Smooth muscle dysfunction syndrome
Vascular Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome
Familial thoracic aortic aneurysm and dissection syndrome
Mycotic aneurysm
MYOCARDIAL DISEASE
Myocarditis
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy*
Dilated cardiomyopathy
Arrhythmogenic (right ventricular) cardiomyopathy
Lyme carditis
Takotsubo syndrome
Nonischemic left ventricular scar
Myocardial infarction
CONDUCTION SYSTEM ABNORMALITY/ARRHYTHMIA
Long QT syndromes*
Brugada syndrome
Proarrhythmic drugs
Wolff-­Parkinson-­White syndrome
Complete AV block
Commotio cordis
Idiopathic ventricular fibrillation
Arrhythmogenic (right ventricular) cardiomyopathy
Catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia
Heart tumor
MISCELLANEOUS
Seizures
Pulmonary hypertension
Pulmonary embolism
Heat stroke
Cocaine and other stimulant drugs or medications
Anorexia nervosa
Electrolyte disturbances
*Common.
CHD, Congenital heart disease; SIDS, sudden infant death syndrome.

2861

myocardial size, ventricular arrhythmias, and presentation at an early
age. Many patients with HCM have left ventricular outflow tract
obstruction (LVOTO). The mechanism of sudden death is arrhythmic
and may be secondary to the development of dynamic obstruction with
exercise and resultant loss of cardiac output, or may be related to cardiac ischemia. Thus patients without LVOTO are also at risk of sudden
death. The dilated cardiomyopathies are also associated with SCD in
children, although the risk is clearly lower than in adults.
Arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy (also referred to as arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy) is a specific form of cardiomyopathy associated with exercise-­induced ventricular arrhythmias and
sudden death. It mainly affects the right ventricle, but the left can be
involved as well. The diagnosis can be difficult; MRI, electrophysiology
study, or endomyocardial biopsy is used with limited reliability. Pathologically, the disease is characterized by transmural fatty replacement
of right ventricular myocardium, with patchy areas of fibrosis. Pathogenic variants are noted in ∼60% of this autosomal dominant (with
incomplete penetrance) disorder; associated genes include PKP2, DSP,
DSC2, DSG2, JUP, CTNNA3, PLN, TMEN43, SCN5A, CDH2, and DES.
Myocarditis has often been found on pathology of patients with sudden death of unknown etiology. Symptoms before sudden death may
be absent or may include overt heart failure or subtle findings such as a
high heart rate. Pediatric patients with this disease may have complete
atrioventricular block or ventricular arrhythmias.

CARDIAC ARRHYTHMIA

A primary conduction system abnormality may result in sudden death.
Causes include Wolff-­Parkinson-­White (WPW) syndrome, long QT
syndrome, short QT syndrome, and Brugada syndrome. Besides causing supraventricular tachycardia, WPW syndrome can result in atrial
fibrillation with rapid conduction across the accessory pathway, leading to VF and sudden death (Fig. 485.2). This is unusual in pediatric
patients but has an increasing incidence in adolescence. In adults, there
is an incidence of sudden death in asymptomatic patients of 1 per 1,000
patient-­years, but this rate may well be higher in children, who have
not yet survived to adulthood. As digoxin and verapamil can augment
conduction down accessory pathways, these drugs are contraindicated
in WPW syndrome.
Long QT syndrome (LQTS; see Chapter 484), a group of channelopathies that affect ventricular repolarization, is also associated with
sudden death (Fig. 485.3). The mechanism of sudden death is polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (torsades de pointes) (Fig. 485.4). An
initial presentation of SCD is found in 9% of patients. Thus treatment
of asymptomatic patients with a long QT interval on electrocardiogram
(ECG) and positive family history is advised.
Acquired long QT interval may be seen in patients with marked
electrolyte abnormalities, central nervous system injury, or starvation
(including bulimia and anorexia nervosa). Medications can also result
in prolongation of the QT interval (see Table 484.4). These patients are
also at risk of malignant ventricular arrhythmias, and correction of the
underlying problem or withdrawal of the inciting medication may be
necessary to reduce the risk of sudden death.
Brugada syndrome, an autosomal dominant disorder associated
with SCD, often occurs with fever, drugs, nighttime electrolyte disorders, or after a large meal (Fig. 485.5). The most common pathogenic
variant is a loss of function in SCN5A, seen in up to 30% of patients.
Typical ECG findings include coved ST segment elevations in leads V1-­
V3; death results from either VF or ventricular tachycardia.

MISCELLANEOUS CAUSES

Commotio cordis is an often fatal condition that follows blunt nonpenetrating trauma to the chest (e.g., from a baseball or hockey puck).
Occasionally, innocent-­appearing chest blows incurred at home or at
a playground may be fatal. Patients experience immediate VF in the
absence of identifiable cardiac trauma (contusion, hematoma, lacerated
coronary artery). This risk is highest in children before adolescence.
Historically, death results from VF that is unresponsive to resuscitative efforts in 85–90% of children. Immediate direct current (DC)
defibrillation may be effective, if available, particularly if employed

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2862 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

I

aVR

II

aVL

III

aVF

V1
V2

V3

V4
V5
V6

V1
V2

V3

Fig. 485.2 Atrial fibrillation in a patient with Wolff-­Parkinson-­White syndrome and rapid conduction to the ventricle. Note the wide QRS complexes, a result of full preexcitation, and the irregularly irregular ventricular response, caused by the atrial fibrillation.

I

II

III

aVR

V1

V4

aVL

V2

V5

aVF

V8

V6

Fig. 485.3 Long QT syndrome in a neonate. QTc is markedly prolonged, and T-­wave alternans is evident.
death, with the exception of correctable causes such as WPW (see
Chapter 484).

MEDICATION FOR ATTENTION-­DEFICIT/
HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER

Fig. 485.4 Episode of torsades de pointes in a patient with long QT
syndrome.

immediately; however, it is reported to be successful in only approximately 25% of cases.

EVALUATION AND THERAPY FOR RESUSCITATED
PATIENTS

It is important to focus therapy on potentially reversible causes of sudden death. These include correction of major hemodynamic defects,
pacing therapy for a patient with bradycardia, or supportive therapy for myocarditis. Unfortunately, reversible causes are not always
found in young cardiac arrest survivors. Adding to this dilemma is
the limited ability to predict antiarrhythmic drug response or risk of
recurrence. The implantable-­cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) is the
therapy of choice for survivors of most forms of arrhythmic sudden

Concern has been raised that stimulant medications prescribed for
children with attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder might increase
the risk of sudden death (see Chapter 50). The concern arises from
a limited number of reports to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) of sudden death of unknown etiology in individuals taking
stimulant medications, mostly adults. In a few cases, left ventricular
hypertrophy caused by hypertension, coarctation of the aorta, or HCM
has been identified at postmortem examination. No prospective studies
support the notion that these medications increase the risk, and there
is no evidence that ECG screening will reliably identify a subgroup at
risk. Some have suggested ECG screening of children before starting
these medications, but there is no consensus that such an approach is
effective. The current recommendations do not support ECG screening
before the initiation of stimulant medication in the absence of a positive cardiac history.

PREVENTION OF SUDDEN DEATH

The probability of survival to hospital discharge for a young patient
who experiences an out-­
of-­
hospital cardiac arrest is <20%. The

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 485 u Sudden Death

2863

A

II

III

V1

B

I

aVR

II

aVL

III

aVF

V1

V2

V3

V4

V5

V6

II

Fig. 485.5 Brugada syndrome. A, Frequent ventricular ectopy and sustained polymorphic ventricular tachycardia. B, Persistent coved-­type ST

segment elevation in lead V1 and V2 characteristic of Brugada type I. (A from Talib S, van de Poll SE. Brugada syndrome diagnosed after Ramadan.
Lancet. 2013;382:100.)

presence of immediate automatic external defibrillators (AEDs),
when combined with standard cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR)
at the site of exercise (gym, track, basketball, or football arena),
improves survival substantially. Thus identifying patients at risk is
extremely important. The American Academy of Pediatrics Policy
Statement on Sudden Death in the Young provides primary care
providers with guidelines screening for life-­threatening conditions,
regardless of athletic status.
Some of the more common causes of sudden death in children
and adolescents can be identified from the patient’s history (prodromal symptoms), the family history, and physical examination.
The American Heart Association (AHA) has a recommended 14-­
point preparticipation evaluation (PPE) that includes questions
about personal and family history in addition to physical exam
findings (Table 485.2). The screening for sudden cardiac arrest
and SCD should be performed at the time of PPE or upon entry
into middle school and high school. The AAP’s Preparticipation

Physical Evaluation form is available at https://www.aap.org/. Of
paramount importance is the careful evaluation of any child who
experiences syncope in association with exercise because this may
be the last opportunity to diagnose a life-­threatening condition in
such a patient.
Patient avoidance of high-­risk behavior (cocaine use, anorexia
nervosa) and knowledge of drug side effects or drug interactions
and contraindications are critical. Chest-­protecting equipment has
not been shown to prevent commotio cordis. Prompt bystander
CPR and rapid defibrillation with an AED has the highest chance
of leading to survival. Family survivors of victims of sudden death
should also be evaluated for genetic etiologies of SCD (e.g., LQTS,
HCM).
The 14-­
element screening checklist underperforms and may
miss high-­risk cardiac lesion. Depending on the population (elite
vs recreational athletes) and the screening protocol (checklist, with
ECG, with echocardiogram, with cardiac MRI), the incidence of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2864 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 485.2  Fourteen-­Element Cardiovascular Screening
Checklist for Congenital and Genetic Heart
Disease
PERSONAL HISTORY
1.	Chest pain/discomfort/tightness/pressure related to exertion
2.	Unexplained syncope/near-­syncope: Judged not to be of
neurocardiogenic (vasovagal) origin; of particular concern when
occurring during or after physical exertion
3.	Excessive exertional and unexplained dyspnea/fatigue or
palpitations, associated with exercise
4.	Prior recognition of a heart murmur
5.	Elevated systemic blood pressure
6.	Prior restriction from participation in sports
7.	Prior testing for the heart, ordered by a physician
FAMILY HISTORY
8.	Premature death (sudden and unexpected, or otherwise) before
age 50 attributable to heart disease in at least one relative
9.	Disability from heart disease in close relative <50 yr of age
10.	Hypertrophic or dilated cardiomyopathy, long QT syndrome,
or other ion channelopathies, Marfan syndrome, or clinically
significant arrhythmias; specific knowledge of certain cardiac
conditions in family members
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
11.	Heart murmur: Refers to heart murmurs judged likely to be
organic and unlikely to be innocent; auscultation should be
performed with the patient in both the supine and standing
positions (or with Valsalva maneuver), specifically to identify
murmurs of dynamic left ventricular outflow tract obstruction
12.	Femoral pulses to exclude aortic coarctation
13.	Physical stigmata of Marfan syndrome
14.	Brachial artery blood pressure (sitting position): Preferably taken
in both arms
From American College of Cardiology: ACC/AHA release recommendations for
congenital and genetic heart disease screenings in youth. https://www.acc.org/latest-­in-­
cardiology/articles/2014/09/15/14/24/acc-­aha-­release-­recommendations-­for-­congenital-­
and-­genetic-­heart-­disease-­screenings-­in-­youth

at-­risk cardiac lesions varies from 0.3–0.4% to 1.4%. The use of a
preparticipation ECG for the detection of those athletes at risk for
sudden death has long been controversial. Because many athletes
either have no pre-­event symptoms or are unwilling to admit to
symptoms for concern of not being able to play, some have proposed that the ECG may identify a small but at-­risk group with
HCM or prolonged QT, Brugada, or WPW syndromes. These ECGs
would fail to identify patients with phenotype-­negative LQTS or
catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia, as well as
coronary artery anomalies. In addition, many false positives may
be identified, requiring further evaluation to exclude worrisome
diagnoses. Preparticipation ECG testing is mandatory in several
European countries but not in the United States, although many
athletic groups with varsity-­level or professional membership (e.g.,
collegiate or professional sports organizations) require such testing
as part of the medical evaluation. If the ECG is abnormal, echocardiography is performed. Cost-­effectiveness studies suggest that
the cost for implementation of a national program in the United
States would be prohibitive because of the low incidence of sudden death in the pediatric population, the high rate of false-­positive
ECGs, and the difficulty in definitively excluding cardiac disease in
patients with borderline ECG findings. Although studies of regional
or national screening programs have suggested some benefit (e.g.,
the Veneto region of Italy), others have failed to demonstrate any
effect of screening on the background incidence of sudden death in
young individuals.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Section 5

Acquired Heart Disease
Chapter 486

Infective Endocarditis*
Erin Faherty and Thomas S. Murray
Infective endocarditis includes acute and subacute bacterial endocarditis, as well as nonbacterial endocarditis, caused by viruses,
fungi, and other microbiologic agents. It is a significant cause
of morbidity and mortality in children and adolescents despite
advances in the management and prophylaxis of the disease with
antimicrobial agents. The inability to eradicate infective endocarditis by prevention or early treatment stems from several factors.
The disease represents a complex interplay between a pathogen and
host factors such as endothelial disruption and immune function
that is still not completely understood; the nature of the infecting
organism changes over time; and diagnosis may be difficult during
early stages and thus is often delayed until a more serious manifestation has developed. Special risk groups include intravenous drug
users; survivors of cardiac surgery, especially those with mechanical prosthesis; patients taking immunosuppressant medications;
and patients who require chronic intravascular catheters. Some
patients have endocarditis on a native valve previously thought to
be healthy but found to have mild structural abnormalities on surgical inspection.

ETIOLOGY

Viridans-­type streptococci (α-­hemolytic streptococci groups such
as Streptococcus mitis, S. anginosus, S. mutans, S. salivarius, S. bovis,
S. sanguinis, and S. mitis) and Staphylococcus aureus remain the
leading causative agents for endocarditis in pediatric patients. Other
organisms cause endocarditis less frequently, and in approximately
6% of cases, blood cultures are negative for any organisms (Table
486.1). No relationship exists between the infecting organism and
the type of congenital defect, duration of illness, or age of the child.
Staphylococcal endocarditis is more common in patients with no
underlying heart disease. Viridans group streptococcal infection is
more common after dental procedures; enterococci are seen more
often after lower bowel or genitourinary manipulation.
Pseudomonas aeruginosa or Serratia marcescens is seen more frequently in intravenous drug users, and fungal organisms are encountered after open heart surgery. Coagulase-­negative staphylococci are
common in the presence of an indwelling central venous catheter.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Infective endocarditis is often a complication of congenital or
rheumatic heart disease but can also occur in children without any
abnormal valves or cardiac malformations. In developed countries,
congenital heart disease (CHD) is the overwhelming predisposing
factor. Endocarditis is rare in infancy; in this age-­group it usually
follows open heart surgery or is associated with a central venous
line.
Patients with congenital heart lesions where there is turbulent
blood flow because of a hole or stenotic orifice, especially if there is
a high-­pressure gradient across the defect, are most susceptible to
* The authors would like to thank Dr Robert S. Baltimore for his work on previous editions
of this chapter.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 486 u Infective Endocarditis
Table 486.1  Bacterial Agents in Pediatric Infective
Endocarditis
COMMON: NATIVE VALVE OR OTHER CARDIAC LESIONS
Viridans group streptococci (S. mutans, S. sanguinis, S. mitis)
Staphylococcus aureus
Group D streptococcus (enterococcus) (S. bovis, S. faecalis)
UNCOMMON: NATIVE VALVE OR OTHER CARDIAC LESIONS
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Haemophilus influenzae
Coagulase-­negative staphylococci
Abiotrophia defectiva (nutritionally variant streptococcus)
Coxiella burnetii (Q fever)*
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Brucella*
Chlamydia psittaci*
Chlamydia trachomatis*
Chlamydia pneumoniae*
Legionella*
Bartonella*
Tropheryma whipplei* (Whipple disease)
HACEK group†
Streptobacillus moniliformis*
Pasteurella multocida*
Campylobacter fetus
Culture negative (6% of cases)
PROSTHETIC VALVE
Staphylococcus epidermidis
Staphylococcus aureus
Viridans group streptococcus
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Serratia marcescens
Diphtheroids
Legionella spp.*
HACEK group†
Fungi‡
*These fastidious bacteria plus some fungi may produce culture-­negative endocarditis.
Detection may require special media, incubation for >7 days, polymerase chain
reaction on blood or valve for 16SrRNA (bacteria) or 18SrRNA (fungi), or serologic tests.
†The HACEK group includes Haemophilus spp. (H. paraphrophilus, H. parainfluenzae,
H. aphrophilus), Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans, Cardiobacterium hominis,
Eikenella corrodens, and Kingella spp.
‡Candida spp., Aspergillus spp., Pseudallescheria boydii, Histoplasma capsulatum.

endocarditis. This turbulent flow traumatizes the vascular endothelium, creating a substrate for deposition of fibrin and platelets, leading to the formation of a nonbacterial thrombotic embolus (NBTE)
that is thought to be the initiating lesion for infective endocarditis.
Biofilm forms on the surface of implanted mechanical devices such
as valves, catheters, or pacemaker wires, which also serves as the
adhesive substrate for infection. The development of transient bacteremia then colonizes this NBTE or biofilm, leading to proliferation of bacteria within the lesion. Bacterial surface proteins, such as
the FimA antigen in viridans streptococci, act as adhesion factors
to the NBTE or biofilm, after which bacteria can rapidly proliferate
within the vegetation. Given the heavy colonization of mucosal surfaces (the oropharynx or gastrointestinal, vaginal, or urinary tracts)
by potentially pathogenic bacteria, these surfaces are thought to be
the origin of this transient bacteremia. There is controversy over
the extent to which daily activities (e.g., brushing or flossing the
teeth) vs invasive procedures (e.g., dental cleaning or surgery) contribute to this bacteremia. Transient bacteremia is reported to occur
in 20–68% of patients after tooth brushing and flossing, and even
in 7–51% of patients after chewing food. The magnitude of this
bacteremia is also similar to that resulting from dental procedures.
Maintenance of good oral hygiene may be a more important factor in decreasing the frequency and magnitude of bacteremia. Case

2865

reports suggest that body piercing and tattoos may be additional
risk factors.
Children at highest risk of adverse outcome after infective endocarditis include those with prosthetic cardiac valves or other prosthetic material used for cardiac valve repair, unrepaired cyanotic
CHD (including those palliated with shunts and conduits), completely repaired defects with prosthetic material or device during
the first 6 months after repair, repaired CHD with residual defects at
or adjacent to the site of a prosthetic patch or device, valve stenosis
or insufficiency occurring after heart transplantation, permanent
valve disease from rheumatic fever (mitral stenosis, aortic regurgitation), and previous infective endocarditis. Patients with high-­
velocity blood flow lesions such as ventricular septal defects (VSDs)
and aortic stenosis are also at high risk. In older patients, congenital
bicuspid aortic valves and mitral valve prolapse with regurgitation
pose additional risks for endocarditis. Surgical correction of CHD
may reduce but does not eliminate the risk of endocarditis, except
for the repair of a simple atrial septal defect or patent ductus arteriosus without prosthetic material.
In ∼30% of patients with infective endocarditis, a predisposing factor is presumably recognized. Although a preceding dental
procedure may be identified in 10–20% of patients, the time of the
procedure may range from 1 to 6 months before the onset of symptoms—thus the continued controversy over the absolute risk of
infective endocarditis after dental procedures. Primary bacteremia
with S. aureus is thought to be another risk for endocarditis. The
occurrence of endocarditis directly after most routine heart surgery is relatively low, but it can be an antecedent event, especially
if prosthetic material is used. In the small group of patients with
culture-­negative endocarditis, epidemiologic or exposure factors
may contribute to the diagnosis (Table 486.2).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Table 486.3 outlines the manifestations of infective endocarditis.
Early manifestations are usually mild, especially when viridans group
streptococci are the infecting organisms. Prolonged fever without
other manifestations (except occasionally weight loss) that persists
for as long as several months may be the only symptom. Alternatively, with pathogenic organisms such as S. aureus, the onset may be
acute and severe, with high intermittent fever and prostration. Usually, the onset and course vary between these two extremes. Fever in
the absence of signs of URI in a patient with congenital heart disease
must be considered as endocarditis. The symptoms are often nonspecific and consist of low-­grade fever with afternoon elevations, fatigue,
myalgia, arthralgia, headache, and at times chills, nausea, and vomiting. The cardiac examination often depends on the underlying heart
disease and the location of infection. A new pathologic murmur or
changing heart murmur may be appreciated and can be associated
with heart failure. Of note, children with palliated congenital heart
disease, such as those palliated with a shunt, may not present with a
change in murmur. Splenomegaly and petechiae are seen in <50% of
patients. Serious neurologic complications such as embolic strokes,
cerebral abscesses, mycotic aneurysms, and hemorrhage are most
often associated with staphylococcal disease and may be late manifestations. Meningismus, increased intracranial pressure, altered
sensorium, and focal neurologic signs are manifestations of these
complications. Meningitis may be seen together with pneumococcal endocarditis. Myocardial abscesses may occur with staphylococcal disease and may damage the cardiac conducting system, causing
heart block, or may rupture into the pericardium and produce purulent pericarditis. Pulmonary (with right-­
sided endocarditis) and
systemic emboli (with left-­sided lesions) are infrequent, except with
fungal disease.
Many of the classic skin findings develop late in the disease; they
are seldom seen in appropriately treated patients. Such manifestations include Osler nodes (tender, pea-­size intradermal nodules in
the pads of the fingers and toes), Janeway lesions (painless, small,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2866 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 486.2  Epidemiologic Clues in the Etiologic Diagnosis of Culture-­Negative Endocarditis
EPIDEMIOLOGIC
FEATURE

COMMON MICROORGANISM

Injection drug use (IDU)

Staphylococcus aureus, including
community-­acquired oxacillin-­resistant
strains
Coagulase-­negative staphylococci
β-­Hemolytic streptococci
Fungi
Aerobic gram-­negative bacilli, including
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Polymicrobial

EPIDEMIOLOGIC
FEATURE

COMMON MICROORGANISM

Diabetes mellitus

S. aureus
β-­Hemolytic streptococci
S. pneumoniae

Early (≤1 yr) prosthetic
valve placement

Coagulase-­negative staphylococci
S. aureus
Aerobic gram-­negative bacilli
Fungi
Corynebacterium spp.
Legionella spp.

Late (>1 yr) prosthetic
valve placement

Coagulase-­negative staphylococci
S. aureus
Viridans group streptococci
Enterococcus spp.
Fungi
Corynebacterium spp.

Indwelling cardiovascular
medical devices

S. aureus
Coagulase-­negative staphylococci
Fungi
Aerobic gram-­negative bacilli
Corynebacterium spp.

Genitourinary disorders,
infection, and
manipulation, including
pregnancy, delivery, and
abortion

Enterococcus spp.
Group B streptococci (S. agalactiae)
Listeria monocytogenes
Aerobic gram-­negative bacilli
Neisseria gonorrhoeae

Dog or cat exposure

Bartonella spp.
Pasteurella spp.
Capnocytophaga spp.

Chronic skin disorders,
including recurrent
infections

S. aureus
β-­Hemolytic streptococci

Contact with
contaminated milk or
infected farm animals

Brucella spp.
Coxiella burnetii
Erysipelothrix spp.

Poor dental health, dental
procedures

Viridans group streptococci
Nutritionally variant streptococci
Abiotrophia defectiva
Granulicatella spp.
Gemella spp.
HACEK organisms

Homeless, body lice

Bartonella spp.

HIV/AIDS

Salmonella spp.
S. pneumoniae
S. aureus

Pneumonia, meningitis

S. pneumoniae

Alcohol use, cirrhosis

Bartonella spp.
Aeromonas spp.
Listeria spp.
Streptococcus pneumoniae
β-­Hemolytic streptococci

Solid-­organ
transplantation

S. aureus
Aspergillus fumigatus
Enterococcus spp.
Candida spp.

Gastrointestinal lesions

Burns

S. aureus
Aerobic gram-­negative bacilli, including
P. aeruginosa
Fungi

Streptococcus gallolyticus (bovis)
Enterococcus spp.
Clostridium septicum

HACEK, Haemophilus spp., Aggregatibacter spp., Cardiobacterium hominis, Eikenella corrodens, and Kingella spp.; HIV/AIDS, human immunodeficiency virus infection and acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome.
From Baddour LM, Wilson WR, Bayer AS, et al. Infective endocarditis in adults: diagnosis, antimicrobial therapy, and management of complications. A scientific statement for
healthcare professionals from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2015;132:1435–1486.

erythematous, or hemorrhagic lesions on the palms and soles), and
splinter hemorrhages (linear lesions beneath the nails). These
lesions may represent vasculitis produced by circulating antigen-­
antibody complexes. Retinal lesions are seen in 10–20%.
In the newborn infant the major risk factor for infective endocarditis is the presence of a central intravenous line. Thus prematurity
is a risk, as are other severe congenital abnormalities. CHD is less
likely to be the underlying condition than it is for older children.
The clinical conditions are variable and may be indistinguishable
from sepsis or congestive heart failure. Identification of infective
endocarditis is most often based on a high index of suspicion during evaluation of an infection in a child with an underlying risk
factor.

DIAGNOSIS

The critical information for appropriate treatment of infective
endocarditis is obtained from blood cultures. All other laboratory
data are secondary in importance (see Table 486.3). Blood specimens for culture should be obtained as promptly as possible, even

if the child feels well and has no other physical findings. Although
increased blood volume can increase the sensitivity of the blood
culture, smaller volumes are reasonable in neonates and small
children. When small volumes of blood are present, a single aerobic blood culture bottle should be inoculated. Ideally, for patients
weighing 2-­12.7 kg, the volume of the first blood culture is 4 mL
(repeat culture is 2 mL); for patients 12.8-­36.3 kg it is 10 mL for
initial and repeat, and for patients >36.3 kg, 20-­30 mL for both.
Three to five separate blood collections should be obtained after
careful preparation of the phlebotomy site. Contamination presents
a special problem because bacteria found on the skin may cause
infective endocarditis. The timing of collections is not important
because bacteremia can be expected to be relatively constant. In
90% of cases of endocarditis, the causative agent is recovered from
the first two blood cultures. Bacteremia is low grade in 80% (<100
colony-­forming units/mL of blood). The laboratory should be notified that endocarditis is suspected so that, if necessary, the blood
can be cultured on enriched media for longer than usual (>5 days)
to detect nutritionally deficient and fastidious bacteria or fungi.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 486 u Infective Endocarditis
Table 486.3  Manifestations of Infectious Endocarditis
HISTORY
Prior congenital or rheumatic heart disease
Preceding dental, urinary tract, or intestinal procedure
Intravenous drug use
Central venous catheter
Prosthetic heart valve

2867

Table 486.4  Diagnostic Approach to Uncommon
Pathogens Causing Endocarditis
PATHOGEN

DIAGNOSTIC PROCEDURE

Brucella spp.

Blood cultures; serology; culture,
immunohistology, and mNGS
of surgical material or blood/
plasma

Coxiella burnetii

Serology (IgG phase I >1
in 800); tissue culture,
immunohistology, and mNGS
of surgical material or blood/
plasma

Bartonella spp.

Blood cultures; serology; culture,
immunohistology, and mNGS
of surgical material or blood/
plasma

SIGNS
Elevated temperature
Tachycardia
Embolic phenomena (Roth spots, petechiae, splinter nail bed
hemorrhages, Osler nodes, CNS or ocular lesions)
Janeway lesions
New or changing murmur
Splenomegaly
Arthritis
Heart failure
Arrhythmias
Metastatic infection (arthritis, meningitis, mycotic arterial aneurysm,
pericarditis, abscesses, septic pulmonary emboli)
Clubbing

Chlamydia spp.

Serology; culture,
immunohistology, and mNGS
of surgical material or blood/
plasma

Mycoplasma spp.

Serology; culture,
immunohistology, and mNGS
of surgical material or blood/
plasma

Legionella spp.

Blood cultures; serology; culture,
immunohistology, and mNGS
of surgical material or blood/
plasma

LABORATORY STUDIES
Positive blood culture
Elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate; may be low with heart or
renal failure
Elevated C-­reactive protein
Anemia
Leukocytosis
Immune complexes
Hypergammaglobulinemia
Hypocomplementemia
Cryoglobulinemia
Rheumatoid factor
Hematuria
Renal failure: azotemia, high creatinine (glomerulonephritis)
Chest radiograph: bilateral infiltrates, nodules, pleural effusions
Echocardiographic evidence of valve vegetations, prosthetic valve
dysfunction or leak, myocardial abscess, or new-­onset valve
insufficiency

Tropheryma whipplei

Histology and mNGS of surgical
material or blood/plasma

SYMPTOMS
Fever
Chills
Chest and abdominal pain
Arthralgia, myalgia
Dyspnea
Malaise, weakness
Night sweats
Weight loss
CNS manifestations (stroke, seizures, headache)

CNS, Central nervous system.

Although bacteremia may occur in the absence of endocarditis,
bacteremia secondary to S. mutans, S. bovis I, S. mitis, S. sanguinis,
and S. aureus (in the absence of focal musculoskeletal infection) is
highly concerning for endocarditis. Antimicrobial pretreatment of
the patient reduces the yield of blood cultures by 50–60%. Other
specimens that may be cultured include scrapings from cutaneous lesions, urine, synovial fluid, abscesses, and in the presence of
manifestations of meningitis, cerebrospinal fluid. Serologic diagnosis or metagenomic next-­generation sequencing or polymerase
chain reaction for 16S and 28S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) for bacteria and fungi, respectively, of resected valve tissues is necessary
in patients with unusual or fastidious microorganisms when there
is suspicion of culture-­negative endocarditis or if the patient has
received prior antibiotics (Table 486.4 and Fig. 486.1). Metagenomic

IgG, Immunoglobulin G; mNGS, metagenomic next-­generation sequencing; PCR,
polymerase chain reaction
From Moreillon P, Que YA. Infective endocarditis Lancet. 2004;363:139–148.

next-­generation sequencing on blood and plasma may help identify
pathogens in patients with culture-­negative endocarditis. Suspicion
should be high when evaluating infection in a child with an underlying contributing factor.
Echocardiography remains the mainstay of diagnosis. Two-­
dimensional echocardiography can identify the size, shape, location, and mobility of the lesion; when combined with Doppler
interrogation, the presence of valve dysfunction (regurgitation,
obstruction) can be determined. (Fig. 486.2). In pediatric patients,
transthoracic echocardiogram is usually adequate for detection of
lesions, especially for children <60 kg. Transesophageal echocardiogram should be considered in pediatric patients with limited
transthoracic views; it is superior to transthoracic echocardiogram
in evaluating prosthetic valves or complications of infective endocarditis, such as aortic root abscess. Intracardiac echocardiography
can be useful for patients with suspicion for an infected pacemaker
lead or implanted percutaneous pulmonary valve. Cardiac MRI may
be useful in suspected perivalvular complications, and PET-­CT may
aid in the diagnosis of endocarditis for those patients with prosthetic valves.
Echocardiography may also be helpful in predicting embolic
complications, given that lesions >1 cm and fungating masses are at
greatest risk for embolization. The absence of vegetations does not
exclude endocarditis, and vegetations are often not visualized in the
early phases of the disease or in patients with complex congenital
heart lesions. Electrocardiography should be part of the evaluation
and can demonstrate new rhythm disorders such as ventricular

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2868 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Priority: blood specimen

Valvular specimen available

Q fever and Bartonella serology
+
Determination of rheumatoid factors
and antinuclear antibodies
If negative

Fig. 486.1 Algorithm of diagnostic
tests applied to clinical specimens
for the identification of the causative
agents of blood culture–negative
endocarditis. Septifast, LightCycler
SeptiFast (Roche). Serum should be
considered a priority specimen, with
Q fever and Bartonella serologic
analysis routinely done. We also suggest that detection of antinuclear
antibodies and rheumatoid factor
be routinely done for the diagnosis
of noninfective endocarditis. (From
Thuny F, Grisoli D, Collart F, et al.
Management of infective endocarditis: challenges and perspectives.
Lancet. 2012;379:965–975, Fig. 2.)

Dedicated PCR for Bartonella sp and Tropheryma
whipplei, broad range PCR for fungi

Septifast blood PCR
specifically targeting
streptococci and
staphylococci
(if previous
antibiotic therapy)

Other serologies
(Mycoplasma
pneumoniae,
Legionella
pneumophila,
Brucella melitensis)
and Western blot
for Bartonella spp

LV

LA

A

If negative

If negative

Ao
Ao

LV

Broad range PCR for bacteria (16S rRNA) and
fungi (18S rRNA)
+
Histological examination

LA

B

Fig. 486.2 Infective endocarditis of the native aortic valve. A, Tran-

sthoracic echocardiography shows vegetations (small arrows) attached
to the left ventricular aspects of the valve cusps and prolapsing into
the left ventricular outflow tract (large arrow) during diastole. B, Severe
aortic regurgitation (arrow) is shown by color Doppler. Ao, Ascending
aorta; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle. (From Baddour LM, Freeman
WK, Suri RM, Wilson WR. Cardiovascular infections. In: Zipes DP, Libby
P, Bonow RO, et al., eds. Braunwald’s Heart Disease, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019: Fig. 73-­1, p. 1490.)

ectopy and conduction disorders such as complete heart block. The
presence of either of these findings, particularly heart block, may signal a serious or even life-­threatening complication of endocarditis.
The Duke criteria help in the diagnosis of endocarditis (Table 486.5).
Two major criteria, one major and three minor, or five minor criteria
suggest definite endocarditis. Additional minor criteria to those listed
include newly diagnosed clubbing, splenomegaly, splinter hemorrhages,
or petechiae; high erythrocyte sedimentation rate or C-­reactive protein
level; presence of central nonfeeding or peripheral lines; and microscopic
hematuria.

PROGNOSIS AND COMPLICATIONS

Despite the use of antibiotic agents, mortality remains high, up to
25%. Serious morbidity occurs in 50–60% of children with documented infective endocarditis; the most common is heart failure
caused by worsening valvular regurgitation due to aortic or mitral

Primer extension
enrichment
reaction

Autoimmunohistochemistry

valve vegetations, accompanied by ventricular dysfunction. Myocardial abscesses and toxic myocarditis may also lead to heart failure
without characteristic changes in auscultatory findings and, occasionally, to life-­threatening arrhythmias. Systemic emboli, often
with central nervous system manifestations, are a major threat.
Pulmonary emboli may occur in children with VSD or tetralogy
of Fallot, although massive life-­
threatening pulmonary embolization is rare. Other complications include mycotic aneurysms,
rupture of a sinus of Valsalva, obstruction of a valve secondary to
large vegetations, acquired VSD, and heart block as a result of
involvement (abscess) of the conduction system. Additional
complications include meningitis, osteomyelitis, arthritis, renal
abscess, purulent pericarditis, and immune complex–mediated
glomerulonephritis.

TREATMENT

Antibiotic therapy should be instituted immediately once a definitive diagnosis of infectious endocarditis is made. When virulent
organisms are responsible, small delays may result in progressive
endocardial damage and are associated with a greater likelihood of
severe complications. The choice of antibiotics, method of administration, and length of treatment should be coordinated with consultants from both cardiology and infectious diseases (Tables 486.6
and 486.7). Empirical therapy after appropriate blood cultures are
drawn but before the identifiable agent is recovered may be initiated
with vancomycin plus gentamicin in patients without a prosthetic
valve and when there is a high risk of S. aureus, enterococcus, or
viridans streptococci (the three most common organisms). High
serum bactericidal levels must be maintained long enough to eradicate organisms that are growing in relatively inaccessible avascular
vegetations. Between 5 and 20 times the in vitro minimal inhibitory concentration must be produced at the site of infection to
destroy bacteria growing at the core of these lesions. Several weeks
are required for a vegetation to organize completely; therapy must
be continued through this period so that recrudescence can be
avoided. A total of 4-­6 weeks of treatment is usually recommended.
Depending on the clinical and laboratory responses, antibiotic
therapy may require modification, and some patients require more

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 486 u Infective Endocarditis
Table 486.5  Definition of Infective Endocarditis (IE):
Modified Duke Criteria
DEFINITE INFECTIVE ENDOCARDITIS
Pathologic Criteria
• Microorganisms demonstrated by results of cultures or histologic
examination of a vegetation, a vegetation that has embolized, or
an intracardiac abscess specimen; or
• Pathologic lesions; vegetation, or intracardiac abscess confirmed
by results of histologic examination showing active endocarditis
Clinical Criteria
• Two major criteria, or
• One major criterion and three minor criteria, or
• Five minor criteria
Possible Infective Endocarditis
• One major criterion and one minor criterion, or
• Three minor criteria
Rejected Diagnosis of Infective Endocarditis
• Firm alternative diagnosis explaining evidence of suspected IE, or
• Resolution of IE syndrome with antibiotic therapy for ≤4 days, or
• No evidence of IE at surgery or autopsy, on antibiotic therapy for
≤4 days, or
• Does not meet criteria for possible IE
DEFINITION OF TERMS USED IN MODIFIED DUKE CRITERIA
Major Criteria
• Blood culture findings positive for IE
Typical microorganisms consistent with IE from two separate
blood cultures:
• Viridans streptococci, Streptococcus gallolyticus (formerly
known as S. bovis), Staphylococcus aureus, HACEK group, or
• Community-­acquired enterococci, in the absence of a primary
focus, or
Microorganisms consistent with IE from persistently positive blood
culture findings, defined as:
• At least two positive culture findings of blood samples drawn
>12 hr apart, or
• Three or most of at least four separate culture findings of
blood (with first and last sample drawn ≥1 hr apart)
• Single positive blood culture for Coxiella burnetii or anti–
phase I IgG titer ≥1:800
• Evidence of endocardial involvement
Echocardiographic findings positive for IE (TEE recommended
in patients with prosthetic valves, rated at least possible IE by
clinical criteria or complicated IE [paravalvular abscess]; TTE as
first test in other patients), defined as follows:
• Oscillating intracardiac mass on valve or supporting
structures, in the path of regurgitant jets, or on implanted
material in the absence of an alternative anatomic
explanation, or
• Abscess, or
• New partial dehiscence of prosthetic valve
New valvular regurgitation; worsening or changing of preexisting
murmur not sufficient
Minor Criteria
• Predisposition, predisposing heart condition, or intravenous drug
use
• Fever—temperature >38°C
• Vascular phenomena, major arterial emboli, septic pulmonary
infarcts, mycotic aneurysm, intracranial hemorrhage, conjunctival
hemorrhages, and Janeway lesions
• Immunologic phenomena: glomerulonephritis, Osler nodes, Roth
spots, and rheumatoid factor
• Microbiologic evidence: positive blood culture finding but does
not meet a major criterion as noted earlier (excludes single
positive culture findings for coagulase-­negative staphylococci and
organisms that do not cause endocarditis) or serologic evidence
of active infection with organism consistent with IE
TEE, Transesophageal echocardiography; TTE, transthoracic echocardiography.
Modified from Li JS, Sexton DJ, Mick N, et al. Proposed modifications to the Duke
criteria for the diagnosis of infective endocarditis. Clin Infect Dis. 2000;30:633.

2869

prolonged treatment. With highly sensitive viridans group streptococcal infections, shortened regimens that include oral penicillin
for some portion have been recommended for certain adults, but
effectiveness studies in children are lacking. In nonstaphylococcal
disease, bacteremia usually resolves in 24-­48 hours, whereas fever
resolves in 5-­6 days with appropriate antibiotic therapy. Resolution
with staphylococcal disease takes longer.
If the infection occurs on a valve and induces or increases symptoms and signs of heart failure, appropriate therapy should be instituted, including diuretics, inotropic medications, and afterload
reducing agents. Surgical intervention for infective endocarditis
is indicated for severe aortic, mitral, or prosthetic valve involvement with intractable heart failure (Table 486.8). Severe heart failure may be associated with acute valve regurgitation, obstruction of
conduits or shunts, or periannular extension of infection, including
fistula formation. Rarely, a mycotic aneurysm, rupture of an aortic
sinus, intraseptal abscess causing complete heart block, or dehiscence of an intracardiac patch requires emergency surgery. Other
surgical indications include failure to sterilize the blood despite
adequate antibiotic levels in 7-­10 days in the absence of extracardiac
infection, myocardial abscess, recurrent emboli, and increasing size
of vegetations while receiving therapy. Vegetations (aortic, mitral,
prosthetic valve) >10-­15 mm are at high risk of embolism. Although
antibiotic therapy should be administered for as long as possible
before surgical intervention, active infection is not a contraindication if the patient is critically ill as a result of severe hemodynamic
deterioration from infective endocarditis. Emergent surgical intervention in patients with severe heart failure may improve the likelihood of survival. Removal of vegetations and, in some instances,
valve replacement may be lifesaving, and sustained antibiotic
administration will most often prevent reinfection. Replacement of
infected prosthetic valves carries a higher risk.
Fungal endocarditis is difficult to manage and has a poorer
prognosis. It has been encountered after cardiac surgery, in severely
debilitated or immunosuppressed patients, and in patients on a prolonged course of antibiotics. The drugs of choice are amphotericin
B (liposomal or standard preparation) and 5-­fluorocytosine. Surgery to excise infected tissue is occasionally attempted, but often
with limited success. Recombinant tissue plasminogen activation
may help lyse intracardiac vegetations and avoid surgery in some
high-­risk patients.

PREVENTION

The American Heart Association (AHA) recommendations for antimicrobial prophylaxis before dental and other surgical procedures
has resulted in a substantial reduction in the number of patients
who require prophylactic treatment, and the procedures requiring
coverage were recommended. The primary reasons for these revised
recommendations were that (1) infective endocarditis is much more
likely to result from exposure to the more frequent random bacteremias associated with daily activities than from a dental or surgical procedure, (2) routine prophylaxis may prevent “an exceedingly
small” number of cases, and (3) the risk of antibiotic-related adverse
events exceeds the benefits of prophylactic therapy. Improving general dental hygiene was thought to be a more important factor in
reducing the risk of infective endocarditis resulting from routine
daily bacteremias. The current recommendations limit the use of
prophylaxis to those patients with cardiac conditions associated
with the greatest risk of an adverse outcome from infective endocarditis (Table 486.9). Patients with permanently damaged valves
from rheumatic heart disease should also be considered for prophylaxis. Prophylaxis for these patients is recommended for “all
dental procedures that involve manipulation of gingival tissue or
the periapical region of teeth or perforation of the oral mucosa.”
Furthermore, “placement of removable prosthodontic or endodontic appliances, adjustment of orthodontic appliances, placement
of orthodontic brackets, shedding of deciduous teeth and bleeding from trauma to the lips or oral mucosa” are not indications for

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2870 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 486.6  Therapy of Pediatric Native Valve Endocarditis Caused by Highly Penicillin-­Susceptible^ Viridans Group
Streptococci and Streptococcus bovis
REGIMEN

DOSAGE*† AND ROUTE

DURATION

COMMENTS

Penicillin G

200,000-­300,000 U/kg/24 hr IV given
every 4 hr up to 12-­24 million U/day

4 wk

Avoids nephrotoxicity of gentamicin

100 mg/kg/24 hr IV given every 12 hr
or 80 mg/kg/24 hr given every 24
hr up to 4 g/day (If total amount is
over 2 g/day then dosing should
be every 12 hr)

4 wk

Avoids nephrotoxicity of gentamicin

40 mg/kg/24 hr IV given every 8-­12 hr
up to 2g/day

4 wk

Vancomycin therapy recommended only for patients
unable to tolerate penicillin or ceftriaxone;
vancomycin dosage should be adjusted to obtain a
trough concentration range of 10-­15 μg/mL

Or
Ceftriaxone sodium

Or
Vancomycin hydrochloride¶

^Defined as minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) ≤0.10 μg/mL.

*Dosages recommended are for patients with normal renal function.
†Pediatric dose should not exceed that of a normal adult.
¶Vancomycin dosages should be infused during course of at least 1 hr to reduce risk of histamine release and facial flushing. Peak vancomycin levels should only be obtained to
calculate the area under the curve to mean MIC ratio.
Data from Baltimore RS, Gewitz M, Baddour LM, et al. Infective endocarditis in childhood: 2015 update. A scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation.
2015;132:1487–1515.

Table 486.7  Therapy for Pediatric Endocarditis Caused by Staphylococci in the Absence of Prosthetic Materials
DOSAGE*§ AND ROUTE

REGIMEN

OXACILLIN-­SUSCEPTIBLE STRAINS
Nafcillin or oxacillin†
200 mg/kg/24 hr IV given every
± gentamicin‡ for first 3-­5
4-­6 hr up to 12 g/day AND
days
consider gentamicin 3-­6 mg/
kg/24 hr IV every 8 hr

DURATION

COMMENTS

4-­6 wk

Clinical benefit of aminoglycosides has not been
established. Gentamicin trough levels of <1-­2 μg/mL
should be targeted to avoid risk of toxicity. Gentamicin
peak levels should be obtained 30 min after the
completion of an infusion with a peak goal of 3-­5 μg/mL
(for synergy).

For penicillin-­allergic
(non-­anaphylactoid-­type)
patients:
Cefazolin
± gentamicin‡ for first 3-­5
days

Consider skin testing for oxacillin-­susceptible staphylococci
and questionable history of immediate-­type
hypersensitivity to penicillin.
100 mg/kg/24 hr IV given every 8
hr up to 12 g/day AND consider
gentamicin 3-­6 mg/kg/24 hr IV
given every 8 hr

OXACILLIN-­RESISTANT STRAINS
Vancomycin¶
40 mg/kg/24 hr IV given every
± gentamicin‡ for first 3-­5
8-­12 hr up to 2 g/day
days
AND consider gentamicin 3-­6
mg/kg/24 hr IV given every 8 hr

Daptomycin
± gentamicin‡ for first 3-­5
days

6 mg/kg/24 hr given every 24 hr
<6 yr of age; 10 mg/kg/24 hr
given every 24 hr AND consider
gentamicin 3-­6 mg/kg/24 hr IV
given every 8 hr

4-­6 wk

Cephalosporins should be avoided in patients with
anaphylactoid-­type hypersensitivity to β-­lactams;
vancomycin should be used in these cases.§ Gentamicin
trough levels of <1-­2 μg/mL should be targeted to avoid
risk of toxicity. Gentamicin peak levels should be obtained
30 min after the completion of an infusion with a peak
goal of 3-­5 μg/mL (for synergy).

6 wk

Adjust vancomycin dosage to achieve trough concentration
of 10-­15 μg/mL. Gentamicin trough levels of <1-­2 μg/mL
should be targeted to avoid risk of toxicity. Gentamicin
peak levels should be obtained 30 min after the
completion of an infusion with a peak goal of 3-­5 μg/mL
(for synergy).

4-­6 wk

Gentamicin trough levels of <1-­2 μg/mL should be targeted
to avoid risk of toxicity. Gentamicin peak levels should be
obtained 30 min after the completion of an infusion with a
peak goal of 3-­5 μg/mL (for synergy).

*Dosages recommended are for patients with normal renal function.
§Pediatric dose should not exceed that of a normal adult.
†Penicillin G 200,000-­300,000 U/kg/24 hr IV given every 4 hr up to 12-­24 million U/day may be used in place of nafcillin or oxacillin if strain is penicillin susceptible (minimum inhibitory
concentration ≤0.1 μg/mL) and does not produce β-­lactamase.
‡Gentamicin should be administered in close temporal proximity to nafcillin, or oxacillin dosing and blood levels monitored to reduce the risk of nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity.
¶For specific dosing adjustment and issues concerning vancomycin, see Table 464.6 footnotes.
IE, Infective endocarditis; IV, intravenously.
Data from Baltimore RS, Gewitz M, Baddour LM, et al. Infective endocarditis in childhood: 2015 update. A scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation.
2015;132:1487–1515.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 486 u Infective Endocarditis
Table 486.8  Echocardiographic Features that Suggest
Potential Need for Surgical Intervention
VEGETATION
Persistent vegetation after systemic embolization
Anterior mitral valve leaflet vegetation, particularly if it is highly
mobile with size >10 mm*
One or more embolic events during the first 2 wk of antimicrobial
therapy*
Increase in vegetation size despite appropriate antimicrobial therapy*†
VALVULAR DYSFUNCTION
Acute aortic or mitral insufficiency with signs of ventricular failure†
Heart failure unresponsive to medical therapy†
Valve perforation or rupture†
PERIVALVULAR EXTENSION
Valvular dehiscence, rupture, or fistula†
New heart block†‡
Large abscess or extension of abscess despite appropriate
antimicrobial therapy†

2871

prophylaxis. The 2023 recommendations of the European Society
of Cardiology are noted in Table 486.10. Given that many invasive
respiratory tract procedures do cause bacteremia, prophylaxis for
many of these procedures is considered reasonable. In contrast to
prior recommendations, prophylaxis for gastrointestinal or genitourinary procedures is no longer recommended in the majority of cases. Prophylaxis for patients undergoing cardiac surgery
with placement of prosthetic material is still recommended. Given
the highly individual nature of these recommendations, direct
consultation with the child’s cardiologist is still the best method
for determining a specific patient’s ongoing need for prophylaxis
(Table 486.11).
Continuing education regarding both oral hygiene and, in appropriate cases, the need for prophylaxis is important, especially in teenagers and young adults. Vigorous treatment of sepsis and local infections
and careful asepsis during heart surgery and catheterization reduce the
incidence of infective endocarditis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

*Surgery may be required because of risk of embolization.
†Surgery may be required because of heart failure or failure of medical therapy.
‡Echocardiography should not be the primary modality used to detect or monitor heart block.
From Baddour LM, Freeman WK, Suri RM, et al. Cardiovascular infections. In: Zipes
DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, et al., eds. Braunwald’s Heart Disease, 11th ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier, 2019: Table 73-­5, p. 1492.

Table 486.9  Cardiac Conditions Associated with Highest
Risk of Adverse Outcome from Infective
Endocarditis for Which Prophylaxis with
Dental Procedures Is Reasonable (2007 AHA
Statement)

Table 486-­10  2023 European Recommendations for
Antibiotic Prophylaxis in Patients with
Cardiovascular Diseases Undergoing
Oro-­Dental Procedures at Increased Risk
of Infective Endocarditis

Prosthetic cardiac valve or prosthetic material used for cardiac valve repair
Previous infective endocarditis
Congenital heart disease (CHD)*
• Unrepaired cyanotic CHD, including palliative shunts and conduits
• Completely repaired CHD with prosthetic material or device,
whether placed by surgery or catheter intervention, during the
first 6 mo after the procedure†
• Repaired CHD with residual defects at the site or adjacent
to the site of a prosthetic patch or prosthetic device (which
inhibits endothelialization)
• Cardiac transplantation recipients who develop cardiac valvulopathy

• Antibiotic prophylaxis is recommended in patients with previous IE.
• Antibiotic prophylaxis is recommended in patients with surgically
implanted prosthetic valves and with any material used for
surgical cardiac valve repair.
• Antibiotic prophylaxis is recommended in patients with
transcatheter implanted aortic and pulmonary valvular prostheses.
• Antibiotic prophylaxis should be considered in patients with
transcatheter mitral and tricuspid valve repair.
• Antibiotic prophylaxis is recommended in patients with untreated
cyanotic CHD, and patients treated with surgery or transcatheter
procedures with post-­operative palliative shunts, conduits,
or other prostheses. After surgical repair, in the absence of
residual defects or valve prostheses, antibiotic prophylaxis is
recommended only for the first 6 months after the procedure.

*Except for the conditions listed here, antibiotic prophylaxis is no longer recommended
by the AHA for any other form of CHD.
†Prophylaxis is reasonable because endothelialization of prosthetic material occurs
within 6 mo after the procedure.
From Wilson W, Taubert KA, Gewitz M, et al. Prevention of infective endocarditis:
guidelines from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2007;116:1736–1754.

From Delgado V, Marsan NA, de Waha S, et al: 2023 ESC Guidelines for the Management
of endocarditis. Eur Heart J 2023;193:1-­95 https://doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehad193.

Table 486.11  Prophylactic Antibiotic Regimens for a Dental Procedure (2007 AHA Statement)
SITUATION

AGENT

ADULTS

CHILDREN

Oral

Amoxicillin

2g

50 mg/kg

Unable to take oral medication

Ampicillin
or
Cefazolin or ceftriaxone

2 g IM or IV
1 g IM or IV

50 mg/kg IM or IV
50 mg/kg IM or IV

Allergic to penicillins or
ampicillin—oral

Cephalexin* †
or
Clindamycin
or
Azithromycin or clarithromycin

2g
600 mg
500 mg

50 mg/kg
20 mg/kg
15 mg/kg

Allergic to penicillins or ampicillin
and unable to take oral
medication

Cefazolin or ceftriaxone†
or
Clindamycin

1 g IM or IV
600 mg IM or IV

50 mg/kg IM or IV
20 mg/kg IM or IV

*Or other first-­or second-­generation oral cephalosporin in equivalent adult or pediatric dosage.
†Cephalosporins should not be used in an individual with a history of anaphylaxis, angioedema, or urticaria with penicillins or ampicillin.

IM, Intramuscularly; IV, intravenously.
From Wilson W, Taubert KA, Gewitz M, et al. Prevention of infective endocarditis: guidelines from the American Heart Association Circulation. 2007;116:1736–1754.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2872 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

Chapter 487

Rheumatic Heart Disease
Michael R. Carr and Stanford T. Shulman
Rheumatic involvement of the cardiac valves is the most important
sequela of acute rheumatic fever (ARF), and the second most common major manifestation after arthritis (see Chapter 229.1). The definitions of three subgroups of rheumatic heart disease (RHD) are noted
in Table 487.1. The valvular lesions begin as small verrucae composed
of fibrin and blood cells along the borders of one or more of the heart
valves. The mitral valve is affected most often, followed in frequency by
the aortic valve. Isolated aortic valve disease is rare and generally seen
with concomitant mitral valve involvement. Right-­sided heart manifestations are rarer and are virtually only associated with left-­sided valve
disease. As the inflammation subsides, the verrucae tend to disappear
and leave scar tissue. With repeated attacks of rheumatic fever, new
verrucae form near the previous ones and the mural endocardium and
chordae tendineae become involved. A single episode of acute rheumatic carditis often results in complete healing of the valvular lesions,
whereas repeated episodes, especially involving previously affected
valves, result in chronic RHD, which is the rationale for secondary prophylaxis. The prevalence of RHD ranges from 3 to 4 cases per 100,000
population in nonendemic countries to >1,000 cases per 100,000 in
endemic countries (Fig. 487.1). On a global scale, the sequelae of RHD
is significant, with up to 300,000 deaths per year related to the disease
process, as well as an exponential degree of related comorbidity.
The diagnosis of ARF requires the fulfillment of the Jones criteria
(see Chapter 229.1), with carditis being a major criterion. The diagnosis
of RHD was once only based on cardiac auscultatory findings of mitral
or aortic valve involvement, which was insensitive for early valve involvement/injury. This was based on valvulitis being seen more frequently in
ARF compared with pericarditis or myocarditis, both of which lack more
readily apparent physical examination findings. Screening large, high-­risk
populations with echocardiography demonstrated a substantially greater
number of patients with RHD than those detected by auscultation alone.
Because access to echocardiography is often available, the current version of the Jones criteria focused on the concept of subclinical carditis
(SCC) detected by echocardiography (see Table 487.1). SCC is defined as
echocardiographic evidence of mitral or aortic valvulitis in the absence of
auscultatory findings and not consistent with physiologic mitral or aortic insufficiency (Table 487.2). Echocardiography with Doppler should
be performed for all cases of confirmed or suspected ARF (Table 487.3).
Additional recommendations are that echocardiography should be performed in moderate-­to high-­risk patient populations if ARF is considered
likely and that echocardiography can be used to exclude cardiac findings
consistent with ARF in patients with cardiac murmurs thought to be suggestive of rheumatic carditis. Additionally, serial echocardiography should
be considered in patients with diagnosed or suspected ARF even if there
is no evidence of valvulitis by echocardiography at diagnosis. The echocardiographic finding of SCC fulfills the major criterion for carditis. The
category of latent RHD is another approach to include patients with mild
asymptomatic valve changes not typically detected on physical exam but
identified by screening high-­risk populations with echocardiography (see
Table 487.1).

PATTERNS OF VALVULAR DISEASE
Mitral Insufficiency

Mitral insufficiency is the result of structural changes that may include
some loss of valvular substance and/or changes to the subvalvular apparatus, including elongation of the chordae, both of which can lead to valve
dysfunction. During ARF with severe cardiac involvement, heart failure
is caused by a combination of mitral insufficiency coupled with a pancarditis involving the pericardium and myocardium in addition to the
endocardium/valve. Because of the increased volume load from the mitral

insufficiency and the inflammatory process, the left ventricle dilates. The
left atrium also enlarges to accommodate the regurgitant volume. Increased
left atrial pressure results in pulmonary congestion and symptoms of left-­
sided heart failure. Spontaneous improvement often occurs with time,
even in patients in whom mitral insufficiency is severe at the onset. The
resultant chronic lesion is most often mild or moderate in severity, and the
patient is often asymptomatic. More than half of patients with acute mitral
insufficiency no longer have an audible mitral insufficiency murmur 1 year
later, although they still may demonstrate insufficiency on echocardiography. In patients with severe chronic mitral insufficiency, pulmonary artery
pressure (PAP) becomes elevated, the right ventricle and atrium become
enlarged, and right-­sided heart failure subsequently develops.

Clinical Manifestations

Physical signs of mitral insufficiency depend on its severity. With mild
disease, signs of heart failure are not present, the precordium is quiet,
and auscultation reveals a high-­pitched holosystolic murmur at the
apex that radiates to the axilla. With severe mitral insufficiency, signs of
acute or chronic heart failure may be noted. The heart is enlarged, with
a heaving apical left ventricular (LV) impulse and often an apical systolic thrill. The second heart sound (S2) may be accentuated if pulmonary hypertension is present. A third heart sound or gallop is generally
prominent. A holosystolic murmur is heard at the apex with radiation
to the axilla. A short mid-­diastolic rumbling murmur is caused by
increased blood flow across the mitral valve as a result of the significant insufficiency. Therefore auscultation of a diastolic murmur, often
referred to as relative mitral stenosis (Carey-­Coombs murmur), does
not necessarily mean that true mitral stenosis is present. The latter
lesion takes many years to develop and is characterized by a diastolic
murmur of greater length, usually with presystolic accentuation.
The electrocardiogram and chest radiographs are normal if the mitral
insufficiency is mild. With more severe insufficiency, the ECG shows a
prominent, longer duration and often bifid P waves, signs of LV hypertrophy, and associated right ventricular (RV) hypertrophy if pulmonary
hypertension is present. On chest radiograph, prominence of the left
atrium and ventricle can be seen, the former of which is better seen on
lateral projections. Congestion of the perihilar vessels, a sign of pulmonary
venous hypertension, may also be evident. Calcification of the mitral valve
is rare in children. Echocardiography in the acute phase may demonstrate
enlargement of the left atrium and ventricle. LV systolic function can be
impaired if there is also a component of myocardial inflammation. Mitral
annular dilation, chordal elongation, and at times, evidence of chordal
rupture resulting in a flail leaflet may be noted. The leaflet tips demonstrate
a nodular appearance, and prolapse of the anterior mitral valve leaflet tip
(much more often than the posterior leaflet) is seen. Doppler evaluation
demonstrates the severity of the mitral regurgitation. Chronic mitral insufficiency from RHD is characterized on echocardiography by leaflet and
chordal thickening, chordal fusion, and restricted leaflet motion. These
changes often lead to stenosis, but poor coaptation of the abnormal leaflets
can also lead to variable degrees of regurgitation. Cardiac catheterization
and left ventriculography are considered only if diagnostic questions are
not completely resolved by noninvasive assessment or in rare cases with a
concern for significantly elevated PAP.

Complications

Severe mitral insufficiency may result in cardiac failure that may be precipitated by progression of the rheumatic process, recurrent episodes
of ARF, the onset of atrial fibrillation (AF) or other arrhythmias, or
infective endocarditis. The effects of chronic mitral insufficiency may
become manifest after many years and include LV and RV failure and
atrial and ventricular arrhythmias.

Treatment

In patients with mild mitral insufficiency, prophylaxis against recurrences
of rheumatic fever is all that is required in addition to the typical treatment for ARF (Table 487.4). For more significant insufficiency, corticosteroids are added in the acute phase. Treatment of complicating heart
failure (see Chapter 491), arrhythmias (see Chapter 484), and infective
endocarditis (see Chapter 486) is described elsewhere. Afterload-­reducing

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 487 u Rheumatic Heart Disease
agents—angiotensin-­converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or angiotensin
receptor blockers (ARBs)—may reduce the regurgitant volume, attenuate pathologic compensatory mechanisms, and preserve LV function, but
these have not been proven to alter the natural history of the disease process. Diuretics may also provide some symptomatic and clinical benefit
in select cases. In rare cases, phosphodiesterase inhibitors such as milrinone may be used in the acute stage because of their inotropic, lusitropic,
and systemic vascular dilating effects. Surgical treatment is indicated for
patients who, despite adequate medical therapy, have persistent heart failure, dyspnea with moderate activity, and progressive cardiomegaly, often
with pulmonary hypertension. Although annuloplasty and other forms of
mitral valve repair provide good results in some children and adolescents,
mitral valve replacement may be required, which can be more complicated
in younger children. In patients with a prosthetic mitral valve replacement,
prophylaxis against bacterial endocarditis is warranted for dental procedures, as the routine antibiotics taken by these patients for rheumatic fever
prophylaxis are insufficient to prevent endocarditis. Additionally, current
recommendations suggest selecting a different class of antibiotic for such
procedures, rather than increasing the dose of the antibiotic taken for
rheumatic fever prophylaxis. Lastly, it is important to remember that all

Table 487.1  Proposed RHD Definitions
Latent RDH

All cases of RHD diagnosed through
echocardiographic screening, to include
previously unrecognized clinical RHD and
subclinical RHD.

Clinical RDH

All cases of RHD that have clinical signs or
symptoms, including pathologic heart
murmur* diagnosed either through
echocardiographic screening or clinical
evaluation. Clinical RHD is typically more
advanced than subclinical RHD.

Subclinical RDH

All cases of RHD that do not have clinical signs or
symptoms, including heart murmur.* Subclinical
RHD is only diagnosed by echocardiography
and is typically less advanced than clinical RHD.

*Detection of a pathologic heart murmur without echocardiography has been shown to
be poorly sensitive and specific in echocardiographic screening studies for RHD.
RHD, Rheumatic heart disease.
Modified from Beaton A, Engelman D, Mirabel M. Echocardiographic screening for
rheumatic heart disease. In: Dougherty S, Carapetis J, Zühlke, Wilson N, eds. Acute
Rheumatic Fever and Rheumatic Heart Disease. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021: Table 13.1.

17

200

400

600

2873

attempts should be made at maximizing medical management of severe
mitral insufficiency during the acute phase of the disease process, before
considering surgical intervention, because surgery carries a poorer prognosis and an increased risk for reoperation when performed during the
acute phase.

Mitral Stenosis

Mitral stenosis of rheumatic origin results from fibrosis of the mitral ring,
commissural adhesions, and contracture of the valve leaflets, chordae,
and papillary muscles over time. This is a chronic process and often takes
≥10 years for the lesion to become fully established, although the process
may occasionally be accelerated. In the developed world, rheumatic mitral
stenosis is seldom encountered before adolescence and is not usually recognized until adult life. Significant mitral stenosis results in increased left
atrial pressure and subsequent enlargement and hypertrophy of the left
atrium, pulmonary venous hypertension, increased pulmonary vascular
resistance, and eventually overt pulmonary hypertension (Fig. 487.2). RV
hypertrophy and right atrial dilation ensue and are followed by RV dilation, tricuspid regurgitation, and clinical signs of right-­sided heart failure.

Clinical Manifestations

Generally, the correlation between symptoms and the severity of
obstruction is good. Patients with mild stenosis are asymptomatic.
More severe degrees of obstruction are associated with exercise intolerance and dyspnea. Critical lesions can result in orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, and overt pulmonary edema, as well as atrial
arrhythmias. When pulmonary hypertension has developed, RV dilation may result in functional tricuspid insufficiency, hepatomegaly,
ascites, and edema. Hemoptysis caused by rupture of bronchial or
pleurohilar veins and, occasionally, pulmonary infarction may occur.
Jugular venous pressure is increased in severe disease with heart failure,
tricuspid valve disease/regurgitation, or severe pulmonary hypertension.
In mild disease, the heart size is normal; however, moderate cardiomegaly
is typical with severe mitral stenosis. Cardiac enlargement can be massive
when AF and heart failure supervene. A parasternal RV lift is palpable
when PAP is high. The principal auscultatory findings are a loud first heart
sound, an opening snap of the mitral valve, and a long, low-­pitched, rumbling mitral diastolic murmur with presystolic accentuation at the apex.
The mitral diastolic murmur may be virtually absent in patients who are
in significant heart failure from the elevated LV filling pressures. A holosystolic murmur secondary to tricuspid insufficiency may be audible at the
left lower sternal border. In the presence of pulmonary hypertension, the
pulmonic component of S2 is accentuated. An early diastolic murmur may

800

1k

1.2k

1.4k

Fig. 487.1 Prevalence of rheumatic heart disease global map showing prevalence/100,000 population in 2017 by country. (From the Institute
for Health Metrics and Evaluation Global Burden of Disease 2019, Non-communicable disease data. Seattle: University of Washington IHME.
https://www.healthdata.org/research-analysis/gbd.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2874 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
be caused by associated rheumatic aortic insufficiency or pulmonary valvular insufficiency secondary to pulmonary hypertension.
ECGs and chest radiographs are normal if the stenosis is mild; as the
severity increases, prominent and notched P waves and varying degrees of
RV hypertrophy become evident. AF or other atrial arrhythmias are common late manifestations. Moderate to severe lesions are associated with
radiographic signs of left atrial enlargement and prominence of the pulmonary artery and right-­sided heart chambers; calcifications may be noted
in the region of the mitral valve (see Fig. 487.2). Severe stenosis is associated with a redistribution of pulmonary blood flow so that the apices of the
lung have greater perfusion (the reverse of normal). Lastly, horizontal lines
in the lower lung periphery, called Kerley B lines, may be evident.
Echocardiography demonstrates thickening of the mitral valve and
chordal apparatus, as well as restricted motion of the valve (Fig. 487.3). The
typical “elbow” or “dog leg” appearance of the anterior leaflet of the mitral
valve can aid in the distinction of a rheumatic valve from the various forms
of congenital mitral stenosis. Left atrial dilation is common; color Doppler flow across the mitral valve shows a narrow jet with flow acceleration,
and variable degrees of tricuspid insufficiency can be seen from left atrial
hypertension. Doppler can estimate the transmitral pressure gradient but
can underestimate the gradient if there is LV dysfunction. Estimates of the
RV/PAP can be made by echocardiographic assessment of the tricuspid
and pulmonary insufficiency, as well as changes in the RV size and function and the systolic septal position. Cardiac catheterization quantitates

Table 487.2  Echocardiographic Findings in Rheumatic
Valvulitis
PATHOLOGIC MITRAL
REGURGITATION*

PATHOLOGIC AORTIC
REGURGITATION*

1.	Seen in at least two views
2.	Jet length ≥2 cm in at least
one view
3.	Peak velocity >3 meters/sec
4.	Pan-­systolic jet in at least one
envelope

1.	Seen in at least two views
2.	Jet length ≥1 cm in at least
one view
3.	Peak velocity >3 meters/sec
4.	Pan-­diastolic jet in at least
one envelope

*All four criteria need to be met.
Adapted from Gewitz MH, Baltimore RS, Tani LY, et al., On behalf of the American Heart
Association Committee on Rheumatic Fever, Endocarditis and Kawasaki Disease of the
Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young. Revision of the Jones criteria for the
diagnosis of acute rheumatic fever in the era of Doppler echocardiography: a scientific
statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2015;131:1806–1818.

the diastolic gradient across the mitral valve well, allows for the calculation
of cross-­sectional valve area in older children, and assesses the degree of
left atrial hypertension and PAP elevation.

Treatment

Intervention is indicated in patients with clinical signs and hemodynamic evidence of severe obstruction, but before the onset of severe
manifestations. Pharmacologic therapy (diuretics and β blockers)
Table 487.4  Recommended Durations of Secondary
Prophylaxis According to International
Guidelines
GUIDELINE
American (AHA)

SECONDARY PROPHYLAXIS
DURATION RECOMMENDED
ARF with carditis and residual heart
disease: until age 40 yr or for 10 yr after
last ARF (whichever is longer); lifetime
prophylaxis may be needed
ARF with carditis but no residual heart
disease: until age 21 yr or for 10 yr after
last ARF (whichever is longer)
ARF without carditis: until age 21 yr or for
5 yr after last ARF (whichever is longer)

WHO Expert
Consultation Geneva
(2004)

Lifelong if severe valvular disease or after
valve surgery
For 10 yr after last ARF or until age 25 yr
in patients with a previous diagnosis of
carditis
For 5 yr after last ARF or until age 18 yr in
patients without proven carditis

AHA, American Heart Association; ARF, acute rheumatic fever; RHD, rheumatic heart
disease; WHO, World Health Organization.
Modified from Kumar RK, Antunes MJ, Beaton A, et al. Contemporary diagnosis and
management of rheumatic heart disease: implications for closing the gap: a scientific
statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2020;142(2):e337–e357,
Table 2.

Table 487.3  Morphologic Findings in Echocardiogram in
Rheumatic Vasculitis
ACUTE MITRAL VALVE CHANGES
Annular dilation
Chordal elongation
Chordal rupture resulting in flail leaflet with severe mitral
regurgitation
Anterior (or, less commonly, posterior) leaflet tip prolapse
Beading/nodularity of leaflet tips
CHRONIC MITRAL VALVE CHANGES: NOT SEEN IN ACUTE
CARDITIS
Leaflet thickening
Chordal thickening and fusion
Restricted leaflet motion
Calcification
AORTIC VALVE CHANGES IN EITHER ACUTE OR CHRONIC
CARDITIS
Irregular or focal leaflet thickening
Coaptation defect
Restricted leaflet motion
Leaflet prolapse
From Kumar RK, Antunes MJ, Beaton A, et al. Contemporary diagnosis and
management of rheumatic heart disease: implications for closing the gap: a scientific
statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2020;142(2):e337–e357,
Supplemental Table 2.

Fig. 487.2 Chest x-­ray from an 8-­yr-­old child with advanced juvenile

mitral valve stenosis. Severe pulmonary venous hypertension is shown
by the prominent upper lobe vasculature, interstitial edema, and visible interlobar fissure (black arrow). The left heart border is straightened, indicating enlargement of the main pulmonary artery and left
atrial appendage (white arrow). (From Kumar RK, Antunes MJ, Beaton
A, et al. Contemporary diagnosis and management of rheumatic heart
disease: implications for closing the gap: a scientific statement from
the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2020;142(2):e337–e357,
Supplemental Fig. 3.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 487 u Rheumatic Heart Disease
can be attempted but is generally used only for symptom control and
much less often in children. However, it should not be considered
adequate treatment in severe, symptomatic disease. Surgical valvotomy or balloon catheter mitral valvuloplasty generally yields good
results (see Fig. 487.3); mitral valve replacement is avoided unless
absolutely necessary. Balloon valvuloplasty is indicated for symptomatic, stenotic, pliable, noncalcified valves in patients without significant atrial arrhythmias or thrombi. Unfortunately, neither surgical
nor interventional options may exist in areas of the world with high
disease burden.

Aortic Insufficiency

In acute rheumatic aortic insufficiency, poor coaptation of the leaflets
or leaflet prolapse is seen. Chronic rheumatic aortic insufficiency leads
to sclerosis of the valve and results in distortion and retraction of the
cusps. In both settings, regurgitation of blood leads to LV volume overload with dilation and hypertrophy of the left ventricle as it attempts to
compensate for the excessive volume load. Concomitant mitral annular dilation accompanying LV dilation can further exacerbate mitral
valve disease, specifically regurgitation. Combined mitral and aortic
insufficiency in the acute phase of ARF is much more common than
aortic involvement alone. However, in cases of isolated significant aortic insufficiency, RHD should not be discounted, even given the rare
nature of this finding.

Clinical Manifestations

Symptoms are unusual except in severe aortic insufficiency or in the
presence of significant concomitant mitral valve involvement or myocardial dysfunction. The large stroke volume and forceful LV contractions may result in palpitations. Sweating and heat intolerance are
related to excessive vasodilation. Dyspnea on exertion can progress to
orthopnea and pulmonary edema; angina may be precipitated by heavy
PRE

POST
AO

AO

LAA

AL

LAA

PL

PL

A

AL

AO
AO
AL
PL

PL

B

exercise. Nocturnal attacks with sweating, tachycardia, chest pain, and
hypertension may occur.
The pulse pressure is wide with bounding peripheral pulses (water hammer or Corrigan pulse). Systolic blood pressure is elevated, and diastolic
pressure is lowered. In severe aortic insufficiency, the heart is enlarged,
with an LV apical heave. A diastolic thrill may be present. The typical
murmur begins immediately with S2 and continues until late in diastole.
The murmur is heard over the upper left and mid-­left sternal border with
radiation to the apex and upper right sternal border. Characteristically, it
has a high-­pitched blowing quality and is easily audible in full expiration
with the diaphragm of the stethoscope placed firmly on the chest and the
patient leaning forward. An aortic systolic ejection murmur is frequently
heard because of the increased stroke volume. An apical presystolic murmur (Austin Flint murmur) resembling that of mitral stenosis is sometimes heard and is caused by the large regurgitant aortic flow in diastole
preventing the mitral valve from opening fully.
Chest radiographs demonstrate enlargement of the left ventricle and
aorta. The ECG may be normal, but in advanced cases it reveals signs
of LV hypertrophy with a strain pattern and prominent P waves. Echocardiography shows a dilated left ventricle and diastolic mitral valve
flutter or oscillations caused by aortic regurgitant flow hitting the valve
leaflets. The aortic valve may demonstrate irregular or focal thickening,
decreased systolic excursion, a coaptation defect, and leaflet prolapse.
Doppler evaluation demonstrates the degree of aortic insufficiency. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging/angiography (cMRI/MRA) can be
useful in quantitating regurgitant volume and in assessing LV size and
systolic function. Cardiac catheterization is generally only necessary
when echocardiographic or axial imaging data are equivocal.

Prognosis and Treatment

Mild and moderate degrees of aortic insufficiency are well tolerated.
Unlike mitral insufficiency, aortic insufficiency does not generally regress.
Patients with combined lesions during the episode of ARF may have only
aortic involvement 1-­2 years later. Treatment consists of ACE inhibitors
or ARBs and prophylaxis against ARF recurrence. Surgical intervention,
which is typically aortic valve repair but occasionally can involve aortic
valve prosthetic (biologic or mechanical) replacement, should be done
well in advance of the onset of heart failure, pulmonary edema, and angina
or when signs of decreasing myocardial performance become evident, as
manifested by increasing LV dimensions and decreasing systolic function
on echocardiography. Surgery is considered when early symptoms are
present, significant ST-­T wave changes are seen on the ECG, or evidence
of decreasing LV ejection fraction is noted.

Tricuspid Valve Disease

C

AL

2875

D

Fig. 487.3 Balloon mitral valvotomy. Real-time three-dimensional

transesophageal echocardiographic images obtained before, during, and after balloon mitral valvotomy in a patient with mitral stenosis. A and B illustrate the stenotic mitral orifice as seen from the
left atrium (A) and from the left ventricle (B) immediately prior to
the procedure. C and D, obtained immediately after the procedure,
show the commissure splitting and the larger mitral valve orifice. AL,
anterior leaflet; AO, aorta; LAA, left atrial appendix; PL, posterior
leaflet. (From Salcedo EE, Carroll JD. Imaging guidance of transcatheter valve procedures. In Otto CM, Bonow RO (eds). Valvular Heart
Disease: A Companion to Braunwald’s Heart Disease. Philadelphia:
Elsevier, 2013. Fig 16.11.)

Primary tricuspid valve involvement is rare during both the acute and
chronic stages of rheumatic fever. Tricuspid insufficiency is more common secondary to RV dilation, resulting from significant left-­sided
cardiac lesions. The clinical signs of tricuspid insufficiency include
prominent pulsations of the jugular veins, systolic pulsations of the liver,
and a blowing holosystolic murmur at the lower left sternal border that
increases in intensity during inspiration. Concomitant signs of mitral
or aortic valve disease, with or without AF, are common. In these cases,
signs of tricuspid insufficiency often decrease or even disappear when
heart failure produced by the left-­sided valvular lesions is successfully
treated. Tricuspid valvuloplasty may be required in very rare cases.

Pulmonary Valve Disease

Pulmonary insufficiency secondary to ARF is rare and usually occurs
on a functional basis secondary to pulmonary hypertension and is a
late finding with severe mitral stenosis. The murmur (Graham Steell
murmur) is similar to that of aortic insufficiency, but peripheral arterial signs (bounding pulses) are absent. The correct diagnosis is confirmed by two-­dimensional echocardiography and Doppler studies
demonstrating nonphysiologic pulmonary insufficiency, evidence of
pulmonary hypertension, and the presence of mitral valve disease. Surgical intervention on the pulmonary valve is highly unusual.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2876 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

Section 6

Diseases of the
Myocardium and
Pericardium
Chapter 488

Diseases of the
Myocardium
John J. Parent and Stephanie M. Ware
The heterogeneous heart muscle diseases associated with structural
remodeling and abnormalities of cardiac function (cardiomyopathy) are important causes of morbidity and mortality in the pediatric
population. Several classification schemes have been formulated in an
effort to provide logical, useful, and scientifically based etiologies for
the cardiomyopathies. Insight into the molecular genetic basis of cardiomyopathies has increased exponentially, and etiologic classification
schemes continue to evolve (Table 488.1).
Table 488.2 classifies the cardiomyopathies based on their anatomic
(ventricular morphology) and functional pathophysiology. Dilated
cardiomyopathy, the most common form of cardiomyopathy, is characterized predominantly by left ventricular (LV) dilation and decreased
LV systolic function (Fig. 488.1). Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy demonstrates increased ventricular myocardial wall thickness, normal or
increased systolic function, and often, diastolic (relaxation) abnormalities with fibrosis of varying degrees (Table 488.3 and Figs. 488.2 and
488.3). Restrictive cardiomyopathy is characterized by near-­normal
ventricular chamber size and wall thickness with preserved systolic
function but dramatically impaired diastolic function leading to elevated filling pressures and atrial enlargement (Fig. 488.4). Arrhythmogenic right ventricular (RV) cardiomyopathy is characterized by
fibrofatty infiltration and replacement of the normal RV myocardium
and occasionally the left ventricle, leading to RV (and LV) systolic and
diastolic dysfunction and arrhythmias. Left ventricular noncompaction is characterized by a hypertrabeculated LV apex and lateral wall,
with a heterogeneous group of associated phenotypes (most often
a dilated phenotype with LV dilation and dysfunction). Cardiomyopathies may be primary or associated with other organ involvement
(Tables 488.4-­488.6).

488.1 Dilated Cardiomyopathy
John J. Parent and Stephanie M. Ware
Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), the most common form of cardiomyopathy in children, is the cause of significant morbidity and mortality
and a common indication for cardiac transplantation. The etiologies
are diverse. Unlike adult patients with DCM, ischemic etiologies are
rare in children, although these include anomalous origin of the left
coronary artery from the pulmonary artery, premature coronary atherosclerosis (homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia, rare genetic
syndromic diseases such as progeria), and coronary inflammatory
diseases such as Kawasaki disease. It is estimated that up to 50% of
cases are genetic (usually autosomal dominant; some are autosomal
recessive or X-­linked), including some with metabolic causes (see

Tables 488.1 and 488.2). Although the most common etiology of DCM
remains idiopathic, it is likely that undiagnosed familial/genetic conditions and myocarditis predominate. The annual incidence of DCM in
children younger than 18 years is 0.57 cases per 100,000 per year. The
incidence is higher in males, Blacks, and infants <1 year old.

PATHOGENESIS

The pathogenesis of the ventricular dilation and altered contractility
seen in DCM varies depending on the underlying etiology; systolic
dysfunction and myocyte injury are common. Genetic abnormalities
of several components of the cardiac muscle, including sarcomere
proteins, the cytoskeleton, and the proteins that bridge the contractile apparatus to the cytoskeleton, have been identified in autosomal
dominant and X-­linked inherited disorders. DCM can occur after viral
myocarditis. Although the primary pathogenesis varies from direct
myocardial injury to viral-­induced inflammatory injury, the resulting
myocardial damage, ventricular enlargement, and poor function likely
occur by a final common pathway similar to that in genetic disorders.
In 20–50% of cases, the DCM is familial, with autosomal dominant
inheritance most common (see Table 488.3). Duchenne and Becker
muscular dystrophies are X-­linked cardiomyopathies that account
for 5–10% of DCM cases (see Chapter 649.1). These dystrophinopathies result in an abnormal sarcomere-­cytoskeleton connection, causing impaired myocardial force generation, myocyte damage/scarring,
chamber enlargement, and altered function (see Table 488.6). Female
carriers of dystrophinopathies may also manifest DCM.
Mitochondrial myopathies, as with the muscular dystrophies,
may present clinically with a predominance of extracardiac findings,
although in some children cardiomyopathy may be the first symptom.
These are inherited in a recessive or mitochondrial pattern (see Tables
488.4 and 488.5). Disorders of fatty acid oxidation present with systemic derangements of metabolism (hypoketotic hypoglycemia, acidosis, and hepatic dysfunction), some with peripheral myopathy and
neuropathy, and others with sudden death or life-­threatening cardiac
arrhythmias.
Anthracycline cardiotoxicity (doxorubicin [Adriamycin]) on rare
occasion causes acute inflammatory myocardial injury, but more
classically results in DCM and occurs in up to 30% of patients given
a cumulative dose of doxorubicin exceeding 550 mg/m2. The risk of
toxicity appears to be exacerbated by concomitant radiation therapy.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Although more prevalent in patients <1 year of age, all age-­groups
may be affected. Clinical manifestations of DCM are typically those
of heart failure but can also include palpitations, syncope, and sudden
death. Irritability or lethargy can be accompanied by additional nonspecific complaints of failure to thrive, nausea, vomiting, or abdominal
pain. Respiratory symptoms (tachypnea, wheezing, cough, orthopnea, or dyspnea on exertion) are often present. Infrequently, patients
may present acutely with pallor, altered mentation, hypotension, and
shock. Patients can be tachycardic with narrow pulse pressure and
may have hepatic enlargement and rales or wheezing. The precordial
cardiac impulse is increased, and the heart may be enlarged to palpation or percussion. Auscultation may reveal a gallop rhythm in addition to tachycardia, and occasionally murmurs of mitral or, less often,
tricuspid insufficiency may be present. The presence of hypoglycemia,
acidosis, hypotonia, or signs of liver dysfunction suggests an inborn
error of metabolism. Neurologic or skeletal muscle deficits are associated with mitochondrial disorders or muscular dystrophies (see Tables
488.4-­488.6).

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Electrocardiographic screening reveals atrial or ventricular hypertrophy, nonspecific T-­wave abnormalities, and occasionally, atrial or
ventricular arrhythmias. The chest radiograph may demonstrate cardiomegaly and pulmonary vascular prominence or pleural effusions.
The echocardiogram is often diagnostic, demonstrating the characteristic findings of LV enlargement, decreased ventricular contractility,
and occasionally a globular (remodeled) LV contour (see Fig. 488.1).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 488.1  Classification of the Cardiomyopathies by Phenome and Genome
PHENOTYPE

GENOME
NONSYNDROMIC,
USUALLY SINGLE GENE

TYPE

MORPHOLOGY

PHYSIOLOGY

PATHOLOGY

Dilated (DCM)

Dilation of LV and RV
with minimal or no
wall thickening

Reduced contractility
is the primary defect;
variable degree of
diastolic dysfunction

Myocyte
hypertrophy;
scattered fibrosis

Hypertension, alcohol,
thyrotoxicosis, myxedema,
persistent tachycardia, toxins
(e.g., chemotherapy, especially
anthracyclines), radiation

Diverse gene ontology
with >50 genes
implicated

SYNDROMIC
Diverse array of associated
conditions, especially
muscular dystrophies:
Emery-­Dreifuss, limb-­
girdle, Duchenne/Becker;
Laing distal myopathy;
Barth syndrome; Kearns-­
Sayre syndrome; other
mitochondrial disorders;
fatty acid oxidation
disorders; Alstrom
syndrome, others

Restrictive (RCM)

Usually normal
chamber sizes;
minimal wall
thickening

Contractility normal or
near-­normal with a
marked increase in
end-­diastolic filling
pressure

Specific to type,
diagnosis: amyloid,
iron, glycogen
storage disease,
others

Endomyocardial fibrosis, amyloid,
sarcoid, scleroderma, Churg-­
Strauss syndrome, cystinosis,
lymphoma, pseudoxanthoma
elasticum, hypereosinophilic
syndrome, carcinoid

If not associated with
systemic genetic
disease, genetic cause
usually from sarcomeric
pathogenic gene
variants

Gaucher disease,
hemochromatosis,
Fabry disease,
familial amyloidosis,
mucopolysaccharidoses,
Noonan syndrome

Hypertrophic
(HCM)

Usually normal or
reduced internal
chamber dimension;
wall thickening
pronounced,
especially septal
hypertrophy

Systolic function
increased or normal

Myocyte
hypertrophy,
classically with
disarray

Severe hypertension can confound
clinical, morphologic diagnosis

Pathogenic variants
of genes encoding
sarcomeric proteins

Noonan syndrome, Noonan
syndrome with multiple
lentigines, Danon
syndrome, Fabry disease,
Wolff-­Parkinson-­White
syndrome, Friedreich
ataxia, MERRF, MELAS,
other mitochondrial
disorders, fatty acid
oxidation disorders

Arrhythmogenic
right ventricular
cardiomyopathy
(ARVC)

Scattered fibrofatty
infiltration, classically
of RV but also of LV;
dilation of RV or LV, or
both, is common but
not universal

Ventricular arrhythmias
(VT, VF) early or late,
reduced contractility
with progressive
disease; can mimic
DCM

Islands of fatty
replacement;
fibrosis

Palmoplantar keratoderma, wooly
hair in Naxos syndrome

Pathogenic variants of
genes encoding proteins
of desmosome

Naxos syndrome

Left ventricular
noncompaction
(LVNC)

Ratio of noncompacted
to compacted
myocardium
increased with normal
LV or RV or any other
phenotype

Normal to reduced
systolic function

Myocardium normal
and ranging
to findings
consistent with
other coexisting
cardiomyopathies

Phenotype observed in setting of
other types of cardiomyopathy

Various cardiomyopathy
genes associated, but
uncertain whether
genetic cause or
developmental defect
during organogenesis
Continued

Chapter 488 u Diseases of the Myocardium

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

SYSTEMIC CONDITIONS,
CLINICAL FEATURES, RISK
FACTORS

2877

PHENOTYPE

GENOME
SYSTEMIC CONDITIONS,
CLINICAL FEATURES, RISK
FACTORS

NONSYNDROMIC,
USUALLY SINGLE GENE

SYNDROMIC

See RCM earlier

See RCM earlier

Hypercholesterolemia, hypertension,
diabetes, cigarette smoking, family
history

Familial
hypercholesterolemia;
other heritable lipid
disorders

Familial
hypercholesterolemia

Viral (especially acute myocarditis);
protozoal (e.g., Chagas disease);
bacterial, direct infection (e.g.,
Lyme disease), or from acute
cellular toxicity as result of systemic
toxins (e.g., Streptococcus, gram-­
negative, others)

Genetic predisposition to
infection and/or variable
response to infective
agent

TYPE

MORPHOLOGY

PHYSIOLOGY

PATHOLOGY

Infiltrative

Usually thickened walls;
occasional dilation

Restrictive physiology;
systolic function
usually mildly
reduced

Specific to type,
diagnosis: amyloid,
iron, glycogen
storage disease,
others

Inflammatory

Normal or dilated
without hypertrophy

Reduced systolic
function

Inflammatory
infiltrates

Hypereosinophilic syndrome, acute
myocarditis

Ischemic

Normal or dilated
without hypertrophy

Reduced systolic
function

Areas of infarcted
myocardium

Infectious

Normal or dilated
without hypertrophy

Reduced systolic
function

Specific to infection

LV, Left ventricle; MELAS, mitochondrial encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, and strokelike symptoms; MERRF, myoclonic epilepsy associated with ragged-­red fibers; RV, right ventricle; VF, ventricular fibrillation; VT, ventricular tachycardia.
From Falk RH, Hershberger RE. The dilated, restrictive, and infiltrative cardiomyopathies. In: Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, et al., eds. Braunwald’s Heart Disease, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019: Table 77.1.

2878 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 488.1  Classification of the Cardiomyopathies by Phenome and Genome—cont’d

Chapter 488 u Diseases of the Myocardium

2879

Table 488.2  Etiology of Pediatric Myocardial Disease
CARDIOMYOPATHY
Dilated Cardiomyopathy (DCM)
Neuromuscular diseases

Muscular dystrophies (e.g., Duchenne, Becker, limb-­girdle, Emery-­Dreifuss, congenital muscular
dystrophy), myotonic dystrophy, myofibrillar myopathy

Inborn errors of metabolism

Fatty acid oxidation disorders (trifunctional protein, VLCAD, LCHAD), carnitine abnormalities (carnitine
transport, CPTI, CPTII), mitochondrial disorders (including Kearns-­Sayre syndrome), organic acidemias
(propionic acidemia), Danon disease (DCM more common in females)

Genetic variants in cardiomyocyte
structural apparatus

Familial or sporadic DCM

Genetic syndromes

Alström syndrome, Barth syndrome (phospholipid disorders)

Ischemic

Most common in adults

Chronic tachyarrhythmias

Atrial tachycardias (intractable reentrant supraventricular tachycardia [AVRT, AVNRT], multifocal atrial
tachycardia, permanent junctional reciprocating tachycardia), ventricular tachycardia

Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy (HCM)
Inborn errors of metabolism

Mitochondrial disorders (including Friedreich ataxia, variants in nuclear or mitochondrial genome),
storage disorders (glycogen storage disorders, especially Pompe; mucopolysaccharidoses; Fabry
disease; sphingolipidoses; hemochromatosis; Danon disease); fatty acid oxidation disorders

Genetic variants in cardiomyocyte
structural apparatus

Familial or sporadic HCM

Genetic syndromes

Noonan, Costello, cardiofaciocutaneous, and Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndromes

Infant of a diabetic mother
Restrictive Cardiomyopathy (RCM)
Neuromuscular disease

Transient hypertrophy

Metabolic

Storage disorders

Genetic variants in cardiomyocyte
structural apparatus

Familial or sporadic RCM

Myofibrillar myopathies

Secondary
Rare in children; radiation therapy of thorax, amyloidosis, sarcoidosis, hemochromatosis, β-­thalassemia
Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular Cardiomyopathy (ARVC)
Genetic variants in cardiomyocyte
Familial or sporadic ARVC
structural apparatus
Left Ventricular Noncompaction
Genetic variants in cardiomyocyte
structural apparatus

LVNC phenotype associated with HCM or DCM

Other

X-­linked (Barth syndrome), autosomal recessive, mitochondrial inheritance, 1p36 deletion syndrome,
and other chromosome abnormalities or genomic disorders; associated with congenital heart defects
SECONDARY OR ACQUIRED MYOCARDIAL DISEASE
Myocarditis (see also Table 488.7)
Viral: parvovirus B19, adenovirus, coxsackievirus A and B, echovirus, rubella, varicella, influenza, mumps,
Epstein-­Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, measles, poliomyelitis, smallpox vaccine, hepatitis C virus, human
herpesvirus 6, HIV, SARS-­CoV-­2 (COVID-­19), opportunistic infections
Rickettsial: psittacosis, Coxiella, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, typhus
Bacterial: diphtheria, mycoplasma, meningococcus, leptospirosis, Lyme disease, typhoid fever,
tuberculosis, streptococcus, listeriosis
Parasitic: Chagas disease, toxoplasmosis, Loa loa, Toxocara canis, schistosomiasis, cysticercosis,
echinococcus, trichinosis
Fungal: histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis, actinomycosis
Systemic inflammatory disease

SLE, infant of mother with SLE, scleroderma, Churg-­Strauss vasculitis, rheumatoid arthritis, rheumatic
fever, sarcoidosis, dermatomyositis, periarteritis nodosa, hypereosinophilic syndrome (Löffler
syndrome), acute eosinophilic necrotizing myocarditis, giant cell myocarditis, Kawasaki disease,
multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (COVID-­19)

Nutritional deficiency

Beriberi (thiamine deficiency), kwashiorkor, Keshan disease (selenium deficiency)

Drugs, toxins

Doxorubicin (Adriamycin), cyclophosphamide, chloroquine, ipecac (emetine), sulfonamides, mesalazine,
chloramphenicol, alcohol, hypersensitivity reaction, envenomations, irradiation, herbal remedy (blue
cohosh), immune checkpoint inhibitors

Coronary artery disease

Kawasaki disease, medial necrosis, anomalous left coronary artery from pulmonary artery, other
congenital coronary anomalies (anomalous right coronary artery, coronary ostial stenosis), familial
hypercholesterolemia

Hematology-­oncology

Anemia, sickle cell disease, leukemia

Endocrine-­neuroendocrine

Hyperthyroidism, carcinoid tumor, pheochromocytoma, adrenal crisis

Stress (takotsubo) cardiomyopathy

Endocrine (see earlier)
Neurologic (stroke, bleed)
Induction of anesthesia
Fright
Medications/drugs (sympathomimetic agents, venlafaxine)

CPTI/CPTII, Carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1/2; LCHAD, long-­chain 3-­hydroxyacyl-­CoA dehydrogenase deficiency; LVNC, left ventricular noncompaction; SLE, systemic lupus
erythematosus; VLCAD, very-­long-­chain acyl-­coenzyme A dehydrogenase.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2880 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
RV enlargement and depressed function are occasionally noted. Echo
Doppler studies can reveal evidence of pulmonary hypertension, mitral
regurgitation, or other structural cardiac or coronary abnormalities.
Cardiac MRI is useful for patients with suboptimal imaging echocardiographic windows or in patients with concern of acute myocarditis

where, in contrast to echocardiography, recognition of inflammation of
the myocardium is possible.
Additional testing may include complete blood count, renal and
liver function tests, creatine phosphokinase (CPK), cardiac troponin I, lactate, brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) and pro-­BNP, plasma
amino acids, urine organic acids, and an acylcarnitine profile. Additional genetic testing is typically indicated, and enzymatic testing may
be useful (see Table 488.3). Cardiac catheterization and endomyocardial biopsy are not routine but may be useful in patients with acute
DCM. Biopsy samples can be examined histologically for the presence
of mononuclear cell infiltrates, myocardial damage, storage abnormalities, and evidence of infection. It is considered standard of care to
screen first-­degree family members using echocardiography and electrocardiogram (ECG) in idiopathic and familial cases of DCM.

RV
Ao
LV

PROGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT

LA

The 1-­and 5-­year freedom from death or transplantation in patients
diagnosed with DCM is 60–70% and 50–60%, respectively. Independent risk factors at DCM diagnosis for subsequent death or transplantation include older age, heart failure, lower LV fractional shortening
z score, and underlying etiology. DCM is the most common cause for
cardiac transplantation in pediatric and adult studies.
The therapeutic approach to patients with DCM includes a careful
assessment to uncover possible treatable etiologies, screening of family
members, and rigorous pharmacologic therapy. Medications aimed at
reverse remodeling (improving ventricular size and function) include
angiotensin-­converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) plus β-­adrenergic blockade with carvedilol or
metoprolol. The combination medication valsartan/sacubitril, which
is an ARB/neprilysin inhibitor, respectively, that is FDA approved
for patients 1 year of age and older, has been readily used in this setting in pediatrics in lieu of either an ACE or ARBs alone (see Chapter 491). Each of these medications have proved independently and in
combination to improve survival and symptoms and reduce hospital
admissions in adults with DCM. Additionally, furosemide may be used
to reduce symptoms of pulmonary or systemic venous congestion.
Digoxin therapy can also be considered in some patients. Implantable cardiac defibrillators may be considered for certain select patients
with a high risk of sudden cardiac arrest. Pacemakers, including dual-­
chamber and biventricular pacing therapy, can improve patients with

A

LA

RV

LV

B
Fig. 488.1 Echocardiogram of a patient with dilated cardiomyopathy.

A, Parasternal long-­axis view showing the enlarged left ventricle. B, Apical four-­chamber view showing the large left ventricle compressing the
right ventricle. Ao, Ascending aorta; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle;
RV, right ventricle.

Table 488.3  Cardiomyopathies
DCM

HCM

RCM

LVNC

ARVC

Prevalence

50/100,000

1/500

Unknown

Unknown

1/2,000

Causes

Sarcomeric/
cytoskeletal/
desmosomal gene
variant, neuromuscular
disease, inborn
error of metabolism,
mitochondrial disease,
genetic syndrome,
infection

Sarcomeric/
cytoskeletal/
desmosomal gene
variant, genetic
syndrome, inborn
error of metabolism/
mitochondrial disease

Sarcomeric
gene variant,
neuromuscular
disease, genetic
syndrome, storage
or infiltrative
disease

Sarcomeric-­cytoskeletal-­
desmosomal
gene mutation,
neuromuscular
disease, inborn
error of metabolism,
mitochondrial disease,
genetic syndrome

Desmosomal gene
variants

Inheritance

30–50% AD, AR, X-­L, Mt

50% AD, Mt

AD, up to 50%

AD, X-­L, Mt, % unknown

30–50% AD, rare AR
(Naxos disease;
Carvajal syndrome)

Sudden death

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Arrhythmias

Atrial, ventricular,
and conduction
disturbances

Atrial and ventricular

Atrial fibrillation

Atrial, ventricular,
and conduction
disturbances

Ventricular and
conduction
disturbances

Ventricular
function

Systolic and diastolic
dysfunction

Diastolic dysfunction
Dynamic systolic
outflow obstruction

Diastolic dysfunction
Normal systolic
function

Systolic or diastolic
dysfunction

Normal-­reduced
systolic and diastolic
function

ACE, Angiotensin-­converting enzyme; AD, autosomal dominant inheritance; AR, autosomal recessive inheritance; ARVC, arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy; DCM,
dilated cardiomyopathy; HCM, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; ICD, implantable cardioverter-­defibrillator; LVNC, left ventricular noncompaction; Mt, mitochondrial inheritance;
RCM, restrictive cardiomyopathy; X-­L, X-­linked inheritance.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 488 u Diseases of the Myocardium

2881

Fig. 488.2 Locations of genes within the cardiac sarcomere known to cause hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Prevalence of every gene (derived from
data of unrelated hypertrophic cardiomyopathy probands with positive genotyping) is shown in parentheses. (From Maron BJ, Maron MS. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Lancet 2013;381:242–252, Fig 1.)

SEPT

LV

LVPW

A

RA

RV

SEPT

LA

LV

RV

LV

B
Fig. 488.3 Echocardiograms demonstrating hypertrophic cardiomyo-

pathy. A, Parasternal long-­axis view of a patient with severe concentric left ventricular hypertrophy. B, Four-­chamber view of a patient with
asymmetric septal hypertrophy. LV, Left ventricle; LVPW, left ventricular
posterior wall; RV, right ventricle; SEPT, septum.

Fig. 488.4 Echocardiogram of a patient with restrictive cardiomyopa-

thy. Apical four-­chamber view shows the greatly enlarged right and left
atria compared to the normal-­size left and right ventricular chambers.
LA, Left atrium; LV, left ventricle; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2882 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 488.4  Nuclear DNA Abnormalities Associated with Cardiomyopathy and Arrhythmias or Conduction Defects*
CONDITION

GENETIC DEFECT

ISOLATED COMPLEX DEFICIENCIES
Complex I deficiency
Multiple complex I subunit
genes, ACAD9, FOXRED1

HEART FINDINGS

OTHER CLINICAL FEATURES

HCM, DCM, LVNC,
WPW

Leigh syndrome, FILA, MELAS, leukoencephalopathy,
seizures, hypotonia, pigmentary retinopathy, optic
atrophy, hearing loss, liver dysfunction

Complex II deficiency

SDHA, SDHD

HCM, DCM, LVNC,
AF, heart block

Leukoencephalopathy, cerebellar atrophy, seizures,
spasticity, myopathy, liver dysfunction, kidney dysfunction

Complex III deficiency

BCS1L

HCM

Developmental delay, psychosis, hearing loss

SCO2, SURF1, C2orf64,
Cl2orf62, COX6B1
MITOCHONDRIAL TRANSLATION DEFECTS
GTP-­binding protein-­3
GTPBP3
deficiency

HCM, DCM

Leigh syndrome, encephalopathy, ataxia, liver dysfunction,
kidney dysfunction

HCM, DCM, heart
block, WPW

Leigh syndrome, encephalopathy

Mitochondrial translational
activator protein deficiency

MTOI

HCM, heart block

Encephalopathy, hypotonia

Alanyl-­tRNA synthetase
deficiency

AARS2

HCM

Leukoencephalopathy, myopathy

Tyrosyl-­tRNA synthetase
deficiency

YARS2

HCM

MLASA syndrome

tRNA methyltransferase-­5
deficiency

TRMTS

HCM

Developmental delay, hypotonia, peripheral neuropathy,
renal tubulopathy

RNA processing defect

ELAC2

Complex IV deficiency

HCM, PSVE

Microcephaly, growth deficiency, hearing loss

Mitochondrial ribosomal
MRPS22, MRPl3, MRPL44
subunit deficiencies
mtDNA DEPLETION SYNDROMES
MNGIE
TYMP

HCM, WPW

Leukoencephalopathy, seizures, liver dysfunction, renal
tubulopathy

Mild or
asymptomatic
HCM

Leukoencephalopathy, severe gastrointestinal dysmotility,
ophthalmoplegia, hearing loss, peripheral neuropathy

F-­box protein deficiency

FBXL4

Cardiomyopathy,
unspecified

Encephalopathy, brain atrophy

Coenzyme Q10 biosynthesis
defects

COQ2, COQ4, COQ9

HCM

Leigh syndrome, encephalomyopathy, retinitis
pigmentosa, hearing loss, liver dysfunction, renal
tubulopathy

HCM, DCM, LVNC,
EFE, VT, LQTS

Myopathy, short stature, neutropenia

3-­METHYLGLUTACONIC ACIDURIAS
Barth syndrome
TAZ
Dilated cardiomyopathy and
ataxia syndrome

DNAJC19

DCM, LVNC

Ataxia, optic ataxia, short stature, testicular abnormalities,
liver disease

Complex V deficiency

TMEM70

HCM

Cataracts, leukodystrophy, ataxia, myopathy, short stature

Sengers syndrome

AGK

HCM

Cataracts, myopathy, exercise intolerance, short stature

*Examples of conditions that are associated with heart disease and feature abnormal nDNA are shown, along with the causative molecular defects and clinical findings. The genetic
defects noted here are provided as major contributors to the various mitochondrial conditions but are not a comprehensive compilation.
AF, Atrial fibrillation; DCM, dilated cardiomyopathy; EFE, endocardial fibroelastosis; FILA, fatal infantile lactic acidosis; GTP, guanosine triphosphate; HCM, hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy; LQTS, long QT syndrome; MELAS, mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis, and strokelike episodes; MLASA, myopathy, lactic acidosis, sideroblastic
anemia; MNGIE, mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalopathy; nDNA, nuclear DNA; PSVE, paroxysmal supraventricular extrasystoles; LVNC, left ventricular noncompaction;
VT, ventricular tachycardia; WPW, Wolff-­Parkinson-­White syndrome.
From Enns GM. Pediatric mitochondrial diseases and the heart. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2017;29:541–551, Table 2.

certain underlying electrical derangements. In patients presenting
with extreme degrees of heart failure or circulatory collapse, intensive
care measures are often required, including intravenous inotropes and
diuretics, mechanic ventilatory support, and on occasion, mechanical circulatory support, which may include a ventricular assist device
(VAD), total artificial heart, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation

(ECMO), and ultimately cardiac transplantation. In patients with
DCM and atrial or ventricular arrhythmias, specific antiarrhythmic
therapy should be instituted.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 488 u Diseases of the Myocardium

2883

Table 488.5  Mitochondrial DNA Abnormalities Associated with Cardiomyopathy and Arrhythmias or Conduction Defects*
CONDITION

GENETIC DEFECT

HEART FINDINGS

OTHER CLINICAL FEATURES

Kearns-­Sayre syndrome

mtDNA deletion

HCM, DCM, heart block,
PMVT

Progressive external ophthalmoplegia, pigmentary
retinopathy, cerebellar ataxia, hearing loss, increased CSF
protein, diabetes mellitus, renal tubulopathy

MELAS

tRNALou point variant

HCM, DCM, LVNC, RCM,
heart block, WPW

Encephalopathy, seizures, strokelike episodes, headaches,
hearing loss, myopathy

MERRF

tRNALys point variant

HCM, DCM, HiCM, WPW

Myoclonus, seizures, ataxia, optic atrophy, hearing loss,
short stature

Complex I deficiency

Multiple complex I subunit
genes

HCM, DCM

Leigh syndrome, leukoencephalopathy, seizures, optic
atrophy

Complex III deficiency

MTCYB

HCM, DCM, HiCM

Exercise intolerance, myopathy, seizures, optic atrophy,
short stature

Complex IV deficiency

MT-­CO1, MT-­CO2, MT-­CO3

HCM, DCM, HiCM

Encephalopathy, seizures, pigmentary retinopathy, hearing
loss, myopathy, liver dysfunction

Complex V deficiency

MT-­ATP6, MT-­ATP8

HCM

Ataxia, peripheral neuropathy

*Relatively common conditions that are associated with heart disease and feature abnormal mtDNA are shown, along with the most common molecular defects and clinical findings.
Although the most common molecular defects are indicated in the table, in most cases, multiple genetic abnormalities can cause similar clinical presentations.
CSF, Cerebrospinal fluid; DCM, dilated cardiomyopathy; HCM, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; HiCM, histiocytoid cardiomyopathy; LVNC, left ventricular noncompaction; MELAS,
mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis, and strokelike episodes; MERRF, myoclonic epilepsy with ragged red fibers; mtDNA, mitochondrial DNA; PMVT, polymorphic
ventricular tachycardia; RCM, restrictive cardiomyopathy; WPW, Wolff-­Parkinson-­White syndrome.
From Enns GM. Pediatric mitochondrial diseases and the heart. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2017;29:541–551. Table 3.

Table 488.6  Gene Variants and Cardiac Manifestations of Neuromuscular Disorders
DISORDER

GENE VARIANT

CARDIOMYOPATHY

ECG

ARRHYTHMIA

Duchenne muscular
dystrophy (DMD)

Dystrophin

Dilated

Short PR interval, prolonged
QT interval, increased
QT:PT ratio, right ventricular
hypertrophy, deep Q waves
II, III, aVF, V5, V6

Increased baseline HR, decreased
rate variability, premature
ventricular beats (58% of
patients by 24 yr of age)

DMD—female carrier

Dystrophin

Dilated

None

Uncommon

Becker muscular dystrophy

Dystrophin

Dilated

Conduction system disease

Similar to DMD

Emery-­Dreifuss autosomal
dominant or proximal
dominant limb-­girdle
muscular dystrophy IB

Lamin A/C

Dilated

Conduction abnormalities:
prolonged PR interval, sinus
bradycardia

Atrial fibrillation or flutter and
atrial standstill; ventricular
dysrhythmias

Limb-­girdle muscular
dystrophy

α, β, γ, δ sarcoglycans

Dilated

Incomplete right bundle
branch block, tall R waves
in VI and V2, left anterior
hemiblock

Uncommon

Congenital muscular
dystrophy

Laminin α2

Dilated

None

None

Limb-­girdle muscular
dystrophy 21

Fukutin

Dilated

AV node and bundle branch
block; age at onset: late
teens and early 20s

Atrial arrhythmias and/or
ventricular arrhythmias

Emery-­Dreifuss X-­linked

Emerin

Rare

Conduction abnormalities:
prolonged PR interval, sinus
bradycardia

Atrial fibrillation or flutter and
atrial standstill

Friedreich ataxia

Frataxin

Hypertrophic

T-­wave inversion, left axis
deviation, repolarization
abnormalities

Ventricular arrhythmias

Myotonic dystrophy type 1,
infantile

Myotonic dystrophy
protein kinase
gene

Hypertrophic

Conduction disease,
prolonged PR interval,
widening of QRS complex

Atrial fibrillation and flutter,
complete heart block

Myotonic dystrophy type 1

Myotonic dystrophy
protein kinase
gene

LVNC

Conduction disease,
prolonged PR interval,
widening of QRS complex

Atrial fibrillation and flutter,
complete heart block

AV, Atrioventricular; HR, heart rate; LVNC, left ventricular noncompaction.
From Hsu DT. Cardiac manifestations of neuromuscular disorders in children. Pediatr Respir Rev. 2010;11:35–38, Table 1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2884 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

488.2 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
John J. Parent and Stephanie M. Ware
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a heterogeneous, relatively
common, and potentially life-­threatening form of cardiomyopathy.
The causes of HCM include inborn errors of metabolism, neuromuscular disorders, syndromic conditions, and genetic abnormalities of
the structural components of the cardiomyocyte (see Tables 488.1 and
488.2). Both the age of onset and the associated features are helpful in
identifying the underlying etiology.
HCM is a genetic disorder and frequently occurs because of pathogenic
variants in sarcomere or cytoskeletal components of the cardiomyocyte
(see Fig. 488.2). Pathogenic variants of the genes encoding cardiac β-­
myosin heavy-­chain (MYH7) and myosin-­binding protein C (MYBPC3)
are the most common (see Table 488.3). Pathogenic variants are inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern with a high penetrance but
variable expressivity. Additional genetic causes for HCM include nonsarcomeric protein pathogenic variants, such as the γ2-­regulatory subunit of
adenosine monophosphate–activated protein kinase (PRKAG2) and the
lysosome-­associated membrane protein 2α-­galactosidase (Danon disease, a form of glycogen storage disease). Syndromic conditions, such as
Noonan syndrome, may present with HCM at birth, and recognition of
extracardiac manifestations is important in making the diagnosis. Medical therapy directed at the Ras signaling pathway is in the initial phases of
use in patients with Noonan syndrome and related RASopathies.
Glycogen storage disorders such as Pompe disease often present
in infancy with a heart murmur, abnormal ECG, systemic signs and
symptoms, and occasionally heart failure. Many states have Pompe
testing on the newborn screening, facilitating early diagnosis and
therapy, which has improved the prognosis. The characteristic ECG in
Pompe disease demonstrates prominent P waves, a short P-­R interval,
and massive QRS voltages. The echocardiogram confirms severe, often
concentric, LV hypertrophy.

PATHOGENESIS

HCM is characterized by the presence of increased LV wall thickness
in the absence of structural heart disease or hypertension. Often the
interventricular septum is disproportionately involved, leading to the
previous designation of idiopathic hypertrophic subaortic stenosis or
the current term of asymmetric septal hypertrophy. In the presence
of a resting or provocable outflow tract gradient, the term hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy is used. Although the left ventricle
is predominantly affected, the right ventricle may be involved, particularly in infancy. The mitral valve can demonstrate systolic anterior
motion and mitral insufficiency. Left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT)
obstruction occurs in 25% of patients, is dynamic in nature, and may
in part be secondary to the abnormal position of the mitral valve as
well as the obstructing subaortic hypertrophic cardiac muscle. The
cardiac myofibrils and myofilaments demonstrate disarray and myocardial fibrosis.
Typically, systolic function is preserved or even hyperdynamic,
although systolic dysfunction may occur late and is a predictor for
death or need for cardiac transplant. LVOT obstruction with or without mitral insufficiency may be provoked by physiologic manipulations such as the Valsalva maneuver, positional changes, and physical
activity. Frequently, the hypertrophic and fibrotic cardiac muscle demonstrates relaxation abnormalities (diminished compliance), and LV
filling may be impaired (diastolic dysfunction).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Many patients are asymptomatic; 50% of cases present with a heart
murmur or during screening when another family member has been
diagnosed with HCM. Symptoms of HCM may include palpitations,

chest pain, easy fatigability, dyspnea, dizziness, and syncope. Sudden
death is a well-­recognized but uncommon manifestation that occurs
during physical exertion but may also occur at rest or during sleep.
Characteristic physical examination findings include an overactive
precordial impulse with a lift or heave, a systolic ejection murmur in
the aortic region not associated with an ejection click, and an apical
blowing murmur of mitral insufficiency.

DIAGNOSIS

The ECG typically demonstrates LV hypertrophy with ST segment and
T-­wave abnormalities (particularly T-­wave inversion in the left precordial leads). Intraventricular conduction delays and signs of ventricular
preexcitation (Wolff-­Parkinson-­White syndrome) may be present and
should raise the possibility of PRKAG2-­related HCM, Danon disease,
or Pompe disease. Chest radiography demonstrates normal or mildly
increased heart size with a prominence of the left ventricle. Echocardiography is diagnostic in identifying, localizing, and quantifying the
degree of myocardial hypertrophy (see Fig. 488.3). Doppler interrogation defines, localizes, and quantifies the degree of LVOT obstruction
and demonstrates and quantifies the degree of mitral insufficiency and
diastolic dysfunction.
Cardiac catheterization is rarely used in the diagnosis of HCM but
may be helpful if there is concern for a myocardial bridge (when a
coronary artery runs through vs on top of the myocardium) that
may be causing intermittent coronary insufficiency during dynamic
obstruction. Myocardial bridges can be seen on coronary angiography.
Additionally, cardiac catheterization may occasionally be used to better
define hemodynamics in patients.
Additional diagnostic studies include metabolic testing, genetic testing for specific syndromes, or genetic testing for pathogenic variants in
genes known to cause isolated HCM (see Table 488.3). Clinical genetic
testing panels continue to expand. Genetic diagnosis is also useful in
identifying at-­risk family members who require ongoing surveillance
(Figs. 488.5 and 488.6).

PROGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT

Children <1 year of age or with inborn errors of metabolism or malformation syndromes or those with a mixed HCM/DCM have a significantly
poorer prognosis. The risk of sudden death in older patients is greater
in those with a personal or family history of cardiac arrest, ventricular
tachycardia, exercise hypotension, syncope, or excessive (>3 cm) ventricular wall thickness. Although intrafamilial variability in symptoms
occurs, a family history of sudden death is a highly significant predictor
of risk. Restriction from competitive sports and strenuous physical activity is highly recommended, and additional recreational exercise activities should be tailored to each individual based on their overall clinical
status. β-­Adrenergic blocking agents (propranolol, atenolol, metoprolol)
or calcium channel blockers (verapamil) may be useful in diminishing
LVOT obstruction, modifying LV hypertrophy, and improving ventricular filling. They also confer an antiarrhythmic benefit and may reduce
symptoms. In patients with atrial or ventricular arrhythmias, specific
antiarrhythmic therapy should be used. Patients with documented, previously aborted sudden cardiac arrest, strong family histories of sudden
death, ventricular wall end-­diastolic dimensions of ≥3 cm, unexplained
syncope, nonsustained ventricular tachycardia, apical aneurysm, ejection fraction ≤50%, or blunted or hypotensive blood pressure response
to exercise should be considered for treatment with an implantable
cardioverter-­defibrillator (ICD). Early identification of HCM, family
screening/surveillance, appropriate activity restriction, and use of ICDs
have greatly reduced the mortality of HCM to approximately 0.5% per
year in the modern era.
Innovative interventional procedures have been used to reduce
the degree of LVOT obstruction anatomically or physiologically.
Dual-­
chamber pacing, alcohol septal ablation, surgical septal

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 488 u Diseases of the Myocardium

2885

HCM Suspected or Family History of HCM

Diagnostic Testing
(ECG, Imaging, Genetics)

1

Phenotype Negative

(See Fig. 488.6 for details
on genetic testing)

Phenotype Positive

Complete Baseline Evaluation
SCD risk assessment
Stress testing if symptomatic,
if LVOTO is suspected but
unconfirmed, or to determine
baseline functional capacity

2
Every 1–2 years or with change in
symptoms*

Family with
known P/LP
variant?
(See Fig. 488.6 for
more detail)

YES
Patient
has family
variant?

Serial evaluation for clinical status,
SCD risk (if no ICD present), or
sooner with change in symptoms:
Clinical assessment
Echo
Holter

NO

YES, or Unknown

Every 3–5 y (2b)
CMR for SCD risk assessment (if no
ICD present), or to evaluate for any
suspected morphologic changes

NO

3
Further clinical or genetic
testing is not recommended
Asymptomatic

4

Reassess variant
classification

Variant = P/LP

5

Screening ECG and Echo
(CMR if echo is inconclusive)
at the intervals in the table
below

Symptomatic

Every 2–3 y (2b)
Treadmill exercise or
Cardiopulmonary exercise testing
for assessment of functional status

Treadmill or Bike Exercise Testing
Special consideration:

Variant downgraded to VUS

Stress echo if gradient <50 mm Hg
CPET if considering advanced HF
therapies

Screening Asymptomatic First-Degree Relatives of Patients With HCM

Age of First-Degree Relative

Children and adolescents from
genotype-positive family and/or family
with early onset HCM
All other children and adolescents
Adults

Initiation of Screening

Surveillance Interval

At the time of diagnosis in another family member Every 1–2 y

Every 2–3 y
At any time after the diagnosis in the family, but
no later than puberty
At the time of diagnosis in another family member Every 3–5 y

Fig. 488.5 Algorithm for recommended evaluation and testing modified for HCM. *The interval may be extended, particularly in adult patients
who remain stable after multiple evaluations. CMR, Cardiovascular magnetic resonance; CPET, cardiopulmonary exercise test; ECG, electrocardiography/electrocardiogram; HCM, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; HF, heart failure; ICD, implantable cardioverter-­defibrillator; LVOTO, left ventricular
outflow tract obstruction; P/LP, pathogenic or likely pathogenic variant; SCD, sudden cardiac death; VUS, variant of unknown significance. (Modified
from Ommen SR, Mital S, Burke MA, et al. 2020 AHA/ACC guideline for the diagnosis and treatment of patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy:
executive summary. J Amer Coll Cardiol. 2020;142:e533–e557, Fig. 1.)

myomectomy, and mitral valve replacement have all met with some
success but are typically reserved for patients with significant symptoms despite medical therapy (Fig. 488.7). Mavacamten, a selective
myosin inhibitor, has been an effective therapy in adults. Enzyme
replacement therapy for Pompe disease is an effective therapy after
birth (see Chapter 107.1). Preliminary trials of in utero enzyme
replacement therapy for Pompe disease have also demonstrated
efficacy.
First-­degree relatives of patients identified as having HCM should
be screened with ECG and echocardiogram. Genetic testing is available clinically and is of high utility. It is important first to test the
affected individual in the family rather than “at-­risk” individuals,

because 20–50% of cases of HCM will not demonstrate pathogenic
variants in currently available panels of genes. If a causative genetic
variant is identified, at-­risk members of the family can be effectively
tested. In families with HCM without demonstrable pathogenic
variants, repeat noninvasive cardiac screening with ECG and echocardiogram should be undertaken in at-­risk individuals yearly until
young adulthood (age 21 years) and then every 3 years if no prior
evidence of HCM is present. Gene-­positive but phenotype-­negative
pediatric patients may remain asymptomatic during childhood but
require careful and frequent follow-­up.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2886 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
HCM Index Case
Targeted Gene Testing

Regular reevaluation
for variant
reclassification
(See Fig. 488.5,
Box 4)

Disease-causing
LP/P variant

Reclassified as
LP/P

VUS, LB/B or
no variant identified

Cascade genetic testing
in family

Variant positive

Variant negative

Regular follow-up
(See Fig. 488.5,
Box 2)

Further clinical or
genetic testing not
recommended
(See Fig. 488.5,
Box 3)

Consider second tier
testing in proband if no
variant is identified

Reclassified as
VUS or LB/B

Clinical surveillance
in family

HCM diagnosed

Regular follow-up
(See Fig. 488.5,
Box 2)

No evidence of
HCM

Regular clinical
surveillance
(See Fig. 488.5,
Box 5)

Fig. 488.6 Algorithm for genetic testing processes in HCM. HCM, Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; LB/B, likely benign/benign; LP/P, likely pathogenic or pathogenic; VUS, variant of unknown significance. (Modified from Ommen SR, Mital S, Burke MA, et al. 2020 AHA/ACC guideline for the
diagnosis and treatment of patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: executive summary. J Amer Coll Cardiol. 2020;142:e533–e557, Fig. 2.)

488.3 Restrictive Cardiomyopathy
John J. Parent and Stephanie M. Ware
Restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM) accounts for <5% of cardiomyopathy cases. Incidence increases with age and is more common in females.
In equatorial Africa, RCM accounts for a large number of deaths. Infiltrative myocardial causes and storage disorders frequently result in
associated LV hypertrophy and may represent HCM with restrictive
physiology. Noninfiltrative causes include pathogenic variants in genes
encoding sarcomeric or cytoskeletal proteins. Although there has been
significant success in discovering pathogenic gene variants causing
RCM, the majority of cases are considered idiopathic. Potential etiologies include sarcoidosis and Gaucher, Hurler, or Fabry diseases.

PATHOGENESIS

RCM is characterized by normal ventricular chamber dimensions,
normal myocardial wall thickness, and preserved systolic function.
Dramatic atrial dilation can result from the abnormal ventricular myocardial compliance and high ventricular diastolic pressure. Autosomal
dominant inheritance has been demonstrated for families with pathogenic gene variants in sarcomeric and cytoskeletal genes.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Abnormal ventricular filling, sometimes referred to as diastolic heart
failure, is manifest in the systemic venous circulation with edema,

hepatomegaly, or ascites. Elevation of left-­sided filling pressures results
in cough, dyspnea, or pulmonary edema. With activity, patients may
experience chest pain, shortness of breath, syncope/near-­syncope, or
even sudden death. Pulmonary hypertension and pulmonary vascular
disease develop and may progress rapidly. Heart murmurs are typically
absent, but a gallop rhythm may be prominent. In the presence of pulmonary hypertension, an overactive RV impulse and pronounced pulmonary component of the second heart sound (S2) are present in RCM.

DIAGNOSIS
The characteristic electrocardiographic finding of prominent P waves
(reflective of atrial enlargement) is usually associated with normal QRS
voltages and nonspecific ST and T-­wave changes. RV hypertrophy
occurs in patients with pulmonary hypertension. The chest radiograph
may be normal or may demonstrate a prominent atrial shadow and
pulmonary vascular redistribution. The echocardiogram is often diagnostic, demonstrating normal-­sized ventricles with preserved systolic
function and dramatic enlargement of the atria (see Fig. 488.4). Flow
and tissue Doppler interrogation reveal abnormal filling parameters. It
is critical to differentiate RCM from constrictive pericarditis, which
can be treated surgically (see Chapter 489.2). MRI may be necessary
to demonstrate the thickened or calcified pericardium often present in
constrictive pericardial disease.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 488 u Diseases of the Myocardium

A

B

C

D

E

F

2887

Fig. 488.7 Scheme of septal reduction therapy. A, Left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) obstruction (arrow) created by hypertrophied basal septum and systolic anterior motion. B, Transthoracic echocardiography with systolic anterior motion (arrow). C, Continuous-­wave Doppler imaging of
dynamic LVOT obstruction. D, Schematic finding after septal reduction. E, Transthoracic echocardiography after septal reduction procedure. F, Absence of LVOT obstruction in continuous-­wave Doppler imaging after septal reduction therapy. LA, Left atrium; LV, left ventricle; MV, mitral valve; RV,
right ventricle. (From Veselka J, Anavekar NS, Charron P. Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy. Lancet. 2017;389:1253–1264, Fig. 5, p. 1259.)

PROGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT

Pharmacologic modalities are of limited use, and the prognosis of
patients with RCM is generally poor, with often progressive clinical
deterioration. Sudden death is a significant risk, with a 2-­year survival
of 50%. When signs of heart failure exist, judicious use of diuretics
can result in clinical improvement. As a result of the dramatic atrial
enlargement and ventricular scarring, these patients are predisposed to
the development of atrial tachyarrhythmias, complete heart block, and
thromboemboli. Antiarrhythmic agents may be necessary, and anticoagulation with platelet inhibitors or warfarin (Coumadin) is indicated.
Cardiac transplantation is the treatment of choice in many centers for
patients with RCM, and the results are excellent in patients without pulmonary hypertension, pulmonary vascular disease, or severe congestive
heart failure. Some patients may need bridging to transplant with a VAD
if they have elevated pulmonary pressures or significant heart failure.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

488.4 Left Ventricular Noncompaction,
Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular
Cardiomyopathy, Endocardial
Fibroelastosis, and Takotsubo
Cardiomyopathy
John J. Parent and Stephanie M. Ware
Left ventricular noncompaction (LVNC) is characterized by a distinctive trabeculated or spongy-­appearing left ventricle commonly associated
with LV dysfunction and/or dilation and at times hypertrophy, diastolic
dysfunction, and arrhythmias (Fig. 488.8). LVNC may be isolated or associated with structural congenital cardiac defects. Patients may present with
signs of heart failure, arrhythmias, syncope, sudden death, or as an asymptomatic finding during screening of family members.

Imaging studies using ultrasound or MRI can demonstrate the characteristic pattern of deeply trabeculated LV myocardium, most characteristically within the apex. ECG findings are nonspecific and include
chamber hypertrophy, ST and T-­wave changes, or arrhythmias. In some
patients, preexcitation is notable, and giant QRS voltages occur in approximately 30% of younger children. Metabolic screening should be considered, especially in young children. Elevated serum lactate and urine
3-­methylglutaconic acid may be seen in Barth syndrome, an X-­linked
disorder of phospholipid metabolism caused by a pathogenic variant in
the TAZ gene. Clinical testing for TAZ variants is available and should be
considered, especially in males. Patients with mitochondrial disorders frequently demonstrate signs of LVNC. These children are at risk for atrial or
ventricular arrhythmias and thromboembolic complications. Treatment
includes anticoagulation, antiarrhythmic therapy if needed, and treatment
of heart failure if present. In patients refractory to medical therapy, cardiac
transplantation has been used successfully.
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC) is relatively uncommon in North America compared with the high prevalence in
Europe, especially Italy (see Chapter 484.4). Autosomal dominant inheritance is common. In addition, recessive forms associated with severe ARVC
and skin manifestations are known. Comprehensive genetic screening has
been reported to identify a cause in up to 50% of cases. ARVC is typically
characterized by a dilated right ventricle with fibrofatty infiltration of the
RV wall; increasingly, LV involvement is being recognized. Global and
regional RV and LV dysfunction and ventricular tachyarrhythmias are the
major clinical findings. Syncope or aborted sudden death can occur and
should be treated with antiarrhythmic medications and placement of an
ICD. In patients with ventricular dysfunction, heart failure management
as indicated for patients with DCM may be of use.
Endocardial fibroelastosis (EFE), once an important cause of
heart failure in children, is uncommon. The decline in primary EFE
is likely related to the abolition of mumps virus infections by immunization practices. Rare familial cases exist, but the causative genes are
unknown. Secondary EFE can occur with severe left-­sided obstructive lesions such as aortic stenosis or atresia, hypoplastic left heart

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2888 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 488.7  Etiology of Myocarditis
LA

LV

Fig. 488.8 Echocardiogram of a patient with left ventricular noncom-

paction cardiomyopathy. Apical view showing abnormal trabeculations
of left ventricle at the apex (arrows). For comparison, see the smooth-­
walled LV in Figure 488.2. LA, Left atrium; LV, left ventricle.

syndrome, or coarctation of the aorta. EFE is characterized by an
opaque, white, fibroelastic thickening on the endocardial surface of the
ventricle, which leads to systolic and/or diastolic dysfunction. Surgical removal of the endocardial fibrosis has been successfully done to
improve cardiac function. Standard heart failure management, including transplantation, has been used in the management of EFE.
Takotsubo cardiomyopathy is a reversible stress-­
induced syndrome associated with transient systolic and diastolic dysfunction and
regional ventricular wall motion abnormalities characterized by ventricular apical ballooning. Physical or emotional stress and associated
etiologies (see Table 488.2) precipitate transient episodes of chest pain
or heart failure. Treatment includes that for heart failure (β blockers,
ACE inhibitors, diuretics) and addressing the precipitating event (thyrotoxicosis, pheochromocytoma, drug ingestion).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

488.5 Myocarditis
John J. Parent and Stephanie M. Ware
Acute or chronic inflammation of the myocardium is characterized by
inflammatory cell infiltrates, myocyte necrosis, or myocyte degeneration and may be caused by infectious, connective tissue, granulomatous, toxic, immune, or idiopathic processes. There may be associated
systemic manifestations of the disease, and occasionally the endocardium or pericardium is involved. Patients may be asymptomatic,
have nonspecific prodromal symptoms, or present with overt congestive heart failure, compromising arrhythmias, or sudden death. It is
assumed that viral infections are the most common etiology, although
myocardial toxins, drug exposures, hypersensitivity reactions, and
immune disorders may also lead to myocarditis (Table 488.7).

ETIOLOGY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
Viral Infections

Coxsackievirus and other enteroviruses, adenovirus, parvovirus B19,
Epstein-­Barr virus, parechovirus, influenza virus, and cytomegalovirus
are the most common causative agents in children. COVID-­19 infections, particularly during multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-­C) and, rarely, after mRNA COVID-­19 vaccinations, have
been associated with myocarditis. In Asia, hepatitis C virus appears to
be significant as well. The true incidence of viral myocarditis is unknown
because mild cases probably go undetected. The disease is typically
sporadic but may be epidemic. Manifestations are, to some degree, age
dependent: in neonates and young infants, viral myocarditis can be fulminant; in children, it often occurs as an acute, myopericarditis with
heart failure; and in older children and adolescents, it may present with
signs and symptoms of acute or chronic heart failure or chest pain.

INFECTIOUS CAUSES
Viral: adenoviruses, echoviruses, enteroviruses (e.g.,
coxsackieviruses), herpesviruses (human cytomegalovirus,
Epstein-­Barr virus, human herpesvirus 6), hepatitis C virus, human
immunodeficiency virus, influenza virus, parvovirus B19, SARS-­
CoV-­2 (COVID-­19) disease and vaccine, smallpox vaccine
Bacterial: Borrelia burgdorferi (Lyme disease), Chlamydia,
Corynebacterium diphtheriae, Legionella, Mycobacterium
tuberculosis, Mycoplasma, Staphylococcus, streptococcus A,
Streptococcus pneumoniae, Whipple disease
Fungal: Actinomyces, Aspergillus, Candida, Cryptococcus
Helminthic: Echinococcus granulosus, Trichinella spiralis
Protozoal: Toxoplasma gondii, Trypanosoma cruzi
Rickettsial: Coxiella burnetii, Rickettsia typhi
Spirochetal: Borrelia burgdorferi, Leptospira, Treponema pallidum
AUTOIMMUNE DISEASES
Rheumatic fever, celiac disease, Churg-­Strauss syndrome, Crohn disease,
dermatomyositis, giant cell myocarditis, hypereosinophilic syndrome,
Kawasaki disease, lupus erythematosus, lymphofollicular myocarditis,
rheumatoid arthritis, sarcoidosis, scleroderma, ulcerative colitis
HYPERSENSITIVITY REACTIONS
Penicillin, ampicillin, cephalosporins, tetracyclines, sulfonamides,
antiphlogistics, benzodiazepines, clozapine, loop and thiazide diuretics,
methyldopa, smallpox vaccine, tetanus toxoid, tricyclic antidepressants
TOXIC REACTIONS TO DRUGS
Amphetamines, anthracyclines, catecholamines, cocaine,
cyclophosphamide, 5-­fluorouracil, phenytoin, trastuzumab,
immune checkpoint inhibitors
TOXIC
Ethanol, snakebite, scorpion bite, electric shock, spider bite
OTHER CAUSES
Arsenic, copper, iron, radiotherapy, thyrotoxicosis, immune modulation
Adapted from Canter CE, Simpson KE. Diagnosis and treatment of myocarditis in
children in the current era. Circulation. 2014;129:115–128, Table 1.

Bacterial Infections

Bacterial myocarditis has become much less common with the advent of
advanced public health measures, which have minimized infectious causes
such as diphtheria. Diphtheritic myocarditis is unique because bacterial
toxin may produce circulatory collapse and toxic myocarditis characterized by atrioventricular block, bundle branch block, or ventricular ectopy
(see Chapter 233). Lyme disease may present as myocarditis; rheumatic
fever (poststreptococcal) may also manifest with valve, myocardium, and
pericardium involvement. Any overwhelming systemic bacterial infection
can manifest with circulatory collapse and shock with evidence of myocardial dysfunction, characterized by tachycardia, gallop rhythm, and low cardiac output. Additional nonviral infectious causes of myocarditis include
rickettsiae, protozoa, parasitic infections, and fungal disease.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

Myocarditis is characterized by myocardial inflammation, injury or
necrosis, and ultimately fibrosis. Cardiac enlargement and diminished
systolic function are a direct result of the myocardial damage. Typical
signs of congestive heart failure occur and may progress rapidly to shock,
atrial or ventricular arrhythmias, and sudden death. Viral myocarditis
may also become a chronic process, with persistence of viral nucleic
acid in the myocardium and the perpetuation of chronic inflammation
secondary to altered host immune response, including activated T lymphocytes (cytotoxic and natural killer cells) and antibody-­dependent
cell-­mediated damage. Additionally, persistent viral infection may alter
the expression of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) antigens
with resultant exposure of neoantigens to the immune system. Some
viral proteins share antigenic epitopes with host cells, resulting in autoimmune damage to the antigenically related myocyte. Cytokines such
as tumor necrosis factor-­α and interleukin-­1 are inhibitors of myocyte
response to adrenergic stimuli and result in diminished cardiac function. The final result of viral-­associated inflammation can be DCM.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 489 u Diseases of the Pericardium

2889

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Manifestations of myocarditis range from asymptomatic or nonspecific
generalized illness to acute cardiogenic shock and sudden death. Infants
and young children more often have a fulminant presentation with
fever, respiratory distress, tachycardia, hypotension, gallop rhythm, and
cardiac murmur. Associated findings may include a rash or evidence of
end-­organ involvement such as hepatitis or aseptic meningitis.
Patients with acute or chronic myocarditis may present with chest discomfort, fever, palpitations, easy fatigability, or syncope/near-­syncope.
Cardiac findings include overactive precordial impulse, gallop rhythm,
and apical systolic murmur of mitral insufficiency. In patients with associated pericardial disease, a rub may be noted. Hepatic enlargement,
peripheral edema, and pulmonary findings such as wheezes or rales may
be present in patients with decompensated heart failure.

A

B

C

D

DIAGNOSIS

Electrocardiographic changes are nonspecific and may include sinus
tachycardia, atrial or ventricular arrhythmias, heart block, diminished
QRS voltages, and nonspecific ST and T-­wave changes, often suggestive of acute ischemia. Chest radiographs in severe, symptomatic cases
reveal cardiomegaly, pulmonary vascular prominence, overt pulmonary
edema, or pleural effusions. Echocardiography often shows diminished
ventricular systolic function, cardiac chamber enlargement, mitral insufficiency, and occasionally, evidence of pericardial infusion.
Cardiac MRI is a standard imaging modality for the diagnosis
of myocarditis; information on the presence and extent of edema,
gadolinium-­enhanced hyperemic capillary leak, myocyte necrosis, LV
dysfunction, and evidence of an associated pericardial effusion assist in
the cardiac MRI diagnosis of myocarditis (Table 488.8 and Fig. 488.9).
Endomyocardial biopsy may be useful in identifying inflammatory cell
infiltrates or myocyte damage and performing molecular viral analysis
using polymerase chain reaction techniques. Catheterization and biopsy,
although not without risk (perforation and arrhythmias), should be performed by experienced personnel in patients suspected to have myocarditis or if unusual forms of cardiomyopathy are strongly suspected, such as
storage diseases or mitochondrial defects. Nonspecific tests include erythrocyte sedimentation rate, CPK isoenzymes, cardiac troponin I, and BNP
levels. A novel microRNA derived from type 17 helper (Th17) cells may be
another useful specific test for viral myocarditis.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The predominant diseases mimicking acute myocarditis include carnitine deficiency, other metabolic disorders of energy generation, hereditary mitochondrial defects, idiopathic DCM, pericarditis, EFE, and
anomalies of the coronary arteries (see Table 488.2).

TREATMENT

Primary therapy for acute myocarditis is supportive. Acutely, the use of inotropic agents, preferably milrinone, should be considered but used with caution because of their proarrhythmic potential. Diuretics are often required
as well. If in extremis, mechanical ventilatory support and mechanical
circulatory support with VAD implantation or ECMO may be needed to
stabilize the patient’s hemodynamic status and serve as a bridge to recovery
or cardiac transplantation. Diuretics, β blockers, ACE inhibitors, and ARBs
are of use in patients with compensated congestive heart failure in the outpatient setting but may be contraindicated in those presenting with fulminant heart failure and cardiovascular collapse. In patients manifesting with
significant atrial or ventricular arrhythmias, specific antiarrhythmic agents
(e.g., amiodarone) should be administered and ICD placement considered
if persistent after a period of recovery is observed.
Table 488.8  MRI Findings Suggestive of Myocarditis
• T2-­weighted edema (global or regional)
• Regional hyperemia/capillary leak by early gadolinium
enhancement ratio (EGEr)
• Myocardial fibrosis or necrosis on late gadolinium enhancement (LGE)
• Features often present in a midmyocardial, subepicardial, and
nonvascular distribution
• Repeat MRI if no early MRI evidence present but clinical
manifestation suggests myocarditis

Fig. 488.9 MRI findings in patients with myocarditis. Cardiac MR images

of a young patient presenting with acute chest pain syndrome caused by
acute myocarditis. (A) Long-­axis and (B) short-­axis T2-­weighted images
demonstrating focal myocardial edema in subepicardium of left midventricular lateral wall (red arrows). Corresponding (C) long-­axis and (D) short-­
axis T1-­weighted images demonstrate the presence of typical late gadolinium enhancement in subepicardium of left midventricular lateral wall and
basal septum (red arrows). (From Kindermann I, Barth C, Mahfoud F, et al.
Update on myocarditis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;59:779–792, Fig. 3, p. 783.)

Immunomodulation of patients with myocarditis is controversial.
Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) may have a role in the treatment of acute or fulminant myocarditis, and corticosteroids have been
reported to improve cardiac function, but this remains controversial
in children. Relapse has been noted in patients receiving immunosuppression who were weaned from therapy. There are no studies to recommend specific antiviral therapies for myocarditis.
If there is an identifiable and treatable condition, its specific therapy
should be employed. If a medication is the etiology, it should be withdrawn and an alternative drug added if needed.

PROGNOSIS

The prognosis of symptomatic acute enteroviral myocarditis in newborns
is poor, with a 75% mortality. The prognosis is better for children and adolescents, although patients who have persistent evidence of DCM often
progress to the need for cardiac transplantation; recovery of ventricular
function, however, has been reported in 10–50% of patients.
The prognosis for COVID-­19 immunization–associated myocarditis
is excellent with full recovery noted by 90 days. Patients with COVID-­19
requiring intensive care unit (ICU) admission and those with MIS-­C must
be followed by a pediatric cardiologist (including follow-­up echocardiography) and refrain from exercise for 3-­6 months. Return to full activity
requires clearance from a cardiologist.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 489

Diseases of the Pericardium
John J. Parent and Stephanie M. Ware
The heart is enveloped in a bilayer membrane, the pericardium, which normally contains a small amount of serous fluid. The pericardium is not vital
to normal function of the heart, and primary diseases of the pericardium
are uncommon. However, the pericardium may be affected by a variety of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 489 u Diseases of the Pericardium

2889

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Manifestations of myocarditis range from asymptomatic or nonspecific
generalized illness to acute cardiogenic shock and sudden death. Infants
and young children more often have a fulminant presentation with
fever, respiratory distress, tachycardia, hypotension, gallop rhythm, and
cardiac murmur. Associated findings may include a rash or evidence of
end-­organ involvement such as hepatitis or aseptic meningitis.
Patients with acute or chronic myocarditis may present with chest discomfort, fever, palpitations, easy fatigability, or syncope/near-­syncope.
Cardiac findings include overactive precordial impulse, gallop rhythm,
and apical systolic murmur of mitral insufficiency. In patients with associated pericardial disease, a rub may be noted. Hepatic enlargement,
peripheral edema, and pulmonary findings such as wheezes or rales may
be present in patients with decompensated heart failure.

A

B

C

D

DIAGNOSIS

Electrocardiographic changes are nonspecific and may include sinus
tachycardia, atrial or ventricular arrhythmias, heart block, diminished
QRS voltages, and nonspecific ST and T-­wave changes, often suggestive of acute ischemia. Chest radiographs in severe, symptomatic cases
reveal cardiomegaly, pulmonary vascular prominence, overt pulmonary
edema, or pleural effusions. Echocardiography often shows diminished
ventricular systolic function, cardiac chamber enlargement, mitral insufficiency, and occasionally, evidence of pericardial infusion.
Cardiac MRI is a standard imaging modality for the diagnosis
of myocarditis; information on the presence and extent of edema,
gadolinium-­enhanced hyperemic capillary leak, myocyte necrosis, LV
dysfunction, and evidence of an associated pericardial effusion assist in
the cardiac MRI diagnosis of myocarditis (Table 488.8 and Fig. 488.9).
Endomyocardial biopsy may be useful in identifying inflammatory cell
infiltrates or myocyte damage and performing molecular viral analysis
using polymerase chain reaction techniques. Catheterization and biopsy,
although not without risk (perforation and arrhythmias), should be performed by experienced personnel in patients suspected to have myocarditis or if unusual forms of cardiomyopathy are strongly suspected, such as
storage diseases or mitochondrial defects. Nonspecific tests include erythrocyte sedimentation rate, CPK isoenzymes, cardiac troponin I, and BNP
levels. A novel microRNA derived from type 17 helper (Th17) cells may be
another useful specific test for viral myocarditis.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The predominant diseases mimicking acute myocarditis include carnitine deficiency, other metabolic disorders of energy generation, hereditary mitochondrial defects, idiopathic DCM, pericarditis, EFE, and
anomalies of the coronary arteries (see Table 488.2).

TREATMENT

Primary therapy for acute myocarditis is supportive. Acutely, the use of inotropic agents, preferably milrinone, should be considered but used with caution because of their proarrhythmic potential. Diuretics are often required
as well. If in extremis, mechanical ventilatory support and mechanical
circulatory support with VAD implantation or ECMO may be needed to
stabilize the patient’s hemodynamic status and serve as a bridge to recovery
or cardiac transplantation. Diuretics, β blockers, ACE inhibitors, and ARBs
are of use in patients with compensated congestive heart failure in the outpatient setting but may be contraindicated in those presenting with fulminant heart failure and cardiovascular collapse. In patients manifesting with
significant atrial or ventricular arrhythmias, specific antiarrhythmic agents
(e.g., amiodarone) should be administered and ICD placement considered
if persistent after a period of recovery is observed.
Table 488.8  MRI Findings Suggestive of Myocarditis
• T2-­weighted edema (global or regional)
• Regional hyperemia/capillary leak by early gadolinium
enhancement ratio (EGEr)
• Myocardial fibrosis or necrosis on late gadolinium enhancement (LGE)
• Features often present in a midmyocardial, subepicardial, and
nonvascular distribution
• Repeat MRI if no early MRI evidence present but clinical
manifestation suggests myocarditis

Fig. 488.9 MRI findings in patients with myocarditis. Cardiac MR images

of a young patient presenting with acute chest pain syndrome caused by
acute myocarditis. (A) Long-­axis and (B) short-­axis T2-­weighted images
demonstrating focal myocardial edema in subepicardium of left midventricular lateral wall (red arrows). Corresponding (C) long-­axis and (D) short-­
axis T1-­weighted images demonstrate the presence of typical late gadolinium enhancement in subepicardium of left midventricular lateral wall and
basal septum (red arrows). (From Kindermann I, Barth C, Mahfoud F, et al.
Update on myocarditis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;59:779–792, Fig. 3, p. 783.)

Immunomodulation of patients with myocarditis is controversial.
Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) may have a role in the treatment of acute or fulminant myocarditis, and corticosteroids have been
reported to improve cardiac function, but this remains controversial
in children. Relapse has been noted in patients receiving immunosuppression who were weaned from therapy. There are no studies to recommend specific antiviral therapies for myocarditis.
If there is an identifiable and treatable condition, its specific therapy
should be employed. If a medication is the etiology, it should be withdrawn and an alternative drug added if needed.

PROGNOSIS

The prognosis of symptomatic acute enteroviral myocarditis in newborns
is poor, with a 75% mortality. The prognosis is better for children and adolescents, although patients who have persistent evidence of DCM often
progress to the need for cardiac transplantation; recovery of ventricular
function, however, has been reported in 10–50% of patients.
The prognosis for COVID-­19 immunization–associated myocarditis
is excellent with full recovery noted by 90 days. Patients with COVID-­19
requiring intensive care unit (ICU) admission and those with MIS-­C must
be followed by a pediatric cardiologist (including follow-­up echocardiography) and refrain from exercise for 3-­6 months. Return to full activity
requires clearance from a cardiologist.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 489

Diseases of the Pericardium
John J. Parent and Stephanie M. Ware
The heart is enveloped in a bilayer membrane, the pericardium, which normally contains a small amount of serous fluid. The pericardium is not vital
to normal function of the heart, and primary diseases of the pericardium
are uncommon. However, the pericardium may be affected by a variety of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2890 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
conditions, often as a manifestation of a systemic illness, and can result in
serious, even life-­threatening, cardiac compromise (Table 489.1).

489.1 Acute Pericarditis
John J. Parent and Stephanie M. Ware
Inflammation of the pericardium may have only minor pathophysiologic
consequences in the absence of significant fluid accumulation in the pericardial space. When the amount of fluid in the nondistensible pericardial
space becomes excessive, pressure within the pericardium increases and
is transmitted to the heart, resulting in impaired filling by compressing
the chambers (atria or ventricles). Although small to moderate amounts
of pericardial effusion can be well tolerated and clinically silent, once the
noncompliant pericardium has been distended maximally, any further fluid
accumulation causes abrupt impairment of cardiac filling, and this can
impair cardiac output and is termed cardiac tamponade. When untreated,
tamponade can lead to shock and death. Pericardial effusions may be serous/
transudative, exudative/purulent, fibrinous, or hemorrhagic.
Pericarditis may present without an obvious pericardial effusion
on echocardiography. In addition, pericarditis may be associated with
myocarditis (myopericarditis), in which case either pericarditis or
myocarditis may be the dominant finding.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The most common symptom of acute pericarditis is chest pain, typically
described as sharp/stabbing, positional, radiating, worse with inspiration,
and relieved by sitting upright, leaning forward, or prone. Cough, fever,
dyspnea, abdominal pain, and vomiting are nonspecific symptoms associated with pericarditis. Additionally, signs and symptoms of organ system
involvement may occur in the presence of generalized systemic disease.
Muffled or distant heart sounds, tachycardia, narrow pulse pressure,
jugular venous distention, and a pericardial friction rub provide clues to
the diagnosis of acute pericarditis. Cardiac tamponade is recognized by
the excessive fall of systolic blood pressure (>10 mm Hg) with inspiration. This pulsus paradoxus can be assessed by careful auscultatory blood
Table 489.1  Etiology of Pericardial Disease
CONGENITAL
Absence (partial, complete)
Cysts
Mulibrey nanism (TRIM 37 gene variant)
Camptodactyly-­arthropathy–coxa vara–pericarditis syndrome (PRG4
gene variant)
Myhre syndrome (SMAD4 gene variant)

pressure determination (automated blood pressure cuffs are inadequate),
arterial pressure line waveform, or pulse oximeter tracing inspection.
Doppler assessment during echocardiography can also indirectly suggest
pulsus paradoxus is present. Conditions other than cardiac tamponade
that may result in pulsus paradoxus include severe dyspnea, obesity, and
positive pressure ventilator support.

DIAGNOSIS

The electrocardiogram is often abnormal in acute pericarditis,
although the findings are nonspecific. Low-­voltage QRS amplitude
may be seen as a result of pericardial fluid accumulation. Tachycardia
and abnormalities of the ST segments (diffuse ST segment elevation),
PR segments, and T waves (inversion or flattening) may be present
as well. Elevated troponin levels may be present in myopericarditis.
Although the chest x-­ray findings in a patient with pericarditis without effusion are usually normal in the presence of a significant effusion, cardiac enlargement will be seen and the cardiac contour may
be unusual (Erlenmeyer flask or water bottle appearance) (Fig. 489.1).
Echocardiography is the most sensitive technique for identifying the
size and location of a pericardial effusion. Compression and collapse
of the right atrium and/or right ventricle are present with cardiac tamponade (Fig. 489.2). Abnormal diastolic filling parameters have also
been described in cases of tamponade. Advanced imaging modalities
like computed tomography or cardiac magnetic resonance imaging are
useful for diagnosis in unclear cases (Fig. 489.3).

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Chest pain similar to that present in pericarditis can occur with lung
diseases, especially pleuritis, and with gastroesophageal reflux or costochondritis, with the latter being reproducible on palpation. Pain related
to myocardial ischemia is usually more severe and prolonged and occurs
with exercise, allowing distinction from pericarditis-­induced pain. The
presence of pericardial effusion on echocardiography is highly suggestive
of pericarditis but does not determine the etiology.

Infectious Pericarditis

A number of viral agents are known to cause pericarditis, and the clinical course of the majority of these infections is mild and spontaneously
resolving. The term acute benign pericarditis is synonymous for viral
pericarditis. Agents identified as causing pericarditis include the enteroviruses, influenza, adenovirus, respiratory syncytial virus, and parvovirus. Because the course of this illness is usually benign, symptomatic
treatment with nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) is often
sufficient. Persistent or early recurrence episodes may need courses of
colchicine or, rarely, corticosteroids. Anakinra and the interleukin-­1

INFECTIOUS
Viral: coxsackievirus B, Epstein-­Barr virus, influenza, adenovirus,
parvovirus, HIV, mumps, COVID-­19, and mRNA COVID-­19 and
HPV vaccines
Bacterial: Haemophilus influenzae, streptococcus, pneumococcus,
staphylococcus, meningococcus, mycoplasma, tularemia, Listeria,
leptospirosis, tuberculosis, Q fever, salmonella
Immune complex mediated: meningococcus, H. influenzae
Fungal: actinomycosis, histoplasmosis
Parasitic: toxoplasmosis, echinococcosis
NONINFECTIOUS
Idiopathic
Systemic inflammatory diseases: acute rheumatic fever, juvenile
idiopathic arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, mixed
connective tissue disorders, systemic sclerosis, Kawasaki disease,
eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis, Behçet syndrome,
sarcoidosis, familial Mediterranean fever and other recurrent fever
syndromes, pancreatitis, granulomatosis with polyangiitis
Metabolic: uremia, hypothyroidism, Gaucher disease, very-­long-­
chain acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase deficiency
Traumatic: surgical, catheter perforation, blunt trauma
Postpericardiotomy syndrome
Oncologic: lymphomas, leukemia, radiation therapy, primary
pericardial tumors

Fig. 489.1 “Water bottle” silhouette. This chest radiograph shows
marked cardiomegaly, also known as a water bottle silhouette, which
is seen in the presence of large pericardial effusions. Also note the associated pulmonary edema from associated high left atrial and left ventricular filling pressures. (Courtesy Dr. Steven M. Selbst, Wilmington,
DE; from Durani Y, Giordani K, Goudie BW. Myocarditis and pericarditis
in children. Pediatr Clin North Am 2010;57:1281–1303, Fig. 7.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 489 u Diseases of the Pericardium

2891

Noninfectious Pericarditis
PE
PE
IVS
LV

LV

PE

B

RV

C
LA

IVC

C

A

Fig. 489.2 Echocardiographic images of large pericardial effusion with
features of tamponade. A, Apical four-­chamber view of LV, LA, and RV
that shows large PE with diastolic right atrial collapse (arrow). B, M-­mode
image with cursor placed through RV, IVS, and LV in parasternal long axis.
The view shows circumferential PE with diastolic collapse of RV free wall
(arrow) during expiration. C, M-­mode image from subcostal window in
the same patient that shows IVC plethora without inspiratory collapse.
IVC, Inferior vena cava; IVS, interventricular septum; LA, left atrium; LV,
left ventricle; PE, pericardial effusion; RV, right ventricle. (From Troughton
RW, Asher CR, Klein AL. Pericarditis. Lancet. 2004;363:717–727.)

A

B

Fig. 489.3 Cardiac magnetic resonance T2 STIR (A) and delayed gado-

linium (B) sequences showing enhancement of the pericardium signifying
acute or active inflammation (arrow). (Modified from Chetrit M, Xu B, Kwon
DH, et al: Imaging-guided therapies for pericardial diseases. JACC: Cardiovascular Imaging. 2019;13(6):1422–1437; Fig. 1E and 1F, p. 1424.)

cytokine trap agent rilonacept have been effective in colchicine-­
nonresponsive acute or recurrent pericarditis. Patients with large effusions and tamponade may require pericardiocentesis. Presumed viral but
often idiopathic pericarditis may have an autoimmune component. Up
to 30% of patients may have recurrences of pericarditis. Treatment and
prevention of recurrences with colchicine improve symptoms and avoid
recurrences in most of these patients. If the condition becomes chronic
or relapsing, surgical pericardiectomy or creation of a pericardial window may be necessary.
Echocardiography is useful in differentiating pericarditis from
myocarditis, which will show evidence of diminished myocardial
contractility or valvular dysfunction (see Chapter 488.5). Pericarditis
and myocarditis may occur together in some cases of viral infection.
Purulent pericarditis, often caused by bacterial infections, has become
much less common with the advent of new immunizations for Haemophilus influenzae and pneumococcal disease. Historically, purulent pericarditis was seen in association with severe pneumonias, epiglottitis, meningitis,
or osteomyelitis. Patients with purulent pericarditis are acutely ill. Unless
the infection is recognized and treated expeditiously, the course can be
fulminant, leading to tamponade and death. Tuberculous pericarditis is
rare in developed countries but can be a relatively common complication
of HIV infection in regions where tuberculosis is endemic and access to
antiretroviral therapy is limited. Immune complex–mediated pericarditis is a rare complication that may result in a nonpurulent (sterile) effusion
after systemic bacterial infections such as meningococcus or Haemophilus.

Systemic inflammatory diseases such as autoimmune, rheumatologic,
and connective tissue disorders may involve the pericardium and result
in serous pericardial effusions. Pericardial inflammation may be a
component of the type II hypersensitivity reaction seen in patients with
acute rheumatic fever. It is often associated with rheumatic valvulitis
and responds quickly to antiinflammatory agents, including corticosteroids. Tamponade is quite uncommon (see Chapters 229.1 and 487).
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis, usually systemic-­
onset disease, can
manifest with pericarditis. Differentiating rheumatoid pericardial
inflammation from that seen with systemic lupus erythematosus is
difficult and requires careful rheumatologic evaluation. Aspirin and
corticosteroids can result in rapid resolution of a pericardial effusion
but may be needed on a chronic basis to prevent relapse. Many of the
autoinflammatory recurrent fever syndromes present with pericarditis,
usually with other manifestations of those disorders (see Chapter 204).
Patients with chronic renal failure or hypothyroidism may have
pericardial effusions. Clinical suspicion warrants careful screening
with physical examination and, if indicated, imaging studies during the
course of their illness.
Especially common in referral centers with hematology/oncology units is
the presence of pericardial effusion related to neoplastic disease. Conditions
resulting in effusion include Hodgkin disease, lymphomas, and leukemia.
Radiation therapy directed to the mediastinum of patients with malignancy
can result in pericarditis and, later, constrictive pericardial disease.
The postpericardiotomy syndrome occurs in patients who have undergone cardiac surgery and is characterized by fever, lethargy, anorexia,
irritability, and chest/abdominal discomfort beginning 1-­4 weeks postoperatively (see Table 483.2 in Chapter 483). There can be associated pleural
effusions. Postpericardiotomy syndrome is effectively treated with aspirin,
NSAIDs, colchicine, and in severe cases, corticosteroids. Pericardial drainage is necessary in those patients with cardiac tamponade.
In many patients the etiology of pericarditis is not known. Approximately
30% of these patients have multiple occurrences and are treated with colchicine to reduce the risk of recurrent pericarditis. Other less frequently used
treatments have included NSAIDs and corticosteroids. Refractory idiopathic
recurrent pericarditis may require pericardiectomy; anakinra and rilonacept
have demonstrated promise for difficult-­to-­treat patients.

489.2 Constrictive Pericarditis
John J. Parent and Stephanie M. Ware
Rarely, chronic pericardial inflammation can result in fibrosis, calcification, and thickening of the pericardium. Pericardial scarring may lead to
impaired cardiac distensibility and filling and is termed constrictive pericarditis. Constrictive pericarditis can result from recurrent or chronic
pericarditis, cardiac surgery, or radiation to the mediastinum as a treatment for malignancies, most often Hodgkin disease or lymphoma.
Clinical manifestations of systemic venous hypertension predominate
in cases of restrictive pericarditis. Jugular venous distention, peripheral
edema, hepatomegaly, and ascites may precede signs of more significant cardiac compromise, such as tachycardia, hypotension, and pulsus
paradoxus. A pericardial knock, rub, and distant heart sounds might be
present on auscultation. Abnormalities of liver function tests, hypoalbuminemia, hypoproteinemia, and lymphopenia may be present. On occasion, chest radiographs demonstrate calcifications of the pericardium.
Constrictive pericarditis may be difficult to distinguish clinically from
restrictive cardiomyopathy because both conditions result in impaired myocardial filling (see Chapter 488.3). Echocardiography may be helpful in distinguishing constrictive pericardial disease from restrictive cardiomyopathy,
but cardiac MRI and CT are more sensitive in detecting abnormalities of the
pericardium. In rare cases, exploratory thoracotomy with direct examination of the pericardium may be required to confirm the diagnosis.
Although acute pericardial constriction is reported to respond to
antiinflammatory agents, the more typical chronic constrictive pericarditis will respond only to pericardiectomy with extensive resection
of the pericardium.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2892 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

Chapter 490

Tumors of the Heart
John J. Parent and Stephanie M. Ware
Although cardiac tumors occur rarely in pediatric patients, they may
result in serious hemodynamic or electrophysiologic abnormalities
depending on tumor type and location.
The vast majority of tumors originating from the heart are benign.
Rhabdomyomas are the most common pediatric cardiac tumors and
are associated with tuberous sclerosis in 70–95% of cases (see Chapter
636.2). Rhabdomyomas may occur at any age, from fetal life through
late adolescence. They are often multiple, can occur in any cardiac
chamber, and originate within the myocardium, often extending into
the atrial or ventricular cavities (Fig. 490.1). Depending on their location and size, rhabdomyomas can result in inflow or outflow obstruction, leading to cyanosis or cardiac failure; many are asymptomatic.
Atrial and ventricular arrhythmias have been reported with rhabdomyomas, and on occasion, ventricular preexcitation (Wolff-­Parkinson-­
White syndrome) is present on electrocardiogram (ECG).
Fibromas are the second most common pediatric cardiac tumor and,
in contrast to rhabdomyomas, are usually solitary and intramyocardial.
The size and location of fibromas can lead to heart failure, cyanosis, or
rhythm disturbances. Loss of the tumor suppressor PTCH1 is associated

with the development of cardiac fibromas in sporadic cases. There is an
increased incidence in patients with Gorlin syndrome (3%).
Myxomas, the most common cardiac tumor seen in adults, occur
infrequently in the pediatric population. Myxomas are predominantly
intraatrial, appear pedunculated, and are rather mobile (Fig. 490.2); however, they may also be ventricular (Fig. 490.3). They may cause obstruction
to inflow or outflow and may present with a murmur, heart failure, or syncope. On occasion, atrial myxomas are associated with systemic symptoms
of fever, malaise, and arthralgia. Carney complex is a familial autosomal
dominant multiple neoplasia (often endocrine: pituitary adenoma, thyroid, testis, ovarian) and lentiginosis syndrome in which cardiac myxomas
can occur at a young age in any or all cardiac chambers. Pathogenic variants in the PRKAR1A gene are causative in some families.
Myxoma

RA
AMVL
LV

RV

LA
RA

Fig. 490.2 A large left atrial myxoma prolapsing across the mitral

valve, resulting in heart failure symptoms. AMVL, anterior mitral valve
leaflet; LV, left ventricle; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle. (From Zipes
DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, et al., eds. Braunwald’s Heart Disease, 11th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019, Fig. 95.8, p. 1871.)

LV

RV

A
RA
LA
RV

Ventricular mass

X

PA
Ao
LV

B
Fig. 490.1 Echocardiograms demonstrating rhabdomyomas. A, Api-

cal four-­chamber view showing multiple rhabdomyomas (arrows) within
the septum and left ventricular myocardium. B, Short-­axis view showing a large rhabdomyoma (arrow) extending into the right ventricular
outflow tract. Ao, Ascending aorta; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle; PA,
pulmonary artery; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle.

Fig. 490.3 Left ventricular myxoma. TTE apical four-­chamber view of

mass within the left ventricle. RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle; LA,
left atrium; LV, left ventricle. (From Schroeder L, Zyblewski S, Forbus G,
et al. Left ventricular myxoma. J Pediatr. 2016;168:249–249.e2, Fig. 1.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 491 u Heart Failure

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Section 7

Cardiac Therapeutics
Chapter 491

Heart Failure
Danielle S. Burstein and
Joseph W. Rossano
The International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation (ISHLT)
defines heart failure as follows:
A clinical and pathological syndrome that results from ventricular dysfunction, volume, or pressure overload, alone or in combination. It leads
to characteristic signs and symptoms, such as poor growth, feeding difficulties, respiratory distress, exercise intolerance, and fatigue, and is associated with circulatory, neurohormonal, and molecular abnormalities.
Heart failure has numerous etiologies that are a consequence of cardiac
and noncardiac disorders, either congenital or acquired.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

The heart can be viewed as a pump with an output proportional to
its filling volume and inversely proportional to the resistance against
which it pumps. As ventricular end-­
diastolic volume increases, a
healthy heart increases cardiac output until a maximum is reached
and cardiac output can no longer be augmented (the Frank-­Starling
principle; Fig. 491.1). The increased stroke volume obtained in this
manner is a result of stretching of myocardial fibers, but it also results
in increased wall tension, which elevates myocardial oxygen consumption. Hearts working under various types of stress function along different Frank-­Starling curves. Cardiac muscle with compromised intrinsic
contractility requires a greater degree of dilation to produce increased
stroke volume and does not achieve the same maximal cardiac output
as normal myocardium does. If a cardiac chamber is already dilated
because of a lesion causing increased preload (e.g., a left-­to-­right shunt
or valvular insufficiency), there is little room for further dilation as a
means of augmenting cardiac output. The presence of lesions that result
in increased afterload to the ventricle (e.g., aortic or pulmonic stenosis, coarctation of the aorta) decreases cardiac performance, thereby
resulting in a depressed Frank-­Starling relationship.
Systemic oxygen transport is calculated as the product of cardiac
output and oxygen content of systemic blood. Cardiac output can be
calculated as the product of heart rate and stroke volume. The primary
determinants of stroke volume are the afterload (pressure work), preload (volume work), and contractility (intrinsic myocardial function).
Abnormalities in heart rate can also compromise cardiac output; for
example, tachyarrhythmias shorten the diastolic time interval for ventricular filling. Alterations in the oxygen-­carrying capacity of blood
(e.g., anemia or hypoxemia) also lead to a decrease in systemic oxygen
transport and, if compensatory mechanisms are inadequate, can result
in decreased delivery of substrate to tissues.
In some cases of heart failure, cardiac output is normal or increased,
yet because of decreased systemic oxygen content (e.g., secondary to
anemia) or increased oxygen demands (e.g., secondary to hyperventilation, hyperthyroidism, or hypermetabolism), an inadequate amount
of oxygen is delivered to meet the body’s needs. This condition, high-­
output failure, results in the development of signs and symptoms of
heart failure when there is no basic abnormality in myocardial function
and cardiac output is greater than normal. It is also seen with large systemic arteriovenous fistulas (e.g., vein of Galen malformation). These
conditions reduce peripheral vascular resistance and cardiac afterload
and increase myocardial contractility. Heart failure results when the
demand for cardiac output exceeds the ability of the heart to respond.

Frank-Starling Curve

Cardiac index (L/min/m2)

Other benign tumors include hemangiomas, Purkinje cell tumors,
papillomas, lipomas, and mesotheliomas. Depending on their location,
these benign tumors can result in valvular function abnormalities,
myocardial dysfunction, or heart block and other arrhythmias.
Malignant pediatric cardiac tumors are much less common than
benign tumors; the majority of such malignancies are sarcomas,
including angiosarcomas, rhabdosarcomas, or fibrosarcomas. Lymphomas and pheochromocytomas are reported but rare. Tumors originating from noncardiac sources that invade, extend, or metastasize to
the heart are more frequently seen than primary malignant cardiac
tumors. In pediatric patients, Wilms tumor and lymphoma/leukemia
are the most common causes of such secondary tumors.
Although the manifestations of cardiac tumors in pediatric patients are
protean, when a tumor is suspected, noninvasive imaging with echocardiography and/or MRI may be diagnostic and can determine tumor type,
location, extent, and hemodynamic impact. ECG and Holter studies are
valuable adjuncts when rhythm abnormalities are suspected. Cardiac
catheterization is rarely indicated but may be used to confirm tumor location, assess intracardiac hemodynamics, and perform biopsy for histologic
assessment. Such risks as blood loss, perforation, arrhythmia, and vessel
injury should be considered when discussing catheterization and biopsy.
Because the natural history of rhabdomyomas is one of spontaneous
diminution or complete resolution, treatment of the majority of cardiac tumors in pediatric patients is usually unnecessary. Everolimus, an
inhibitor of the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), may enhance
resolution in symptomatic patients with cardiac rhabdomyomas. Careful
clinical follow-­up and imaging are important. Antiarrhythmic medications may be prescribed to control rhythm disorders. Surgical removal of
a cardiac tumor may be indicated to relieve obstruction, improve myocardial or valve function, or control arrhythmias. Heart transplantation
has been performed in cases of unresectable tumors with significant
hemodynamic compromise. Wilms tumors extending from the inferior
vena cava into the atrium may require cardiopulmonary bypass support
during the course of primary resection of the renal tumor. Radiation or
chemotherapy can improve cardiac function in rare cases of lymphoma
or leukemia compressing the heart with hemodynamic compromise.

2893

III—Normal
10
8
6
4
2

II—Congestive
heart failure
(treated)
I—Congestive
heart failure

0
5
10 15 20 25 30
Left ventricular end-diastolic pressure (mm Hg)

Fig. 491.1 The Frank-­Starling relationship. As left ventricular end-­
diastolic (LVED) pressure increases, the cardiac index increases, even
in the presence of congestive heart failure, until a critical level of LVED
pressure is reached. Adding an inotropic agent (digoxin) shifts the curve
from I to II. (From Gersony WM, Steep CN. In: Dickerman JD, Lucey
JF, eds. Smith’s The Critically Ill Child: Diagnosis and Medical Management, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 1984.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2894 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Chronic severe high-­output failure may eventually result in a decrease
in myocardial performance as the metabolic requirements of the myocardium are not met.
Multiple systemic compensatory mechanisms are used by the body
to adapt to chronic heart failure. Some are mediated at the molecular/cellular level, such as upregulation or downregulation of various metabolic pathway components leading to changes in efficiency
of oxygen and other substrate utilizations. Others are mediated by
neurohormones such as the renin-­angiotensin system and the sympathoadrenal axis. One of the principal mechanisms for increasing cardiac output is an increase in sympathetic tone secondary to
increased secretion of circulating epinephrine by the adrenals and
increased release of norepinephrine at the neuromuscular junction.
The initial beneficial effects of sympathetic stimulation include an
increase in heart rate and myocardial contractility, mediated by these
hormones’ action on cardiac β-­adrenergic receptors, increasing cardiac output. These hormones also cause vasoconstriction, mediated
by their action on peripheral arterial α-­adrenergic receptors. Some
vascular beds may constrict more readily than others, so that blood
flow is redistributed from the cutaneous, visceral, and renal beds to
the heart and brain. Whereas these acute effects are beneficial, chronically increased sympathetic stimulation can have deleterious effects,
including hypermetabolism, increased afterload, arrhythmogenesis,
and increased myocardial oxygen requirements. Peripheral vasoconstriction can result in decreased renal, hepatic, and gastrointestinal
tract function. Chronic exposure to circulating catecholamines leads
to a decrease in the number of cardiac β-­adrenergic receptors (downregulation) and also causes direct myocardial cell damage. Therapeutic agents for heart failure are directed at restoring balance to these
neuroendocrine systems.
Based on these physiologic and clinical principles, heart failure has
been described by different classification and stage definitions (Tables
491.1-­491.3 and Fig. 491.2). These definitions help describe the degree
of cardiac impairment and help direct therapy.
Table 491.1  Classification of Heart Failure Based on LVEF
HF CLASS ACCORDING TO LVEF
(MUST HAVE SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS)

ACRONYM

LVEF, %

HF with reduced ejection fraction

HFrEF

≤40

HF with mildly reduced ejection fraction

HFmrEF

41–49

HF with preserved ejection fraction

HFpEF

≥50

HF with preserved ejection fraction,
improved

HFpEF,
improved

Prior <40,
now ≥40

LVEF, Left ventricular ejection fraction.
From Kellerman RD, Rakel DP, Heidelbaugh JJ, Lee EM, eds. Conn’s Current Therapy
2023. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023: Table 2, p. 117.

Table 491.2  New York Heart Association (NYHA)
Functional Classification (FC)
NYHA FC

FUNCTIONAL CAPACITY

I

No limitations. Can perform high level of activity
without symptoms (for example, running, cycling,
weightlifting).

II

Slight limitations. Tolerate lower or moderate level
activities well, may have limitations with higher-­level
activities (for example, regular walking causes no
symptoms, but a run may cause shortness of breath).

III

Significant limitations. Symptoms with low-­level
activities such as with daily activities such as
walking and household chores.

IV

Symptoms at rest, dyspnea with any physical activity.

From Kellerman RD, Rakel DP, Heidelbaugh JJ, Lee EM, eds. Conn’s Current Therapy
2023. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023: Table 3, p. 117.

ETIOLOGY OF HEART FAILURE

There are many causes of heart failure in the pediatric population, and
the etiologies of heart failure are age-­dependent (Table 491.4). Pediatric heart failure can occur because of ventricular systolic or diastolic
dysfunction caused by an underlying cardiomyopathy. This may be
the result of a primary cardiomyopathy from an underlying genetic
mutation in cardiac proteins or secondary due to conditions including metabolic and neuromuscular diseases. Ischemic cardiomyopathy
caused by congenital coronary anomalies or acquired disease, such
as Kawasaki disease, can also result in heart failure. Inflammatory or
infectious diseases of the myocardium (e.g., myocarditis) can present
with a range of heart failure severity from mild symptoms of chest pain
to severe disease with fulminant cardiogenic shock. Persistent atrial
and ventricular arrhythmias, particularly tachyarrhythmias, may also
result in ventricular dysfunction and heart failure. High-­output heart
failure can occur in the setting of severe anemia or large arteriovenous
malformations.
Heart failure in children can also occur in the setting of underlying congenital heart disease with outflow tract obstructive lesions,
shunt lesions with overcirculation of the pulmonary vascular system
(e.g., ventricular septal defect), or ventricular volume overload caused
by significant valve regurgitation. Heart failure in children can also
occur because of valvar heart disease resulting in significant valve
regurgitation that causes ventricular volume overload and ventricular dilation with eventual systolic dysfunction. Single ventricle heart
disease, including hypoplastic left heart syndrome, has increased the
risk of developing heart failure due to multiple mechanisms that influence appropriate blood flow through the single ventricle palliated
circulation.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The clinical manifestations of heart failure depend in part on the
degree of the child’s cardiac reserve. A critically ill infant or child who
has exhausted the compensatory mechanisms to the point that cardiac output is no longer sufficient to meet the basal metabolic needs
of the body may present in cardiogenic shock. Other patients may
be comfortable when quiet but are incapable of increasing cardiac
output in response to even mild activity without experiencing significant symptoms. Conversely, it may take rather vigorous exercise to
compromise cardiac function in children who have less severe heart
disease.
A thorough history is extremely important in making the diagnosis
of heart failure and in evaluating the possible causes. Parents or caregivers who observe their child on a daily basis may not recognize subtle
changes that have occurred over the course of days or weeks. Gradually worsening perfusion or increasing respiratory effort may not be
recognized as an abnormal finding, or may be misattributed to other
diagnoses such as asthma. Edema, which is generally absent in infants
and young children, may be passed off as normal weight gain, and exercise intolerance as lack of interest in an activity. The history of a young
infant should also focus on feeding. An infant with heart failure often
takes less volume per feeding, becomes dyspneic while sucking, and
may perspire profusely. Eliciting a history of fatigue in an older child
requires detailed questions about activity level and its course over several months.
In children and adolescents, the signs and symptoms of heart failure
may be similar to those in adults and include fatigue, exercise intolerance, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, dyspnea, edema, wheezing, and
cough. Many children, however, may have primarily abdominal symptoms (abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, anorexia) and a surprising
lack of respiratory complaints. Attention to the cardiovascular system
may come only after an abdominal radiograph unexpectedly catches
the lower end of an enlarged heart.
The physical examination for a child with suspected heart failure
includes evaluation of vital signs and physical exam. Abnormal vital
signs sometimes seen in pediatric heart failure include tachypnea,
tachycardia, and desaturation caused by pulmonary edema. The elevation in systemic venous pressure may be gauged by clinical assessment of jugular venous pressure and liver enlargement. Orthopnea and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 491 u Heart Failure

2895

Table 491. 3  Classification of HF According to the American Heart Association (AHA) and American College of Cardiology
(ACC)
HEART FAILURE STAGE

AHA/ACC DESCRIPTION

Stage A

At risk

Patients without identified structural or functional cardiac abnormality or ventricular function abnormality but at
high risk of developing HF because of the presence of a condition (hypertension) strongly associated with the
development of HF.
Examples: anthracycline exposure, known pathogenic sarcomeric gene variant including dystrophinopathies.

Stage B

Pre-­HF

Patients with structural heart disease or ventricular function abnormality that is strongly associated with the
development of HF but without HF signs or symptoms, past or present.
Examples: asymptomatic patient with CHD status postsurgical correction with residual lesion, isolated left
ventricle noncompaction, elevated BNP or troponin if exposed to cardiotoxins.

Stage C

HF

Patients with current or prior symptoms of HF associated with underlying structural heart disease or ventricular
function abnormality (elevated filling pressure, systolic dysfunction).
Examples: acute myocarditis, dilated cardiomyopathy, mitral or aortic regurgitation.

Stage D

Advanced HF

Patients with advanced structural heart disease and refractory symptoms of HF requiring specialized
interventions.
Example: Inotropic dependency patient in end stage of dilated cardiomyopathy: may require VAD or transplant.

BNP, B-type natriuretic protein; CHD, congenital heart defect; VAD, ventricular assist devices; HF, heart failure
Modified from Hunt SA, Baker DW, Chin MH, Cinquegrani MP, Feldman AM, Francis GS, et al. ACC/AHA guidelines for the evaluation and management of chronic heart failure in the
adult: executive summary. A report of the American college of cardiology/American heart association task force on practice guidelines (committee to revise the 1995 guidelines for
the evaluation and management of heart failure). J Am Coll Cardiol. 2001;38:2101–13.

Is there congestion?

No

No

Yes

Warm and dry

Warm and wet

Is there low
perfusion?
Yes

Cold and dry

Cold and wet

Evidence for low perfusion:
• Narrow pulses pressure
• Cool extremities
• Sleepy, mental confusion
• Hypotension
• Worsening of kidney function

Evidence for congestion:
• Tachypnea, orthopnea
• Ascites, hepatomegaly
• ↑Jugular venous pressure
• Peripheral edema,
ascites, rales

Fig. 491.2 Clinical assessment in acute decompensated heart fail-

ure should answer the two questions suggested by this diagram: First,
does the patient present with significant congestion? Second, does the
patient present with significant underperfusion? Using this construct,
patients will segregate into one of four categories in accordance with
clinical findings. Typically, patients move in a clockwise fashion through
these categories, first becoming congested (warm and wet) and then
vasoconstricted to maintain blood pressure (cold and wet). Once vasoactive support and diuresis are achieved, movement is generally counterclockwise, from cold and wet, to warm and wet, and then warm and
dry. However, some patients will remain underperfused despite restoration of normovolemia, representing the cold and dry group, for whom
mechanical support may be needed. (Modified from Kantor PF, Mertens
LL. Clinical practice: heart failure in children. Part I: clinical evaluation,
diagnostic testing, and initial medical management. Eur J Pediatr.
2010;169[3]:269–279.)

basilar rales are variably present; edema is usually discernible in dependent portions of the body, or anasarca may be present. Cardiomegaly
is invariably noted based on a hyperactive precordium, ventricular
heave, or displaced apical impulse. A gallop rhythm is common; when
ventricular dilation is advanced, the holosystolic murmur of mitral
or tricuspid valve regurgitation may be heard. Pulsus alternans is an
ominous physical exam finding usually seeing in a state of low stroke
volume with variable cardiac output with each ventricular contraction.
Impaired systemic perfusion with poor capillary refill or decreased
pulses is a concerning sign for cardiogenic shock.

In infants, heart failure may be difficult to distinguish from other
causes of respiratory distress or gastrointestinal diseases. Prominent
manifestations of heart failure include tachypnea, feeding difficulties, vomiting, poor weight gain, excessive perspiration, irritability,
weak cry, and noisy, labored respirations with intercostal and subcostal retractions, as well as flaring of the alae nasi. The signs of cardiac-­
induced pulmonary congestion may be indistinguishable from those
of bronchiolitis; wheezing is often a more prominent finding in young
infants with heart failure than rales. Hepatomegaly usually occurs, and
cardiomegaly is invariably present. Despite pronounced tachycardia,
a gallop rhythm can frequently be recognized. The other auscultatory signs are those produced by the underlying cardiac lesion. Clinical assessment of jugular venous pressure in infants may be difficult
because of the shortness of the neck and the difficulty of observing a
relaxed state; palpation of an enlarged liver is a more reliable sign.

DIAGNOSIS

Chest radiograph (CXR) may be helpful in pediatric heart failure. It
can assess the cardiac silhouette for cardiac enlargement. Pulmonary
vascularity is variable and depends on the cause of the heart failure.
Infants and children with large left-­to-­right shunts have exaggeration
of the pulmonary arterial vessels to the periphery of the lung fields,
whereas patients with cardiomyopathy may have a relatively normal
pulmonary vascular bed early in the course of disease. Fluffy perihilar
pulmonary markings suggestive of venous congestion and acute pulmonary edema are seen only with more severe degrees of heart failure.
Pleural effusions may also be present. Cardiac enlargement as a marker
of heart failure may be noted on a chest radiography performed to
evaluate for a possible pulmonary infection, bronchiolitis, or asthma.
Electrocardiography (ECG) may be helpful in assessing the cause
of heart failure but does not establish the diagnosis. In cardiomyopathies, exaggerated left or right ventricular voltages may be suggestive of
underlying cardiomyopathy, and ischemic changes may correlate with
other noninvasive parameters of ventricular function. Low-­voltage
QRS morphologic characteristics with ST-­T–wave abnormalities may
also suggest myocardial inflammatory disease (myocarditis) but can
be seen with pericarditis as well. ECG is the best tool for evaluating rhythm disorders as a potential cause of heart failure, especially
tachyarrhythmias. Ambulatory ECG monitoring can evaluate for
occult arrhythmias that may be present in heart failure.
Echocardiography is the standard technique for assessing ventricular function (Fig. 491.3). Ventricular function can be quantitated
simply and reliably with commonly used parameters such as fractional
shortening (a single-­dimensional variable) and an ejection fraction.
The fractional shortening is determined as the difference between

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2896 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Assessment
• Clinical history
• Physical examination
• ECG, labs

Table 491.4  Etiology of Heart Failure
FETAL
Severe anemia (hemolysis, fetal-­maternal transfusion, parvovirus
B19–induced anemia, hypoplastic anemia)
Supraventricular tachycardia
Ventricular tachycardia
Complete heart block
Severe Ebstein anomaly or other severe right-­sided lesions
Myocarditis

Natriuretic peptide
• NT-proBNP >125 pg/mL
• BNP ≥35 pg/mL

PREMATURE NEONATE
Fluid overload
Patent ductus arteriosus
Ventricular septal defect
Cor pulmonale (bronchopulmonary dysplasia)
Hypertension
Myocarditis
Genetic/metabolic cardiomyopathy
FULL-­TERM NEONATE
Asphyxial cardiomyopathy
Arteriovenous malformation (vein of Galen, hepatic)
Left-­sided obstructive lesions (coarctation of aorta, hypoplastic left
heart syndrome)
Large mixing cardiac defects (single ventricle, truncus arteriosus)
Myocarditis
Genetic/metabolic cardiomyopathy
Pheochromocytoma
Stress cardiomyopathy (Takotsubo)
Substance misuse
INFANT/TODDLER
Left-­to-­right cardiac shunts (ventricular septal defect)
Hemangioma (arteriovenous malformation)
Anomalous left coronary artery
Genetic/metabolic cardiomyopathy
Acute hypertension (hemolytic-­uremic syndrome)
Supraventricular tachycardia
Kawasaki disease
Myocarditis
CHILD/ADOLESCENT
Congenital heart disease (various forms, including single ventricle
heart disease)
Rheumatic fever
Acute hypertension (glomerulonephritis)
Myocarditis
Thyrotoxicosis
Hemochromatosis-­hemosiderosis
Cancer therapy (radiation, doxorubicin)
Sickle cell anemia
Endocarditis
Cor pulmonale (cystic fibrosis)
Genetic/metabolic cardiomyopathy (hypertrophic, dilated)

end-­systolic and end-­diastolic diameter divided by end-­diastolic diameter. Normal fractional shortening is between approximately 28% and
42%. The ejection fraction uses two-­dimensional data to calculate a
three-­dimensional volume; the normal range is 55–65%. In children
with right ventricular enlargement or other cardiac pathology resulting
in flattening of the interventricular septum, ejection fraction is used
because fractional shortening measured in the standard echocardiographic short-­axis view will not be accurate. Doppler studies can also
be used to estimate cardiac output. Doppler assessment of transmitral
inflow and tissue characterization can also be used as a noninvasive
assessment of diastolic function.
Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) is also useful in quantifying left and right ventricular function, volume, and mass along with
coronary artery anatomy. If valvular regurgitation is present, CMR can
quantify the regurgitant fraction. CMR can also provide details about
tissue characterization such as fibrosis and inflammation, which is
helpful for assessing conditions such as myocarditis.

Transthoracic echocardiography
• Additional testing, if necessary

HF diagnosis confirmed
• Determine cause and classify

HFrEF
LVEF ≤40%

HFmrEF
LVEF 41%–49%

HFpEF
LVEF ≥50%

• Evaluate for precipitating
factors
• lnitiate treatment

Fig. 491.3 Diagnostic algorithm for HF-­and EF-­based classification

BNP, B-­type natriuretic peptide; ECG, electrocardiogram; EF, ejection
fraction; HF, heart failure; HFmrEF, heart failure with mildly reduced
ejection fraction; HFpEF, heart failure with preserved ejection fraction;
HFrEF, heart failure with reduced ejection fraction; LVEF, left ventricular
ejection fraction; LV, left ventricular; NT-­proBNP, N-­terminal pro-­B type
natriuretic peptide. (From Heidenreich PA, Bozkurt B, Aguilar D, et al.
2022 AHA/ACC/HFSA guideline for the management of heart failure. J
Amer Coll Cardiol. 2022;79[17]:1757–1780, Fig. 4.)

Cardiac catheterization is an invasive test that can be helpful for
assessing heart failure by evaluating intracardiac hemodynamics and
shunt lesions. Angiography can be performed to evaluate for structural
heart defects. Endomyocardial biopsy may sometimes be performed as
part of an evaluation of myocarditis.
Laboratory testing is important for evaluating end-­organ function and
systemic perfusion. This includes evaluating renal function, liver function,
lactate levels, and electrolytes. Heart failure may result in hyponatremia
caused by compensatory activation of the renin-­angiotensin-­aldosterone
pathway with renal water retention, which may be compounded by further salt wasting due to chronic diuretic treatment. When heart failure is
severe, respiratory acidosis or metabolic acidosis, or both, may be present.
The cardiac serum biomarker B-­type (brain) natriuretic peptide (BNP)
(or N-­terminal pro-­BNP) is a cardiac neurohormone released in response
to increased ventricular wall tension that is elevated in patients with heart
failure. In children with heart failure, BNP may be elevated as a result of
systolic dysfunction (e.g., cardiomyopathy) and in children with volume
overload (e.g., left-­to-­right shunts such as ventricular septal defect). Table
491.5 lists other causes of an elevated BNP.

TREATMENT

The underlying cause of cardiac failure must be removed or alleviated if
possible. If the cause is a congenital cardiac anomaly amenable to surgery, medical treatment of the heart failure is indicated to prepare the
patient for surgery. With the current excellent outcomes of primary
surgical repair of congenital heart defects, even in the neonatal period,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 491 u Heart Failure
Table 491.5  Causes of Elevated Concentrations of
Natriuretic Peptides
CARDIAC
Heart failure (HFpEF, HFrEF)
Acute coronary symptoms
Pulmonary embolism
Myocarditis
Left ventricular hypertrophy
Hypertrophic or restrictive cardiomyopathy
Valvular heart disease
Congenital heart disease
Atrial and ventricular tachyarrhythmias
Heart contusion
Cardioversion ICD shock
Surgical procedures involving the heart
Pulmonary hypertension
Toxic injury (chemotherapy)
NONCARDIAC
Ischemic stroke
Subarachnoid hemorrhage
Renal dysfunction
Liver dysfunction (mainly liver cirrhosis with ascites)
Paraneoplastic syndrome
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Severe infections (including pneumonia and sepsis)
Severe burns
Anemia
Severe metabolic and hormone abnormalities (e.g., thyrotoxicosis,
diabetic ketosis)
HFpEF, Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction; HFrEF, heart failure with reduced
ejection fraction; ICD, implantable cardioverter-­defibrillator.
Adapted from McDonagh TA, Metra M, Adamo M, et al. 2021 ESC Guidelines for
the diagnosis and treatment of acute and chronic heart failure [published correction
appears in Eur Heart J. 2021 Oct 14]. Eur Heart J. 2021;42(36):3599–3726, Table 7.

few children require aggressive heart failure management to grow big
enough for surgery. In contrast, if the cause of heart failure is cardiomyopathy, medical management provides temporary relief from symptoms
and may allow the patient to recover if the insult is reversible (e.g., myocarditis). If the lesion is not reversible, heart failure management usually
allows the child to return to normal activities for some period and to
delay, sometimes for months or years, the need for heart transplantation.

General Measures

Heart failure management focuses on maintaining adequate cardiac
output to allow for appropriate end-­organ function while reducing
volume overload and venous or pulmonary congestion. Encouraging
regular physical activity is important for preventing acquired cardiovascular comorbidities, but it is important that the child be allowed
to rest as needed and monitor for cardiac symptoms. Formal cardiopulmonary exercise testing can be used to assess the patient’s ability
to perform exercise in a controlled environment and is useful for providing exercise recommendations. Malnutrition is common in patients
with heart failure because of gastrointestinal symptoms related to mesenteric venous congestion, and patients often require supplemental
nutrition either with caloric fortification and/or nasogastric supplementation. For patients with pulmonary edema, positive pressure ventilation (PPV) may be required along with other drug therapies. For
those in low-­output heart failure, PPV can significantly reduce total
body oxygen consumption by eliminating the work of breathing and
help to reverse metabolic acidosis. Reverse remodeling agents, including β blockers, angiotensin-­blockers, combination angiotensin receptor/neprilysin inhibitors, and aldosterone antagonists, can provide
long-­term myocardial reverse remodeling. Appropriate blood pressure
control is important to reduce afterload and stress on the myocardium.
In patients with advanced heart failure and/or cardiogenic shock, providing adequate cardiac output to meet the metabolic demands and
provide adequate end-­organ perfusion may require inotropic agents
and, potentially, mechanical circulation support (Table 491.6).

2897

Diet

Infants with heart failure usually fail to thrive because of a combination of increased metabolic demands and decreased caloric intake.
Increasing daily calories is an important aspect of their management. Increasing the number of calories per ounce of infant formula
(or supplementing breastfeeding) may be beneficial. Many infants do
not tolerate an increase beyond 24 calories/oz because of diarrhea or
because these formulas provide too large a solute load for compromised kidneys.
Severely ill infants and children may lack sufficient strength for effective sucking because of extreme fatigue, rapid respirations, and generalized weakness. In these circumstances, nasogastric feedings may
be helpful. In many patients with cardiac enlargement, gastroesophageal reflux is a major problem. The use of continuous drip nasogastric
feedings at night, administered by pump, may improve caloric intake
while decreasing problems with reflux. Continued malnutrition may
be an important factor in the decision to undertake earlier surgical
intervention in patients who have an operable congenital heart lesion
or to proceed with mechanical circulatory support and/or listing for
transplantation in patients with cardiomyopathy. Iron supplementation
should be initiated in the presence of iron deficiency even in the absence
of anemia.
The use of low-­sodium formulas in the routine management of
infants with heart failure is not recommended because these preparations are often poorly tolerated and may exacerbate diuretic-­induced
hyponatremia. Human breast milk is the ideal low-­sodium nutritional
source. The use of more potent diuretic agents allows more palatable
standard formulas to be used for nutrition while controlling salt and
water balance by chronic diuretic administration. Most older children
can be managed with generally heart-­healthy diets that have low fat
and sugar content, although caloric supplementation may be needed if
there is significant malnutrition.

Diuretics

Diuretics are an important component of heart failure management by reducing volume overload and congestion. Diuretics interfere with reabsorption of water and sodium by the kidneys, which
results in a reduction in circulating blood volume and thereby
reduces pulmonary fluid overload and ventricular filling pressure.
Diuretics are usually the first mode of therapy initiated in patients
with congestive heart failure.
Loop diuretics, including Furosemide and bumetanide, are the
most commonly used diuretics in pediatric patients with heart failure. It inhibits the reabsorption of sodium and chloride in the distal
tubules and the loop of Henle. Patients requiring acute diuresis should
be given intravenous (IV) furosemide at an initial dose of 1-­2 mg/kg,
which usually results in rapid diuresis and prompt improvement in
clinical status, particularly if symptoms of pulmonary congestion are
present. Chronic furosemide therapy is then prescribed at a dose of
1-­4 mg/kg/24 hr given between 1 and 4 times a day. Careful monitoring of electrolytes is necessary with long-­term furosemide therapy
because of the potential for significant loss of potassium. Potassium
chloride supplementation is usually required unless the potassium-­
sparing diuretics are given concomitantly. Chronic administration
of furosemide may cause contraction of the extracellular fluid compartment and result in “contraction alkalosis” (see Chapter 73.7).
Diuretic-­induced hyponatremia may become difficult to manage in
patients with severe heart failure.
Thiazide diuretics, including chlorothiazide, are also used for
diuresis in children with heart failure. It is less immediate in action
and less potent than furosemide, and it affects the reabsorption
of electrolytes in the renal tubules only. The usual dose is 10-­40
mg/kg/24 hr in two divided doses. Potassium supplementation is
often required if chlorothiazide is used alone. Sodium glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitors (dapagliflozin, empagliflozin)
also produce a natriuresis and have other beneficial direct cardiac
effects and have been recommended for some etiologies of heart
failure.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2898 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 491.6  Dosage of Drugs Commonly Used for the Treatment of Congestive Heart Failure
DRUG

DOSAGE*

DIGOXIN
Digitalization (1/2 initially, followed
by 1/4 q12h × 2)

Maintenance digoxin†
DIURETICS
Furosemide (Lasix)

Premature: 20 μg/kg
Full-­term neonate (up to 1 mo): 20-­30 μg/kg
Infant or child: 25-­40 μg/kg
Adolescent or adult: 0.5-­1 mg in divided doses
Note: These doses are PO; IV dose is 75% of PO dose
5-­10 μg/kg/day, divided q12h
Note: These doses are PO; IV dose is 75% of PO dose
IV: 0.5-­2 mg/kg/dose
PO: 1-­4 mg/kg/day, divided qd-­qid

Bumetanide (Bumex)

IV: 0.01-­0.1 mg/kg/dose
PO: 0.01-­0.1 mg/kg/day q24-­48h

Chlorothiazide (Diuril)

PO: 20-­40 mg/kg/day, divided bid or tid

Spironolactone (Aldactone)

PO: 1-­3 mg/kg/day, divided bid or tid

ADRENERGIC AGONISTS (ALL IV)
Dobutamine

2-­20 μg/kg/min

Dopamine

2-­20 μg/kg/min

Epinephrine

0.01-­1.0 μg/kg/min

PHOSPHODIESTERASE INHIBITORS (ALL IV)
Milrinone
0.25-­1.0 μg/kg/min
AFTERLOAD-­REDUCING AGENTS
Captopril (Capoten), all PO

Premature: start at 0.01 mg/kg/dose; 0.1-­0.4 mg/kg/day, divided q6-­24h
Infant: start at 0.15-­0.3 mg/kg/dose; 1.5-­6 mg/kg/day, divided q6-­12h
Child: start at 0.3-­0.5 mg/kg/dose; 2.5-­6 mg/kg/day, divided q6-­12h

Enalapril (Vasotec), all PO

0.08-­0.5 mg/kg/day, divided q12-­24h

Hydralazine (Apresoline)

IV: 0.1-­0.5 mg/kg/dose (maximum: 20 mg)
PO: 0.75-­5 mg/kg/day, divided q6-­12h

Nitroglycerin

IV: 0.25-­0.5 μg/kg/min start; increase to 20 μg/kg/min maximum

Nitroprusside (Nipride)

IV: 0.5-­8 μg/kg/min

β-­ADRENERGIC BLOCKERS
Carvedilol (Coreg)
Metoprolol (Lopressor, Toprol-­XL)

PO: initial dose: 0.1 mg/kg/day (maximum: 6.25 mg) divided bid (may use tid in infants), increase gradually (usually
2-­wk intervals) to maximum of 0.5-­1 mg/kg/day over 8-­12 wk as tolerated; adult maximum dose: 50-­100 mg/day
PO, non–extended-­release form: 0.2 mg/kg/day divided bid, increase gradually (usually 2-­wk intervals) to
maximum dose of 1-­2 mg/kg/day
PO, extended-­release form (Toprol-­XL): given once daily; adult initial dose: 25 mg/day, maximum: 200 mg/day

*Pediatric doses based on weight should not exceed adult doses. Because recommendations may change, these doses should always be double-­checked. Doses may also need to
be modified in any patient with renal or hepatic dysfunction.
†Maintenance digitalis therapy is started approximately 12 hr after full digitalization. The daily dosage, one quarter of the total digitalizing dose, is divided in two and given at 12-­hr
intervals. The oral maintenance dose is usually 20–25% higher than when digoxin is used parenterally. The normal daily dose of digoxin for older children (>5 yr of age) calculated
by body weight should not exceed the usual adult dose of 0.125-­0.5 mg/24 hr.
IV, Intravenous; PO, oral; bid, twice daily, tid, 3 times daily; qid, 4 times daily; qd, every day.

Cardiac Reverse Remodeling
Angiotensin Antagonists

The renin-­angiotensin-­aldosterone pathway becomes active as a compensatory response to heart failure, but these compensatory effects can
result in increased afterload and adverse remodeling of the myocardium, including development of cardiac fibrosis. Angiotensin antagonists, including angiotensin-­converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs) and
aldosterone II receptor blockers (ARBs), reduce ventricular afterload
by decreasing peripheral vascular resistance and thereby improving
myocardial performance. Afterload reducers may be useful in children with heart failure secondary to cardiomyopathy and in patients
with severe mitral or aortic insufficiency. They may also be effective
in patients with heart failure caused by left-­to-­right shunts. ACEIs

and ARBs may have additional beneficial effects on cardiac remodeling independent of their influence on afterload by directly influencing adverse cardiac intracellular signaling pathways and decreasing
the formation of myocardial fibrosis. In adult patients with dilated
cardiomyopathy, the addition of an ACEI to standard medical therapy
reduces both morbidity and mortality.
The orally active ACEIs captopril, enalapril, and lisinopril produce arterial dilation by blocking the production of angiotensin II,
thereby resulting in significant afterload reduction. Venodilation and
consequent preload reduction also have been reported. In addition,
these agents interfere with aldosterone production and therefore also
help control salt and water retention. ACEIs have additional beneficial
effects on cardiac structure and function that may be independent of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 491 u Heart Failure
Activation of
NPS

+

+

BNP/ANP

Natriuretic
peptide receptor A

–
Neprilysin
–

+

Sacubitril/valsartan
Heart failure

orally in two divided doses of 2 mg/kg/24 hr. Adults with heart failure
have improved survival when an aldosterone inhibitor is included in
the diuretic regimen, likely through multiple effects, including a favorable effect on cardiac fibrosis. Eplerenone is an alternative to spironolactone and does not have the side effect of gynecomastia.

β Blockers
–

+
Activation of
RAAS

2899

+

ACE inhibitors

ARBs

–

RENIN

ACE

–

+
Angiotensinogen

Angiotensin
I

Angiotensin
II

Angiotensin
receptor

Fig. 491.4 Systems activated in heart failure and pathways blocked
by angiotensin-­
converting enzyme inhibitors, angiotensin receptor
blockers, and neprilysin inhibitors (sympathetic nervous system activation pathway is not shown in the figure). ANP, Atrial natriuretic peptide;
BNP, B-­type natriuretic peptide; NPS, natriuretic peptide system; RAAS,
renin angiotensin aldosterone system. (From Arya A, Azad S, Sitaraman
R. Angiotensin receptor and neprilysin inhibitor: a new drug in pediatric cardiologist’s armamentarium. Ann Pediatr Cardiol. 2020;13[4]:334–
336, Fig. 1.)

Table 491.7  Valsartan/Sacubitril Recommended Dose*
(Twice Daily)(mg/kg)
STARTING

SECOND

FINAL

Pediatric patients <40 kg**
(mg/kg)

1.6

2.3

3.1

Pediatric patients at least
40 kg, <50 kg (mg)

24/26

49/51

72/78#

Pediatric patients at least
50 kg (mg)

49/51

72/78#

97/103

*Available as 24/26, 49/51, and 97/103 mg tablets, where the first drug is sacubitril and
the second drug is valsartan.
#Doses of 72/78 mg can be achieved using three 24/26 mg tablets. Titration: titrate
dose every 2 wk and target final dose.
**An oral suspension can be substituted at the recommended tablet dosage in patients
unable to swallow tablets.
From Arya A, Azad S, Sitaraman R. Angiotensin receptor and neprilysin inhibitor: a new
drug in pediatric cardiologist’s armamentarium. Ann Pediatr Cardiol. 2020;13(4):334–
336, Table 1.

their effect on afterload. Adverse reactions to ACEIs include hypotension and its sequelae (weakness, dizziness, syncope) and hyperkalemia.
A maculopapular pruritic rash is encountered in a small number of
patients, but the drug may be continued because the rash often disappears spontaneously with time. Neutropenia, renal toxicity, and
chronic cough also occur. Angioedema is a rare side effect of ACEIs
and is related to inhibiting breakdown of bradykinin. If patients have
had side effects related to bradykinin effect from ACEIs, including
chronic cough, ARBs may be an alternative therapy and include losartan and valsartan.
An angiotensin receptor combined with neprilysin inhibition
(ARNI) (valsartan/sacubitril) is approved for children 1-­18 years of
age with New York Heart Association class II-­IV and a left ventricular
ejection fraction ≤40%. The mechanism of action is noted in Figure
491.4 and the dosing in Table 491.7.

Aldosterone Antagonists

Spironolactone and eplerenone inhibit aldosterone and act both as
a reverse remodeling agent and a weak diuretic. They also enhance
potassium retention, often eliminating the need for oral potassium
supplementation in patients receiving diuretics. Aldosterone antagonists blunt the adverse cardiac remodeling effects and may reduce cardiac fibrosis that results in heart failure. Spironolactone is usually given

Studies in adults with dilated cardiomyopathy show that β-­adrenergic
blocking agents, introduced gradually as part of a comprehensive heart
failure treatment program, improve exercise tolerance, decrease hospitalizations, and reduce overall mortality. The agents most often used
are carvedilol, with both α-­ and β-­adrenergic receptor–blocking and
free radical–scavenging effects, and metoprolol, a β1-­adrenergic receptor–selective antagonist. β Blockers are used for the chronic treatment
of patients with heart failure and should not be administered when
patients are still in the acute phase of heart failure (i.e., receiving IV
adrenergic agonist infusions). Although highly efficacious in adults,
clinical studies in children have shown mixed results, potentially from
the significant heterogeneity of the populations being studied and differences in the types of β-­blocking agents.
Although ACEIs/ARBs along with β-­adrenergic–blocking agents
and aldosterone antagonists have been shown in multiple prospective,
randomized, controlled trials in adults to improve symptoms and mortality in adult heart failure patients, it is unclear if these medications
improve the natural history of heart failure in children. Nonetheless,
these medications are commonly used for the treatment of heart failure
and are recommended by consensus guidelines from the ISHLT and
Canadian Cardiovascular Society.

Afterload Reduction

Afterload reduction is an important component of heart failure management to reduce workload on the myocardium. Oral afterload-­
reducing agents, including ACEIs and ARBs, are often used for both
cardiac reverse remodeling and afterload reduction benefits. If renal
insufficiency is present, alternative oral afterload-­reducing agents may
be considered, including calcium channel blockers such as amlodipine, although they have potential side effects including peripheral
edema and gingival hyperplasia.
Intravenously administered afterload-­
reducing agents, including
milrinone (see later section on “Phosphodiesterase Inhibitors”), nicardipine, and nitroprusside, should be initiated only in a closely monitored clinical care setting. Nitroprusside’s short IV half-­life makes it
ideal for titrating the dose in critically ill patients. Peripheral arterial
vasodilation and afterload reduction are the major effects, but venodilation causing a decrease in venous return to the heart may also be
beneficial. Blood pressure must be continuously monitored because
sudden hypotension can occur. Consequently, nitroprusside is contraindicated in patients with preexisting hypotension. Because the drug is
metabolized, small amounts of circulating cyanide are produced and
detoxified in the liver to thiocyanate, which is excreted in urine. When
high doses of nitroprusside are administered for several days, toxic
symptoms related to thiocyanate poisoning may occur (fatigue, nausea,
disorientation, acidosis, and muscular spasm). If nitroprusside use is
prolonged, blood thiocyanate levels should be monitored.

Phosphodiesterase Inhibitors

Milrinone is useful in treating patients with low cardiac output who are
refractory to standard therapy. It has been shown to be highly effective
in managing the low-­output state present in children after open heart
surgery. It works by inhibiting phosphodiesterase, which prevents the
degradation of intracellular cyclic adenosine monophosphate. Milrinone has both positive inotropic effects on the heart and peripheral
vasodilatory effects and has generally been used as an adjunct to dopamine or dobutamine therapy in the intensive care unit. It is given by
IV infusion at 0.25-­1 μg/kg/min. A major side effect is hypotension
secondary to peripheral vasodilation. The hypotension can generally
be managed by the administration of IV fluids to restore adequate
intravascular volume. Because of renal clearance of milrinone, caution
must be used in the setting of renal insufficiency. Long-­term milrinone

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2900 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
is often used to support patients while listed for heart transplantation,
and in select patients can be used in the outpatient setting.

α-­ and β-­Adrenergic Agonists

The α-­ and β-­adrenergic receptor agonists may be needed for advanced
heart failure with impaired cardiac output and are usually administered
in an intensive care setting, where the dose can be carefully titrated to
hemodynamic response. Continuous determinations of arterial blood
pressure and heart rate are performed; measuring serial mixed venous
oxygen saturations or cardiac output directly with a pulmonary thermodilution (Swan-­Ganz) catheter may be helpful in assessing drug efficacy,
although this technique is used much less in children than in adults.
These agents increase myocardial oxygen consumption and are associated
with increased arrhythmogenic burden and have been shown to increase
morbidity and mortality in adults with heart failure; thus they are usually
avoided as a long-­term therapy.
Dopamine is a predominantly β-­adrenergic receptor agonist, but it
has α-­adrenergic effects at higher doses. Dopamine has less chronotropic
and arrhythmogenic effect than the pure β-­agonist isoproterenol. At a
dose of 2-­10 μg/kg/min, dopamine results in increased contractility with
little peripheral vasoconstrictive effect. If the dose is increased beyond
15 μg/kg/min, however, its peripheral α-­adrenergic effects may result in
vasoconstriction.
Dobutamine, a derivative of dopamine, is also useful in treating low
cardiac output. It has direct inotropic effects and causes a moderate
reduction in peripheral vascular resistance. Dobutamine can be used
alone or as an adjunct to dopamine therapy to avoid the vasoconstrictive effects of higher-­dose dopamine. Dobutamine is also less likely to
cause cardiac rhythm disturbances.
Epinephrine is a mixed α-­ and β-­adrenergic receptor agonist that is
usually reserved for patients with cardiogenic shock and low arterial blood
pressure. Although epinephrine can raise blood pressure effectively, it also
increases systemic vascular resistance, and therefore increases the afterload
against which the heart has to work and is associated with an increased risk
of arrhythmia. Additionally, epinephrine is proarrhythmic and can result
in direct cardiac toxicity, including myocardial necrosis and apoptosis.

Digitalis Glycosides

Digoxin, once the mainstay of heart failure management in both children
and adults, is currently used less frequently as a result of the introduction
of other therapies and the recognition of its potential toxicities. Some cardiologists will use digitalis as an adjunct to ACEIs and diuretics in patients
with symptomatic heart failure, whereas others have stopped using it
altogether. Despite multiple clinical studies, predominantly in adults, the
controversy over digitalis remains. Some data suggest a beneficial effect
of digoxin on reducing death among infants with single ventricle heart
disease.
Digoxin is the digitalis glycoside used most often in pediatric patients.
It has a half-­life of 36 hours and is absorbed well by the gastrointestinal
tract (60–85%), even in infants. An initial effect is seen as early as 30 minutes after administration, and the peak effect for oral digoxin occurs at 2-­6
hours. When the drug is administered intravenously, the initial effect is
seen in 15-­30 minutes, and the peak effect occurs at 1-­4 hours. The kidney
eliminates digoxin, so dosing must be adjusted according to the patient’s
renal function. The half-­life of digoxin may be up to 6 days in patients
with anuria because slower hepatic excretion pathways are used in these
patients.
Rapid digitalization of infants and children may be carried out intravenously. This should be done with caution in patients with severe heart
failure. The dose depends on the patient’s age (see Table 491.6). The recommended digitalization schedule is to give half the total digitalizing dose
immediately and the succeeding two one-­quarter doses at 12-­hours intervals later. The ECG must be closely monitored and rhythm strips obtained
before each of the three digitalizing doses. Digoxin should be discontinued
if a new rhythm disturbance is noted. Prolongation of the P-­R interval is
not necessarily an indication to withhold digitalis, but a delay in administering the next dose or a reduction in the dosage should be considered,
depending on the patient’s clinical status. Minor ST segment or T-­wave
changes are frequently noted with digitalis administration and should not
affect the digitalization regimen. Baseline serum electrolyte levels should

be measured before and after digitalization. Hypokalemia and hypercalcemia exacerbate digitalis toxicity. Because hypokalemia is relatively common in patients receiving diuretics, potassium levels should be monitored
closely in those receiving a potassium-­wasting diuretic in combination
with digitalis. In patients with active myocarditis, some cardiologists recommend avoiding digitalis altogether, and if used, maintenance digitalis
should be started at half the normal dose without digitalization because of
the increased risk of arrhythmia in these patients.
Patients who are not critically ill may be given digitalis initially by the
oral route, and in most instances, digitalization is completed within 24
hours. When slow digitalization is desirable, for example, in the immediate
postoperative period, initiation of a maintenance digoxin schedule without
a previous loading dose achieves full digitalization in 7-­10 days.
Measurement of serum digoxin levels is useful in the following circumstances: (1) when an unknown amount of digoxin has
been administered or ingested accidently, (2) when renal function
is impaired or if drug interactions are possible, (3) when questions
regarding compliance are raised, and (4) when a toxic response is
suspected. In suspected toxicity, elevated serum digoxin levels are
not in themselves diagnostic of toxicity but must be interpreted as an
adjunct to other clinical and electrocardiographic findings (rhythm
and conduction disturbances). Hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia,
hypercalcemia, cardiac inflammation secondary to myocarditis, and
prematurity may all potentiate digitalis toxicity. A cardiac arrhythmia
that develops in a child who is taking digitalis may also be related
to the primary cardiac disease rather than the drug; however, any
arrhythmia occurring after the institution of digitalis therapy must
be considered to be drug related until proven otherwise. Many drugs
interact with digoxin and may increase levels or risk of toxicity, so
care should be taken when a patient receiving digoxin is being considered for any additional pharmacologic therapy.

Additional Therapies

Several medications that have shown promise in the treatment of adult
patients with heart failure are being studied in pediatric patients. For
chronic heart failure, ivabradine has been studied in patients with elevated heart rates despite optimized β blocker use. Ivabradine is a selective
inhibitor of the If current in the sinus node and lowers heart rates without
decreasing myocardial contractility. The use of ivabradine was associated
with improved outcomes in adults with heart failure, and a recent study
of children with heart failure caused by dilated cardiomyopathy demonstrated improved left ventricular systolic function and clinical status.
Sodium-­glucose co-transporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitors, which blocks
reabsorption of glucose in the proximal renal tubule, are the newest class
of adult heart failure medications and, though developed as a treatment
for diabetes, have shown dramatic improvement in cardiac mortality
and morbidity in adults with heart failure with reduced ejection fraction. Given the mechanism of action, which includes glucosuria, there
is a risk for urinary tract infection and yeast infection. Additional possible side effects include acute kidney injury and bone fracture as well as
development of diabetic ketoacidosis in patients with diabetes. Further
studies are needed to determine what role, if any, these medications
will have in the treatment of pediatric heart failure.

ELECTROPHYSIOLOGIC APPROACHES TO HEART
FAILURE MANAGEMENT

Significant improvements in symptomatology and functional capacity
have been achieved in select adult patients with cardiomyopathy using
biventricular resynchronization pacing. This technique improves
cardiac output by restoring normal synchrony between right and left
ventricular contraction, which is often lost in patients with dilated
cardiomyopathy (these patients usually manifest a left bundle branch
block on ECG). There is growing experience with resynchronization pacing in children, but it remains uncertain which population of
patients with heart failure benefit from this therapy.
Arrhythmias are a leading cause of sudden death in patients with
severe cardiomyopathy (both dilated and hypertrophic). Although antiarrhythmic medications can sometimes reduce this risk, for patients at
particularly high risk (e.g., those with a condition known to be associated with a high risk of ventricular arrhythmia or those who have already

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 491 u Heart Failure

2901

Table 491.8  Treatment of Cardiogenic Shock*
DETERMINANTS OF STROKE VOLUME
Preload

Contractility

Afterload

Parameters measured

CVP, PCWP, LAP, cardiac chamber
size on echocardiography

CO, BP, fractional shortening or ejection fraction
on echocardiography, MV O2 saturation

BP, peripheral perfusion, SVR

Treatment to improve
cardiac output

Volume expansion (crystalloid,
colloid, blood)

β-­Adrenergic agonists, phosphodiesterase
inhibitors

Afterload-­reducing agents:
milrinone, nitroprusside, ACEIs

*The goal is to improve peripheral perfusion by increasing cardiac output, where cardiac output = heart rate × stroke volume.
ACEIs, Angiotensin-­converting enzyme inhibitors; BP, blood pressure; CO, cardiac output (measured with a thermodilution catheter); CVP, central venous pressure; LAP, left atrial
pressure (measured with an indwelling LA line); MV O2 saturation, mixed venous oxygen saturation (measured with a central venous catheter); PCWP, pulmonary capillary wedge
pressure (measured with a thermodilution catheter); SVR, systemic vascular resistance (calculated from CO and mean BP).

experienced a “missed sudden death” episode), use of an implantable
cardioverter-­defibrillator can be lifesaving (see Chapter 485).

491.1 Cardiogenic Shock
Joseph W. Rossano and Danielle S. Burstein
Cardiogenic shock may be caused by (1) severe cardiac dysfunction before or after cardiac surgery, (2) septicemia, (3) severe burns,
(4) anaphylaxis, (5) cardiomyopathy, (6) myocarditis, (7) myocardial
infarction or stunning, and (8) acute central nervous system (CNS)
disorders. It is characterized by low cardiac output and results in inadequate tissue perfusion (see Chapter 85).
Treatment is aimed at restoring adequate cardiac output to prevent
the untoward effects of prolonged ischemia on vital organs, as well as
management of the underlying cause. Under normal physiologic conditions, cardiac output is increased as a result of sympathetic stimulation, which increases both contractility and heart rate. If contractility
is depressed, cardiac output may be improved by increasing the heart
rate, increasing ventricular filling pressure (preload) through the
Frank-­Starling mechanism, or decreasing systemic vascular resistance
(afterload). Optimal filling pressure is variable and depends on a number of extracardiac factors, including ventilatory support and intraabdominal pressure. The increased pressure necessary to fill a relatively
noncompliant ventricle should also be considered, particularly after
open heart surgery or in patients with restrictive or hypertrophic cardiomyopathies. If carefully administered incremental fluid does not
result in improved cardiac output, abnormal myocardial contractility
or an abnormally high afterload, or both, must be implicated as the
cause of the low cardiac output. Although an increase in heart rate may
improve cardiac output, an excessive increase in heart rate may reduce
cardiac output because of decreased time for diastolic filling. Additionally, high heart rates will increase myocardial oxygen demand, which
may be counterproductive in a state of limited tissue oxygen supply.
Myocardial contractility usually improves when treatment of the
basic cause of shock is instituted, hypoxia is eliminated, and acidosis is corrected. β-­Adrenergic agonists such as dopamine, epinephrine, and dobutamine improve cardiac contractility, increase heart
rate, and ultimately increase cardiac output. However, some of these
agents also have α-­adrenergic effects, which cause peripheral vasoconstriction and increase afterload, so careful consideration of the
balance of these effects in an individual patient is important. The use
of cardiac glycosides and β blockers to treat acute low-­cardiac-­output
states should be avoided.
Patients in cardiogenic shock may have a marked increase in systemic
vascular resistance (SVR) resulting in high afterload and poor peripheral
perfusion. If the increased SVR is persistent and the administration of
positive inotropic agents alone does not improve tissue perfusion, the
use of afterload-­reducing agents may be appropriate, such as nitroprusside or milrinone in combination with a β-­adrenergic agonist. Milrinone,
a phosphodiesterase inhibitor (see earlier), is also a positive inotropic
agent, and combined with a β-­adrenergic agonist, it works synergistically
to increase levels of myocardial cyclic adenosine monophosphate.

Sequential evaluation and management of cardiovascular shock are
mandatory (see Chapter 85). Table 491.8 outlines the general treatment
principles for acute cardiac circulatory failure under most circumstances.
In addition to cardiac-­specific medications, other treatments aimed at
improving oxygen capacity (e.g., blood transfusion for patients with
anemia) and decreasing oxygen demand (e.g., intubation, mechanical
ventilation, sedation, antipyretics) can be beneficial. Treatment of infants
and children with low cardiac output after cardiac surgery also depends
on the nature of the operative procedure, any intraoperative complications, and the physiology of the circulation after repair or palliation (see
Chapter 483). If cardiogenic shock does not respond rapidly to medical
therapy, consideration of mechanical support is warranted.

MECHANICAL CIRCULATORY SUPPORT

Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO), which can provide
total cardiopulmonary support, is the most common short-­term modality to support circulatory failure in children. In experienced centers, children can be placed on ECMO rapidly, and therefore the modality can be
used in multiple settings, including low cardiac output syndrome (low-­
output heart failure) after cardiac surgery, rapidly deteriorating hemodynamics in several scenarios (e.g., myocarditis), and as resuscitation from
refractory cardiac arrest. The modality is ideal for short-­term support
when the underlying disease requiring ECMO is expected to resolve
within days to weeks. For multiple reasons, including the relatively high
complication rate and decreased mobility of many patients on ECMO, it
is not an ideal support modality for long-­term myocardial support.
Given the limitations of ECMO, there is a need to develop long-­term
support options for children with refractory heart failure. Ventricular
assist devices (VADs) include both short-­term and long-­term mechanical circulatory support and can be deployed either percutaneously or
surgically. In children, most of these devices are used with the intention
of subsequently performing a heart transplantation, although the devices
can be removed if myocardial function recovers. This is in contrast to
adult patients, many of whom are placed on these devices with no plan
for heart transplantation, the so-­called destination therapy. Successfully
managing patients on VAD support requires a dedicated multidisciplinary team.
For infants and small children, the most commonly used VADs are
paracorporeal devices, including paracorporeal pulsatile-­flow VADs
(e.g., Berlin Heart EXCOR) and paracorporeal continuous-­flow VADs
(e.g., Pedimag). These devices can be used for left, right, or biventricular support. They are classified as a paracorporeal device because the
pump sits outside the body. In older children and adolescents, intracorporeal continuous flow devices (e.g., HeartMate3) are preferred. These
VADs are completely internalized except for a drive line that connects
to the power source (Fig. 491.5). These VADs have fewer complications and can provide long-­term durable support outside the hospital.
These devices are often used in older children and adolescents, with
many of these patients discharged home on VAD support. Other types
of devices, including temporary percutaneous VAD (e.g., Impella) for
short-­term support and the total artificial heart for long-­term support, have also been used in children.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2902 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
100

1982-1989 (N = 908)

1990-2003 (N = 5,637)

2004-2008 (N = 2,442)

2009-6/2014 (N = 3,104)

B

Survival (%)

75

50
p-values significant at p < 0.05
25

Median survival (years): 1982-1989 = 9.8; 1990-2003 = 14.5;
2004-2008 = NA; 2009-6/2014 = NA
0

A

Fig. 491.5 Commonly used ventricular assist devices in children. A,

Danielle S. Burstein and Joseph W. Rossano
Pediatric heart transplantation is considered the standard therapy that offers long-­term survival for end-­stage heart disease in
children. In adults, ventricular assist devices (VADs) are usually
employed as a long-­term therapy for patients not eligible for heart
transplantation, but in children the vast majority of VADs are used
as a bridge to transplantation as opposed to an alternative to transplantation. According to the International Society for Heart and
Lung Transplantation, as of January 2019, over 14,000 heart transplants had been performed on children in the world, with about
400 transplants annually—a quarter of these in children <1 year of
age. Survival rates have improved significantly over time, with most
of the improvement occurring in the early period after transplant.
This period continues to the associated with the greatest risk of
death, and many patients who survive the first year after transplant
are alive 20 years later (Fig. 492.1). Indeed, a growing number of
patients receiving a heart transplant in childhood are approaching
their 15-­, 20-­, and 30-­year posttransplant anniversaries. Current
(2011-2023) 1-year survival is ~90% and 5-year survival ~80%.

INDICATIONS

Heart transplantation is performed (1) in infants and children with
end-­stage cardiomyopathy who have become refractory to medical
therapy, (2) in patients with previously repaired or palliated congenital heart disease (CHD) who have developed ventricular dysfunction or other nonoperable late-­term complications, and (3)
less frequently in patients with complex CHD—pulmonary atresia
with intact septum and coronary arterial stenoses and some forms
of hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS)—for whom standard
surgical procedures are extremely high risk. Additionally, retransplantation accounts for approximately 5% of transplants annually.

8

10

12
14
Years

16

18

20

22

24

50
All pair-wise comparisons were significant at p < 0.05.
<1 Year (N = 2,159)

1-5 Years (N = 2,128)

6-10 Years (N = 1,430)

11-17 Years (N = 3,826)

Overall (N = 9,543)

Chapter 492

492.1 Pediatric Heart Transplantation

6

Median survival (years): <1 = NA; 1-5 = 21.5;
6-10 = 16.5; 11-17 = 15.7

25

Pediatric Heart and Heart-­
Lung Transplantation

4

75
Survival (%)

Paracorporeal pneumatic pulsatile Berlin Heart EXCOR. B and C, Continuous flow devices: (B) HeartMate3; (C) HeartWare HVAD. (A courtesy
Berlin Heart, LLC; B from St. Jude Medical; C courtesy Medtronic, Inc.)

2

100

C

A

0

0

B

0

2

4

6

8

10

12
14
Years

16

18

20

22

24

Fig. 492.1 A, Survival after pediatric heart transplantation comparing
current and past eras. B, Long-­term survival among patients that lived
to 1-­yr post-­transplant. NA, Not applicable. (From Rossano JW, Dipchand AI, Edwards LB, et al. The Registry of the International Society
for Heart and Lung Transplantation: Nineteenth Pediatric Heart Transplantation Report—2016. Focus theme: primary diagnostic indications
for transplant. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2016;35[10]:1185–1195, Figs.
6 and 7.)

Cardiomyopathies account for >50% of heart transplants in pediatric patients older than 1 year, with the percentage of patients with
previously repaired complex CHD at approximately 30%. In infants
younger than 1 year, CHD previously represented >80% of transplants; this has decreased to 60% as standard surgical results for
complex CHD (e.g., HLHS) have improved.

RECIPIENT AND DONOR SELECTION

Potential heart transplant recipients must be free of serious noncardiac medical problems such as neurologic disease, active systemic
infection, severe hepatic or renal disease, and severe malnutrition. Many children with ventricular dysfunction are at risk for
the development of pulmonary vascular disease, which, if severe
enough, would also preclude heart transplantation. Therefore pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) is measured at cardiac catheterization in heart transplant candidates, both at rest and, if elevated,
in response to vasodilators. Patients with fixed elevated PVR above
6 index Wood units are at higher risk for heart transplantation and
may be considered candidates for heart-­lung transplantation (see
Chapter 492.2). However, with advances in postoperative management of pulmonary hypertension (e.g., inhaled nitric oxide),
many patients with moderate elevation in PVR can undergo heart
transplant alone. A comprehensive social services evaluation is an
important component of the recipient evaluation. Because of the
complex posttransplantation medical regimen, the family must
have a history of compliance. Detailed informed consent must be
obtained, indicating that the family (and, if old enough, the patient)
understand the lifelong commitment to immunosuppressive medication and careful monitoring.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2902 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
100

1982-1989 (N = 908)

1990-2003 (N = 5,637)

2004-2008 (N = 2,442)

2009-6/2014 (N = 3,104)

B

Survival (%)

75

50
p-values significant at p < 0.05
25

Median survival (years): 1982-1989 = 9.8; 1990-2003 = 14.5;
2004-2008 = NA; 2009-6/2014 = NA
0

A

Fig. 491.5 Commonly used ventricular assist devices in children. A,

Danielle S. Burstein and Joseph W. Rossano
Pediatric heart transplantation is considered the standard therapy that offers long-­term survival for end-­stage heart disease in
children. In adults, ventricular assist devices (VADs) are usually
employed as a long-­term therapy for patients not eligible for heart
transplantation, but in children the vast majority of VADs are used
as a bridge to transplantation as opposed to an alternative to transplantation. According to the International Society for Heart and
Lung Transplantation, as of January 2019, over 14,000 heart transplants had been performed on children in the world, with about
400 transplants annually—a quarter of these in children <1 year of
age. Survival rates have improved significantly over time, with most
of the improvement occurring in the early period after transplant.
This period continues to the associated with the greatest risk of
death, and many patients who survive the first year after transplant
are alive 20 years later (Fig. 492.1). Indeed, a growing number of
patients receiving a heart transplant in childhood are approaching
their 15-­, 20-­, and 30-­year posttransplant anniversaries. Current
(2011-2023) 1-year survival is ~90% and 5-year survival ~80%.

INDICATIONS

Heart transplantation is performed (1) in infants and children with
end-­stage cardiomyopathy who have become refractory to medical
therapy, (2) in patients with previously repaired or palliated congenital heart disease (CHD) who have developed ventricular dysfunction or other nonoperable late-­term complications, and (3)
less frequently in patients with complex CHD—pulmonary atresia
with intact septum and coronary arterial stenoses and some forms
of hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS)—for whom standard
surgical procedures are extremely high risk. Additionally, retransplantation accounts for approximately 5% of transplants annually.

8

10

12
14
Years

16

18

20

22

24

50
All pair-wise comparisons were significant at p < 0.05.
<1 Year (N = 2,159)

1-5 Years (N = 2,128)

6-10 Years (N = 1,430)

11-17 Years (N = 3,826)

Overall (N = 9,543)

Chapter 492

492.1 Pediatric Heart Transplantation

6

Median survival (years): <1 = NA; 1-5 = 21.5;
6-10 = 16.5; 11-17 = 15.7

25

Pediatric Heart and Heart-­
Lung Transplantation

4

75
Survival (%)

Paracorporeal pneumatic pulsatile Berlin Heart EXCOR. B and C, Continuous flow devices: (B) HeartMate3; (C) HeartWare HVAD. (A courtesy
Berlin Heart, LLC; B from St. Jude Medical; C courtesy Medtronic, Inc.)

2

100

C

A

0

0

B

0

2

4

6

8

10

12
14
Years

16

18

20

22

24

Fig. 492.1 A, Survival after pediatric heart transplantation comparing
current and past eras. B, Long-­term survival among patients that lived
to 1-­yr post-­transplant. NA, Not applicable. (From Rossano JW, Dipchand AI, Edwards LB, et al. The Registry of the International Society
for Heart and Lung Transplantation: Nineteenth Pediatric Heart Transplantation Report—2016. Focus theme: primary diagnostic indications
for transplant. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2016;35[10]:1185–1195, Figs.
6 and 7.)

Cardiomyopathies account for >50% of heart transplants in pediatric patients older than 1 year, with the percentage of patients with
previously repaired complex CHD at approximately 30%. In infants
younger than 1 year, CHD previously represented >80% of transplants; this has decreased to 60% as standard surgical results for
complex CHD (e.g., HLHS) have improved.

RECIPIENT AND DONOR SELECTION

Potential heart transplant recipients must be free of serious noncardiac medical problems such as neurologic disease, active systemic
infection, severe hepatic or renal disease, and severe malnutrition. Many children with ventricular dysfunction are at risk for
the development of pulmonary vascular disease, which, if severe
enough, would also preclude heart transplantation. Therefore pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) is measured at cardiac catheterization in heart transplant candidates, both at rest and, if elevated,
in response to vasodilators. Patients with fixed elevated PVR above
6 index Wood units are at higher risk for heart transplantation and
may be considered candidates for heart-­lung transplantation (see
Chapter 492.2). However, with advances in postoperative management of pulmonary hypertension (e.g., inhaled nitric oxide),
many patients with moderate elevation in PVR can undergo heart
transplant alone. A comprehensive social services evaluation is an
important component of the recipient evaluation. Because of the
complex posttransplantation medical regimen, the family must
have a history of compliance. Detailed informed consent must be
obtained, indicating that the family (and, if old enough, the patient)
understand the lifelong commitment to immunosuppressive medication and careful monitoring.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 492 u Pediatric Heart and Heart-­Lung Transplantation 2903
Donor shortage is a serious problem for both adults and children. At the national registry of transplant recipients in the United
States, the United Network for Organ Sharing (UNOS), allografts
are matched by ABO blood group and body weight. However, ABO
matching may not be required for young infants less than 2 years of
age because of the immaturity of the immune system. Patients, especially with a history of CHD, who have undergone prior operations
may have antibodies against human leukocyte antigens (HLAs).
Patients with elevated anti-­HLA antibodies are at risk for a positive
cross match and early graft dysfunction. These antibodies can also
contribute to late graft dysfunction through antibody-­mediated
rejection and development of cardiac allograft vasculopathy. For
patients with these elevated antibodies, there are strategies to avoid
a positive cross match through a prospective cross match or a virtual cross match, although this may prolong the waiting list time.
There are also desensitization therapies that may reduce circulating
HLA antibody production, although they do not affect historical
antibodies, and current data remain unclear how effective desensitization therapy is for reducing posttransplant rejection risk. Contraindications to organ donation include prolonged cardiac arrest
with persistent moderate to severe cardiac dysfunction, ongoing
systemic illness or infection, and preexisting severe cardiac disease.
Physicians caring for a patient who may be a potential donor should
always contact the organ donor coordinator at their institution,
who can best judge the appropriateness of organ donation and has
experience in interacting with potential donor families. A history of
resuscitation alone or reparable CHD is not an automatic exclusion
for donation.
The decision of when to place a patient on the transplant waiting
list is based on many factors, including degree of ventricular function, markedly decreased exercise tolerance as determined by cardiopulmonary exercise testing (see Chapter 472.5), poor response
to medical heart failure therapy, multiple hospitalizations for heart
failure, arrhythmia, progressive deterioration in renal or hepatic
function, early stages of pulmonary vascular disease, and poor
nutritional status. Patients with severe ventricular dysfunction are
often started on a regimen of anticoagulation to reduce the risk of
mural thrombosis and thromboembolism. Patients with progressive
heart failure resulting in decreases in end-­organ (renal or hepatic)
function unresponsive to standard pharmacologic treatment may
be candidates for a VAD. The use of these devices has increased dramatically over the past decade, and currently over half of patients
with dilated cardiomyopathy are on VAD support before transplant.
VADs can improve hemodynamics and end-­organ function, allow
for rehabilitation, and allow some patients to be discharged home
on VAD support (see Chapter 491).

PERIOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT

Heart transplantation in children can be performed either with a
biatrial or bicaval anastomosis. In the biatrial anastomosis, both
donor and recipient hearts are excised so that the posterior portions
of the atria containing the venae cavae and pulmonary veins are
left intact. The aorta and pulmonary artery are divided above the
level of the semilunar valves. The anterior portions of the donor’s
atria are then connected to the remaining posterior portions of the
recipient’s atria, thereby avoiding the need for delicate suturing of
the venae cavae or pulmonary veins. Previously, the donor and
recipient great vessels were connected via end-­to-­end anastomoses.
This has been supplanted in many centers by the bicaval anastomosis, with the donor right atrium (and sinus node) left intact and the
suture lines at the superior and inferior vena cavae; the left atrial
connection is still performed as in the biatrial anastomosis.
In the immediate postoperative period, immunosuppression is
achieved with induction therapy that includes an antilymphocyte
therapy for the first 5-­7 days; common agents include antithymocyte globulin (ATG) and the humanized anti–interleukin-­2 receptor
antibodies (basiliximab). Steroids are also commonly used within
the first 5-­7 days and then are often weaned off or discontinued.
Antiproliferative agents (mycophenolate mofetil [MMF]) are also

started immediately after transplant and are transitioned to an oral
compound once enteral medications are tolerated. The most common combinations of chronic immunosuppression are a calcineurin
inhibitor (CNI; tacrolimus or cyclosporine) plus an antiproliferative agent (MMF or azathioprine). Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitors (sirolimus or everolimus) may be added to
decrease the dose of CNI if renal insufficiency occurs. Many centers do not use steroids as part of maintenance immunosuppression
but do use them as bolus treatment for acute rejection episodes.
Immunosuppression levels are usually reduced after the first year
posttransplant if there are no significant concerns for rejection. An
ongoing U.S. multicenter pediatric trial called the TEAMMATE
trial is comparing conventional immunosuppression therapy
(tacrolimus and mycophenolate) with low-­dose tacrolimus with
everolimus and mycophenolate to determine which combination
of immunosuppression is better at improving long-­term pediatric
post–heart transplant outcomes.
Many pediatric heart transplant recipients can be extubated from
endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation support within
the first 48 hours after transplantation and are out of bed in several
days. In patients with preexisting high-­risk factors, postoperative
recovery may be considerably prolonged. For those with preoperative pulmonary hypertension, the use of nitric oxide in the postoperative period can allow the donor right ventricle to hypertrophy
in response to elevated pulmonary artery pressures. Occasionally,
these patients will require extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
(ECMO) for primary graft dysfunction.

DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF ACUTE GRAFT
REJECTION

Posttransplantation management consists of adjusting medications to
maintain a balance between the risk of rejection and the side effects
of over-­immunosuppression. Acute graft rejection is a leading cause
of death in pediatric heart transplant recipients. The incidence of
acute rejection is greatest in the first 3 months after transplantation
and decreases considerably thereafter. Many pediatric patients experience at least one episode of acute rejection in the first 2 years after
transplantation, although modern immunosuppressive regimens
have decreased the frequency of severe rejection episodes. Because
the symptoms of rejection can mimic many routine pediatric illnesses
(e.g., pneumonia, gastroenteritis), the transplant center should be
notified whenever a heart transplant recipient is seen in the pediatrician’s office or emergency department for acute illnesses.
Clinical manifestations of acute rejection may include fatigue,
fluid retention, fever, diaphoresis, abdominal symptoms, and a
gallop rhythm. The electrocardiogram (ECG) may show reduced
voltage, atrial or ventricular arrhythmias, or heart block but is
usually nondiagnostic. X-­ray examination may show an enlarged
heart, effusions, or pulmonary edema but typically only in the more
advanced stages of rejection. Natriuretic peptide levels are usually
increased during episodes of acute rejection. Most rejection episodes occur without any detectable clinical symptoms. On echocardiography, indices of systolic left ventricular function may be
decreased; however, these usually do not deteriorate until rejection
is at least moderately severe. Techniques to evaluate wall thickening
and left ventricular diastolic function have not fulfilled their promise as predictors of early rejection. Most transplant centers do not
rely on echocardiography alone for rejection surveillance.
Myocardial biopsy is the most reliable method of monitoring
patients for rejection. Biopsy specimens are taken from the right
ventricular side of the interventricular septum and can be harvested
relatively safely, even in small infants. In infants, surveillance biopsies are usually performed less often and may be as infrequent as
once or twice per year. Children may have clinically unsuspected
rejection episodes even 5-­10 years after transplantation; most pediatric transplant centers continue routine surveillance biopsies,
although at less frequent intervals. Cardiac MRI evaluation has
been an effective noninvasive method to perform rejection surveillance and to diagnose actual rejection.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2904 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Gene expression profiling of peripheral blood mononuclear
cells has been validated in adults as a highly sensitive, moderately
selective method of rejection surveillance. These results have not
been confirmed in children. Other promising current techniques
include the profiling of donor cell–free DNA released in the serum
of patients during episodes of graft injury. Progress has also been
made in genetic profiling as a means to determine which patients
are most at risk for rejection. Children who have single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) leading to greater activity of inflammatory cytokines or decreased activity of regulatory cytokines are at
increased risk of rejection.
Cardiac rejection can be classified as cellular, antibody-­mediated,
or mixed. Criteria for grading cellular rejection are based on a system developed by the International Society for Heart and Lung
Transplantation (ISHLT) that considers the degree of cellular infiltration and whether myocyte necrosis is present. ISHLT rejection
grade 1R is usually mild enough that it is often not treated with
bolus steroids, and many of these episodes resolve spontaneously.
For patients with ISHLT grade 2R rejection, treatment is instituted with either intravenous (IV) methylprednisolone or a “bump
and taper” of oral prednisone. Asymptomatic patients further out
from transplant with normal echocardiograms may be treated as
outpatients. Patients with grade 3R, or anyone with hemodynamic
instability, are admitted to the hospital for IV corticosteroid and
potentially more aggressive antirejection therapy. For rejection episodes resistant to steroid therapy, additional therapeutic regimens
include antilymphocyte preparation (antithymocyte globulin),
methotrexate, or total lymphoid irradiation. Refractory rejection is
often considered a contraindication for retransplantation because
of the relatively poor outcomes compared with other indications for
retransplantation.
Criteria for grading antibody-­mediated rejection are based on
a system developed by the ISHLT that considers histologic and
immunopathologic findings. In contrast to cellular rejection,
antibody-­
mediated rejection is mediated by circulating donor-­
specific antibodies (DSAs) and can be detected by immunostaining of the biopsy specimen for the complement component C4d,
for macrophages expressing CD68, and for evidence of histologic

50
CAV

Acute rejection

Infection (non-CMV)

Graft failure

Percentage of deaths

40

30

20

COMPLICATIONS OF IMMUNOSUPPRESSION
Infection

Infection is also a leading cause of death in pediatric transplant
patients (Fig. 492.2). The incidence of infection is greatest in the
first 3 months after transplantation, when immunosuppressive
doses are highest. Viral infections are most common and account
for as many as 25% of infectious episodes. Cytomegalovirus (CMV)
infection was once a leading cause of morbidity and mortality and
may occur as a primary infection in patients without previous exposure to the virus or as a reactivation. Severe CMV infection can be
disseminated or associated with pneumonitis or gastroenteritis and
may provoke an episode of acute graft rejection or graft coronary
disease. Most centers use IV ganciclovir or CMV immune globulin (Cytogam), or both, as prophylaxis in any patient receiving a
heart from a donor who is positive for CMV or in any recipient who
has serologic evidence of previous CMV disease. Oral preparations
of ganciclovir with improved absorption profiles are available for
chronic therapy, usually for 3-­6 months after transplant, and have
largely replaced IV preparations for prophylaxis. These regimens
have significantly reduced the burden of CMV disease in heart
transplant patients. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) enhances
the ability to diagnose CMV infection and monitor the efficacy of
therapy serially.
Most normal childhood viral illnesses are well tolerated and do
not usually require special treatment. Otitis media and routine
upper respiratory tract infections can be treated in the outpatient
setting, although fever or symptoms that last beyond the usual
course require further investigation. Gastroenteritis, especially
with vomiting, can result in greatly reduced absorption of immunosuppressive medications and provoke a rejection episode. In this
setting, drug levels should be closely monitored and use of IV medications considered. Gastroenteritis can also be a sign of rejection,
so a high index of suspicion must always be maintained. Varicella
is another childhood illness of concern for immunosuppressed
patients. If a heart transplant recipient acquires clinical varicella
infection, treatment with IV acyclovir usually attenuates the illness.
Bacterial infections occur next in frequency after viral, with the lung
the most common site of infection, followed by blood, urinary tract,
and less often, the sternotomy site. Other sources of posttransplantation
infection include fungi and protozoa. Many centers use trimethoprim-­
sulfamethoxazole for prophylaxis during the first several months after
transplant to prevent Pneumocystis jiroveci infection.

Growth Stunting

10

0

damage. Antibody-­mediated rejection is less responsive to standard
therapies for acute cellular rejection (e.g., bolus corticosteroids) and
has been treated with plasmapheresis, intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG), the anti–CD20 monoclonal antibody rituximab, and
the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib, all with mixed results. The
long-­term outcome of patients with persistent DSAs or antibody-­
mediated rejection is poor, with many having early graft failure and
premature development of graft vasculopathy.

0-30 Days
(N = 256)

31 Days 1 Year
(N = 297)

>1 Year 3 Years
(N = 236)

>3 Years 5 Years
(N = 204)

>5 Years 10 Years
(N = 366)

>10 Years
(N = 408)

Fig. 492.2 Major causes of death after pediatric heart transplantation by time since transplant. CAV, Cardiac allograft vasculopathy; CMV,
cytomegalovirus. (From Rossano JW, Dipchand AI, Edwards LB, et al.
The Registry of the International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation: Nineteenth Pediatric Heart Transplantation Report—2016. Focus theme: primary diagnostic indications for transplant. J Heart Lung
Transplant. 2016;35[10]:1185–1195, Fig. 10.)

Patients requiring chronic corticosteroid therapy usually have
decreased linear growth. Thus many pediatric transplant programs
aim for steroid-­free immunosuppression within the first year after
transplant. In patients who experience rejection when steroids
are withdrawn, alternate-­day corticosteroid regimens may result
in improved linear growth. Total lymphoid irradiation has also
shown promise as a steroid-­sparing protocol. Despite these concerns, the majority of long-­term survivors of pediatric heart transplantation have normal growth.

Hypertension

Hypertension is common in patients treated with CNIs, caused by a combination of plasma volume expansion and defective renal sodium excretion. Corticosteroids usually potentiate calcineurin-­induced hypertension.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 492 u Pediatric Heart and Heart-­Lung Transplantation 2905
Renal Function

Chronic administration of cyclosporine or tacrolimus can lead to a
tubulointerstitial nephropathy in adults, but severe renal dysfunction is less common in children. Most pediatric patients gradually
have an increase in serum creatinine in the first year after transplantation; if renal dysfunction occurs, it usually responds to a
decrease in CNI dosage. The addition of sirolimus, an mTOR inhibitor, allows a reduction in CNI dose in patients with renal dysfunction, although it is unclear whether this strategy leads to long-­term
improved renal function. Infection with BK virus, a growing problem in renal transplant patients, has been described as a source of
renal dysfunction in heart transplant patients. Fortunately, pediatric heart transplant patients infrequently require dialysis or renal
transplantation.

Neurologic Complications

Neurologic side effects of cyclosporine and tacrolimus include tremor,
myalgias, paresthesias, and, rarely, seizures. These complications can
be treated with reduced doses of medication and occasionally with oral
magnesium supplementation. A rare form of encephalopathy known as
posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES) can occur in
patients taking CNIs (cyclosporine or tacrolimus). PRES presents with
hypertension, headaches, and seizures, requires MRI for diagnosis, and
is usually managed by changing CNI or, in rare cases, eliminating CNIs
totally in favor of other immunosuppressive agents (e.g., sirolimus,
MMF).

Tumors

One of the serious complications limiting long-­term survival in
pediatric heart transplant patients is the risk of neoplastic disease.
The most common is posttransplant lymphoproliferative disease
(PTLD), a condition associated with Epstein-­
Barr virus (EBV)
infection. Patients who are EBV seronegative at transplant (usually infants and young children) are at increased risk of developing
PTLD if they subsequently seroconvert, acquiring the virus either
from the donor organ or from primary infection. Unlike true cancer, many cases of PTLD respond to a reduction in immunosuppression. A monoclonal antibody directed against the CD20 antigen
on activated lymphocytes (rituximab), in conjunction with steroids
and cyclophosphamide therapy, has been effective against some
forms of PTLD. However, PTLD can behave more aggressively, and
many patients eventually require chemotherapy. An increased risk
of skin cancer requires that children use appropriate precautions
when exposed to sunlight.

Cardiac Allograft Vasculopathy

Cardiac allograft vasculopathy (CAV) is a disease of the coronary
arteries that occurs in approximately 20% of children 5 years after
transplant. The cause is still unclear, although it is thought to be a
form of immunologically mediated vessel injury. Multiple factors,
including rejection episodes, infections, hypercholesterolemia,
and hyperglycemia, are thought to increase the risk of CAV. Unlike
native coronary atherosclerosis, CAV is a diffuse process with a high
degree of distal vessel involvement. Because the transplanted heart
has been denervated, patients may not experience symptoms such
as angina pectoris during ischemic episodes, and the initial manifestation may be cardiovascular collapse or sudden death. Most centers perform coronary angiography annually to screen for coronary
abnormalities; some also perform coronary intravascular ultrasound
in larger children and adolescents. Standard coronary artery bypass
procedures are usually not helpful because of the diffuse nature of
the process, although transcatheter stenting can sometimes be effective for isolated lesions. For patients with severe CAV, repeat heart
transplantation has been the only effective treatment. Thus prevention has been the focus of most current research. The cell-­c ycle

inhibitors sirolimus and everolimus have been shown to decrease
coronary arterial intimal thickening in adult transplant patients.
Cholesterol-­lowering HMG-­C oA (3-­hydroxy-­3-­methyl-­coenzyme
A) reductase inhibitors (e.g., pravastatin, atorvastatin) have been
associated with a lower risk of CAV.

Other Complications

Corticosteroids usually result in cushingoid facies, steroid acne, and
striae. Cyclosporine can cause a subtle change in facial features, such
as hypertrichosis and gingival hyperplasia. These cosmetic features
can be particularly disturbing to adolescents and may be the motivation for noncompliance, one of the leading risks for late morbidity and
mortality. Most of these cosmetic complications are dose related and
improve as immunosuppressive medications are weaned. Tacrolimus
does not have the cosmetic side effects of cyclosporine. Osteoporosis
and aseptic necrosis are additional reasons for reducing the steroid
dosage as soon as possible. Diabetes and pancreatitis are rare but serious complications.

Rehabilitation

Despite the potential risks of immunosuppression, the prospect
for rehabilitation in pediatric heart transplant recipients is excellent; most have no functional limitations in their daily lives. They
can attend daycare or school and participate in competitive sports
and other age-­appropriate activities. Standardized measurements of
ventricular function are close to normal. Because the transplanted
heart is denervated, the increase in heart rate and cardiac output
during exercise is slower in transplant recipients, and maximal
heart rate and cardiac output responses are mildly attenuated. These
subtle abnormalities are rarely noticeable by the patient.
Growth of the transplanted heart is excellent, although a mild
degree of ventricular hypertrophy is often seen, even years after
transplantation. The sites of atrial and great vessel anastomoses
usually grow without the development of obstruction. In neonates
who undergo transplantation for HLHS, however, juxtaductal aortic
coarctation may recur.
A serious problem with noncompliance may occur once patients
reach adolescence, and life-­threatening rejection may result. Early
intervention by social workers, counselors, and psychologists may be
able to reduce this risk.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

492.2 Heart-­Lung and Lung Transplantation
Samuel B. Goldfarb, Danielle S. Burstein, and
Joseph W. Rossano
More than 700 heart-­lung and 2,500 lung (single or double) pediatric transplants have been performed and reported to ISHLT, with
>100 procedures performed annually. The majority of these are lung
transplantation, with only three heart-­lung transplants reported in
2017. Only 16 heart-lung transplants have been performed in the
United States in the past 5 years compared to over 140 lung transplants during this same time frame. Primary indications for lung
transplantation include cystic fibrosis, pulmonary hypertension,
interstitial lung disease, surfactant deficiencies, and retransplant.
Indications for heart-­lung transplant include complex CHD along
with either pulmonary parenchymal or vascular disease. Patients
with normal hearts are candidates for lung transplantation even
in the setting of right ventricular dysfunction. This had led to the
marked decline in heart-­lung transplant procedures in the current
era. In some patients with CHD, double-­lung transplantation can
be performed in combination with repair of intracardiac defects.
Patients with cystic fibrosis are not candidates for single-­lung grafts

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2906 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
because of the risk of infection from the diseased contralateral lung.
Patients are selected according to many of the same criteria as for
heart transplant recipients (see Chapter 492.1).
Posttransplant immunosuppression is usually achieved with a
triple-­drug regimen, combining a CNI (cyclosporine or tacrolimus)
with an antiproliferative agent (MMF or azathioprine) and prednisone. Most patients receive induction therapy with an antithymocyte or anti–T-­cell preparation. Unlike patients with isolated heart
transplants, patients with lung or heart-­lung transplants cannot be
weaned totally off steroids. Prophylaxis against P. jiroveci infection
is achieved with trimethoprim-­
sulfamethoxazole or aerosolized
pentamidine. Ganciclovir and CMV immune globulin prophylaxis
are used as in heart transplant recipients (see Chapter 492.1). Antifungal medications are used in the perioperative and posttransplant
periods in patients who have pretransplant colonization.
Pulmonary rejection is common in lung or heart-­lung transplant recipients, whereas heart rejection is encountered much less
often than in patients with isolated heart transplants. Acute cellular rejection (ACR) occurs in approximately 10–30% of patients
in the first year after transplant depending on the recipient’s age.
Younger recipients have a lower incidence of ACR. Antibody-­
mediated rejection (AMR) and chronic lung allograph dysfunction
(CLAD) are other forms of rejection. Symptoms of lung rejection
may include fever and fatigue, although many episodes are minimally symptomatic. Signs of rejection could include changes in lung
function testing and radiographic findings. Surveillance for acute
rejection is performed by monitoring pulmonary function (forced
vital capacity; forced expiratory volume in 1 second [FEV1]; forced
expiratory flow, midexpiratory phase [FEF25–75%]), systemic arterial
oxygen tension, chest radiographs, chest CT, transbronchial biopsy,
and open lung biopsy. The gold standard for ACR is tissue diagnosis, generally performed with transbronchial biopsies. AMR is
diagnosed based on findings of donor-­specific antibodies and tissue biopsy often associated with graft dysfunction. CLAD is a form
of chronic rejection. It can present as an obstructive lung disease in
the form of obliterative bronchiolitis. CLAD can also present with
significant pulmonary fibrosis in the form of restrictive allograft
dysfunction (RAD). In heart-­lung transplant recipients, hearts are
assessed for rejection similar to the approach described in Chapter
492.1.
Actuarial survival rates after lung or heart-­lung transplantation
in children are currently 75–80% at 1 year and 50% at 5 years after
transplant; improved patient selection and postoperative management are continually improving these survival statistics from prior
eras. In the analysis of survival at 5 years conditional on survival
at 12 months, rates significantly improve for both lung and heartlung regardless of underlying condition. One year conditional survival rates at 5 years for both are roughly 70%. Some groups, such
as patients with CHD in the absence of Eisenmenger syndrome,
have particularly poor outcomes with transplant. Graft failure
and infection are the leading cause of early death, whereas a form
of chronic rejection in the form of CLAD or RAD accounts for
almost 50% of cases of late mortality. Other causes of early morbidity and mortality include technical complications, multiorgan failure, primary graft dysfunction, and cardiovascular causes.
Additional late complications include the development of late graft
failure, malignancies, infection, and other side effects of chronic
immunosuppression.
Postoperative indices of cardiopulmonary function and exercise
capacity show significant improvement. Problems of donor availability
are even more severe with lung transplantation than with isolated heart
transplantation. However, significant advances in ex vivo lung perfusion have great potential to expand the number of organs available for
transplantation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Section 8

Diseases of the Peripheral
Vascular System
Chapter 493

Diseases of the Blood
Vessels (Aneurysms and
Fistulas)
493.1 Aneurysms
Daniel Bernstein
See also Chapter 208.
Aneurysms of the coronaries and occasionally the systemic arteries
may complicate Kawasaki disease and are the leading cause of morbidity in this disease (Figs. 493.1 and 493.2). Persistent moderate to
large aneurysms carry several risks: embolism and thromboembolism
(a clot developing in the aneurysm because of stagnant blood flow and
obstructing flow and/or breaking off and traveling more distally down
the coronary, resulting in myocardial ischemia/infarction) and stenosis
(the distal end of the aneurysm tends to become narrowed over time,
limiting downstream coronary blood flow). Management includes
anticoagulation to prevent thrombosis and β blockers to reduce myocardial oxygen requirements (see Chapter 210).
COVID-­19–associated multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-­C) typically occurs a few weeks after active SARS-­CoV-­2 infection and can cause coronary artery dilation and aneurysms, in addition to
other significant cardiac manifestations (ventricular dysfunction, arrhythmias, and conduction abnormalities; see Chapters 311 and 449.1).
Other than in Kawasaki disease and MIS-­C, aneurysms are not common in children and occur most frequently in the aorta in association
with coarctation of the aorta, patent ductus arteriosus, Ehlers-­Danlos
syndrome type IV (vascular ecchymotic form), hyper-­IgE syndrome,
Marfan syndrome, and the four forms of Loeys-­Dietz syndrome (see
Chapter 641). Aneurysms may be seen in the arterial tortuosity syndrome and the multisystem smooth muscle dysfunction syndrome
(MSMDS) (see Chapter 493.4). MSMDS is characterized by congenital mydriasis, patent ductus arteriosus, aortic and other arterial
aneurysms, as well as moyamoya-like cerebrovascular disease and pulmonary hypertension. The affected gene is ACTA2. Aneurysms may
also occur secondary to an infected embolus; infection contiguous to
a blood vessel; trauma; congenital abnormalities of vessel structure,
especially the medial wall; and arteritis, including polyarteritis nodosa,
Behçet syndrome, and Takayasu arteritis (see Chapter 210.2).

493.2 Arteriovenous Fistulas
Daniel Bernstein
Arteriovenous fistulas may be limited and small or may be large and
extensive, producing systemic complications (see Chapters 554 and
691). The most common sites in infants and children are within the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 493 u Diseases of the Blood Vessels (Aneurysms and Fistulas)

2907

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Ao

A

B
Fig. 493.1 Two-­dimensional echocardiograms comparing a normal left

main coronary artery (arrow in A) with a giant coronary artery aneurysm
(outlined by cross marks in B) in a patient with Kawasaki disease. Ao, Aorta.

Ao

Fig. 493.2 Pathologic specimen showing giant aneurysm of left main
coronary artery (arrow). Ao, Ascending aorta.

cranium, in the liver, in the lung, in the extremities, and in vessels
in or near the thoracic wall. These fistulas, although usually congenital, may follow trauma or may be a manifestation of hereditary
hemorrhagic telangiectasia (Osler-­Weber-­Rendu disease). Femoral
arteriovenous fistulas are a rare complication of percutaneous femoral catheterization.

Clinical symptoms occur only in association with large arteriovenous communications when arterial blood flows into a low-­
pressure venous system without the resistance of the capillary bed;
local venous pressure is increased, and arterial flow distal to the
fistula is decreased. Systemic arterial resistance falls because of the
runoff of blood through the fistula. Compensatory mechanisms
include tachycardia and increased stroke volume so that cardiac
output rises. Total blood volume is also increased. In large fistulas,
left ventricular dilation, a widened pulse pressure, and high-­output
heart failure can occur. CT, MRI, or injection of contrast material
into an artery proximal to the fistula confirms the diagnosis.
Large intracranial arteriovenous fistulas most often occur in
newborn infants in association with a vein of Galen malformation.
The large intracranial left-­to-­right shunt results in heart failure secondary to the demand for high cardiac output. Patients with smaller
communications may not have cardiovascular manifestations but
may later be disposed to hydrocephalus (see Chapter 631.9) or seizures. The diagnosis can often be made by auscultation of a continuous murmur over the cranium. Older children with more diffuse
intracranial arteriovenous malformations may be recognized on the
basis of intracranial calcification and high cardiac output without
cardiac failure.
Coronary arteriovenous fistulas can develop between a coronary
artery and any of the cardiac chambers (coronary cameral fistula)
or great vessels. These fistulas can result in steal of blood away from
the heart muscle downstream of the fistula resulting in ischemia
and, in rare cases, can even cause obstruction of ventricular inflow
caused by physical interference with atrioventricular valve function.
Hepatic arteriovenous fistulas may be generalized or localized in
the liver and may be hemangioendotheliomas or cavernous hemangiomas. The fistula may be located between the hepatic artery and the
ductus venosus or portal vein. Congenital hemorrhagic telangiectasia
may also be present. Large arteriovenous fistulas are associated with
increased cardiac output and heart failure. Hepatomegaly is usual, and
systolic or continuous murmurs may be audible over the liver.
Peripheral arteriovenous fistulas generally involve the extremities and can be associated with disfigurement, swelling of the
extremity, and visible hemangiomas. Their presence can be complicated by breathing difficulties if located near the upper airways and
causing obstruction. Because only a small minority results in large
arterial runoff, cardiac failure is uncommon.

TREATMENT

Medical management of heart failure is initially helpful in neonates
with these conditions; with time, the size of the shunt may diminish and symptoms spontaneously regress. Hemangiomas of the liver
often eventually disappear completely. Large liver hemangiomas
have been treated with corticosteroids, β blockers, ε-­aminocaproic
acid, interferon, local compression, embolization, or local irradiation; the beneficial effects of these management options are
not firmly established because individual patients display marked
variation in clinical course without treatment. Transcatheter closure is becoming the treatment of choice for many patients with a
symptomatic arteriovenous fistula. Embolic agents that have been
used include detachable balloons, steel (Gianturco) coils, plugs, and
liquid tissue adhesives (cyanoacrylate). Often, multiple procedures
are necessary before flow is significantly reduced. Gamma knife
radiosurgery has been used successfully in patients with cerebral
arteriovenous malformations. Surgical removal of a large fistula
may be attempted in patients with severe cardiac failure and lack
of improvement with medical treatment. Surgical treatment may be
contraindicated or unsuccessful when the lesion is extensive and
diffuse or is located in a position where adjoining tissue may be
injured during the surgery or related procedures. β-­Adrenergic
blockers such as propranolol have dramatically changed the treatment for cutaneous hemangiomas, with excellent results.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2908 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

Fig. 493.3 Lateral radiograph of the neonate showing calcification of
the descending aorta and its bifurcation (arrows). (From Karthikeyan G.
Generalized arterial calcification of infancy. J Pediatr. 2013;162:1074,
Fig 3.)

calcification of muscular arteries with fibrotic myointimal proliferation and subsequent vascular stenosis leading to tissue ischemia, poor function, or infarction. Diffuse arterial calcification
may begin in utero, leading to hydrops fetalis; in the neonate,
diffuse arterial calcification leads to respiratory distress and heart
failure or myocardial infarction (coronary, pulmonary arteries),
hypertension (renal arteries), and poor femoral pulses (aorta, femoral arteries).
Pathogenic variants in the ectonucleotide pyrophosphatase 1 gene
(ENPP1) are noted in 75% of patients. Serum calcium, phosphate, and
alkaline phosphatase levels are normal; the vascular calcification may
be seen on plain x-­ray films (Fig. 493.3), ultrasonography (Fig. 493.4),
or CT scans (Fig. 493.5), which may reveal calcifications not visible on
plain films.
A subset of patients with GACI have monoallelic or biallelic
pathogenic variants in the adenosine triphosphate–binding cassette subfamily C number 6 gene (ABCC6), which is responsible for
pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE). PXE, an autosomal recessive
disorder, is classically associated with a later onset of ectopic mineralization of elastic fibers in the skin, eyes, joints, and arteries. In
addition, some surviving infants with ENPP1 variant develop PXE
symptoms involving the skin and retina (angioid streaking).
Infants with GACI have been treated with bisphosphonates
with variable success. In addition, some survivors with the ENPP1
variant have developed hypophosphatemic-­
hyperphosphaturic
rickets.
In the absence of stroke or encephalomalacia, most survivors
are developmentally normal. In some survivors the vascular calcification resolves and is replaced by fibrosis. The differential diagnosis
includes Singleton-­Merten syndrome (aortic calcification, dental
anomalies, osteopenia), hypervitaminosis D, hyperparathyroidism, congenital syphilis (aortitis), twin-­twin transfusion syndrome
(recipient), and idiopathic iliac artery calcification of infancy.

ARTERIAL CALCIFICATIONS CAUSED BY
DEFICIENCY OF CD73

This rare autosomal recessive disorder, caused by pathogenic variants
in the 5-­exonucleotidase CD73 (NT5E), results in joint and arterial
(lower-­extremity) calcification in adults. Patients present with intermittent claudication and joint pain. Onset is probably before adulthood, since patients may be undiagnosed with nonspecific findings
during adolescence.

493.4 Arterial Tortuosity
Robert M. Kliegman
Fig. 493.4 Ultrasonography of abdominal aorta showing calcification
of descending aorta and its branches (arrows). (From Karthikeyan G. Generalized arterial calcification of infancy. J Pediatr. 2013;162:1074, Fig. 1.)

493.3 Generalized Arterial Calcification of
Infancy (Idiopathic Infantile Arterial
Calcification)
Robert M. Kliegman
Generalized arterial calcification of infancy (GACI) is a rare
and often lethal autosomal recessive disorder characterized by

Arterial tortuosity may be seen in many different diseases and genes
(Table 493.1). These disorders are usually recognized by their phenotype, and all may present during childhood. Tortuosity is best
defined by magnetic resonance angiography (Fig. 493.6). When
present, it often increases the risk for early cardiovascular morbidity for patients with Marfan or Loeys-­Dietz syndrome.
Arterial tortuosity syndrome is another genetic arteriopathy
caused by pathogenic variants in the SCL2A10 gene. It has many features of other connective tissue diseases, including hyperextensible
and soft velvety skin, high-­arched palate, micrognathia, abdominal
hernias, and joint hypermobility. The prognosis for patients with
arterial tortuosity syndrome is quite variable, but the presence of
vascular stenosis is associated with a poorer prognosis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 493 u Diseases of the Blood Vessels (Aneurysms and Fistulas)

2909

SCA
ITA
ETT

MPA
LM

LtPA

RtPA

LtPA

RCA

AA

CA

SA

LtRA

LtRA
SMA

Rt
CIA

SMA
CIA

LtCIA
EIA

Fig. 493.5 Coronal maximum intensity projection (MIP) CT scans demonstrate an endotracheal tube (ETT) and extensive vascular calcifications.
PA, Pulmonary artery; SA, splenic artery; RA, renal artery; CIA, common iliac artery; BA, brachial artery; CA, celiac axis; SMA, superior mesenteric
artery; SCA, subclavian artery. (From Bolster F, Ali Z, Southall P, et al. Generalized arterial calcification of infancy—findings at post-­mortem computed
tomography and autopsy. Forensic Sci Int. 2015;254:e7–e12, Fig 3.)

Table 493.1  Genetic Disorders Associated with Aortic
Disease and Arterial Tortuosity
GENE

DISORDER

TGFBR1

Loeys-­Dietz syndrome, FTAAD

TGFBR2

Loeys-­Dietz syndrome, FTAAD

FBN1

Marfan syndrome

SMAD3

Osteoarthritis-­aneurysm
syndrome, FTAAD

SLC2A10

Arterial tortuosity syndrome

TGFB2

FTAAD

PRKG1

FTAAD

FBLN4/EFEMP2

Cutis laxa

ATP7A

Occipital horn syndrome,
Menkes syndrome

Monosomy X/mosaic monosomy
X

Turner syndrome

FTAAD

Familial aortic aneurysm and
dissection

ACTA2

Multisystem smooth muscle
dysfunction syndrome

A

B

Fig. 493.6 Examples of vertebral artery tortuosity in Marfan syndrome
with FBN1 pathogenic variant (A) and Loeys-­Dietz syndrome with a
TGFBR2 mutation (B). (From Morris SA. Arterial tortuosity in genetic
arteriopathies. Curr Opin Cardiol. 2015;30:587–593, Fig 1.)

FTAAD, Familial thoracic aortic aneurysm and dissection.
Adapted from Morris SA. Arterial tortuosity in genetic arteriopathies. Curr Opin Cardiol.
2015;30:587–590, Table 1, p. 590.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2910 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

Chapter 494

Systemic Hypertension
Ian R. Macumber and Joseph T. Flynn
Hypertensive children, although frequently asymptomatic, already
may manifest evidence of target organ damage. Up to 40% of hypertensive children have left ventricular hypertrophy, and hypertensive children have increased carotid intima-­to-­media thickness, a
marker of early atherosclerosis. Primary (essential) hypertension
occurring during childhood often continues into adulthood. Children with blood pressure (BP) >90th percentile exhibit a 2.4-­fold
greater risk of having hypertension as adults. Similarly, almost half
of hypertensive adults had a BP >90th percentile as children. Adolescent hypertension is also an independent predictor of both end-­
stage kidney disease and left ventricular dysfunction in middle-­age
males.

PREVALENCE OF HYPERTENSION IN CHILDREN

In infants and young children, systemic hypertension is uncommon, with a prevalence of <1%, but, when present, often indicates an underlying disease process (secondary hypertension).
Severe and symptomatic hypertension in children is usually caused
by secondary hypertension. In contrast, the prevalence of primary
hypertension, mostly in older school-­age children and adolescents,
has increased in prevalence in parallel with the obesity epidemic.
Estimates are variable, but data from the U.S. National Health and
Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) show that approximately
9% of American youth have elevated BP and 3–4% have hypertension. A meta-­analysis suggests a similar worldwide prevalence of
hypertension in children. The normative data from the 2017 American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) clinical practice guidelines have
resulted in an overall trend of increased hypertension prevalence.
The influence of obesity on elevated BP is evident in children as
young as 2-­5 years old. Approximately 20% of American youth have
obesity, and up to 10% of these have hypertension.

DEFINITION OF HYPERTENSION

Normal BP in adults is <120/80 mm Hg. Elevated blood pressure is
considered systolic BP of 120-­129 and diastolic BP <80 mm Hg. Stage
1 hypertension is systolic 130-­139 or diastolic 80-­89 mm Hg; Stage 2
hypertension is systolic ≥140 or diastolic ≥90 mm Hg. This definition
is based on potential outcomes because it relates degree of BP elevation with significant likelihood of subsequent cardiovascular events.
Because hypertension-­
associated cardiovascular events (e.g., myocardial infarction, stroke) occur rarely in childhood, the definition of
hypertension in children is statistical and based on the distribution
of BP in healthy children, not outcomes. The AAP clinical practice
guideline on childhood hypertension maintains the same statistical
approach to defining and categorizing childhood BP as in previous guidelines from the National High Blood Pressure Education
Program (NHBPEP):
• Normal BP: BP <90th percentile for age, sex, and height or <120/<80
(systolic/diastolic) mm Hg for adolescents ≥13 years old
• Elevated BP: BP reading ≥90th percentile and <95th percentile for
age, sex, and height or 120-­129/<80 mm Hg for adolescents ≥13
years old
• Hypertension: BP >95th percentile for age, sex, and height or
≥130/80 mm Hg for adolescents ≥13 years old. Hypertensive-­level
BP is further staged as follows:
Stage 1 hypertension: BP >95th percentile for age, sex, and height
up to the 95th percentile + 11 mm Hg or 130-­139/80-­89 mm Hg
for adolescents ≥13 years of age
Stage 2 hypertension: BP ≥95th percentile + 12 mm Hg for age, sex,
and height or >140/90 mm Hg for adolescents ≥13 years of age

The BP cut-­points for adolescents ≥13 years old and use of the
term elevated BP instead of prehypertension were chosen to align
with revised BP cut-­points and terminology found in the American
Heart Association/American College of Cardiology (AHA/ACC)
guideline for adult hypertension. The European Society of Hypertension (ESH) pediatric BP guideline also suggested that an absolute BP cutoff be used for adolescents age 16 and older, rather than
using BP percentiles. For these older adolescents, the ESH guidelines define high-­normal BP as 130-­139/85-­89 mm Hg and hypertension as ≥140/90 mm Hg.
The AAP guideline* also contains tables of normative BP values
for children and adolescents based on a reanalysis of the NHBPEP
database, removing all overweight and obese children. This revision
results in BP values that are 2-­3 mm Hg lower than the corresponding BP values in the 2004 NHBPEP Fourth Report, illustrating the
impact of the childhood obesity epidemic on BP in young persons.
The AAP guideline also contains a simplified table of BP values that
may require further evaluation, which should be useful for screening (Table 494.1).

BLOOD PRESSURE MEASUREMENT IN CHILDREN

The AAP guideline recommends that children 3 years or older
should have their BP measured during annual preventive visits,
unless the child has risk factors such as obesity, chronic kidney disease (CKD), or diabetes, in whom it should be checked at every
healthcare encounter. In contrast, the ESH pediatric guideline recommends checking BP at every healthcare encounter for all children >3 years old. Selected children <3 years old should also have
their BP measured, including those with a history of prematurity,
congenital heart disease, kidney disease, solid-­organ transplant,
cancer, treatment with drugs known to raise BP, other illnesses
associated with hypertension (e.g., neurofibromatosis, tuberous
sclerosis), or evidence of increased intracranial pressure. The preferred method is by auscultation using a sphygmomanometer (BP)
with a cuff appropriate for the size of the child’s arm.
Elevated readings should be confirmed on repeat visits before
determining that a child is hypertensive. The BP should be measured with the child in the seated position after a period of quiet for
at least 5 minutes, and it is recommended that the BP be checked
3 times, averaging the results. Careful attention to cuff size is necessary to avoid overdiagnosis, because a cuff that is too short or
narrow artificially increases BP readings. An appropriate-­sized cuff
has an inflatable bladder whose length covers 80–100% of the upper
arm circumference (measured midway between the acromion process and olecranon) and whose width is at least 40% of the arm
circumference. A wide variety of cuff sizes should be available in
any medical office where children are routinely seen.
Systolic blood pressure (SBP) is indicated by appearance of the first
Korotkoff sound. Diastolic blood pressure (DBP) has been defined by
consensus as the fifth Korotkoff sound, unless the Korotkoff sounds can
be heard down to 0 mm Hg, in which case the fourth Korotkoff sound
should be reported as the DBP. Palpation is useful for rapid assessment
of SBP, although the palpated BP is generally about 10 mm Hg lower
than that obtained by auscultation. Oscillometric techniques are used
frequently in infants and young children, but they are susceptible to
artifacts and are best for measuring mean arterial pressure (MAP). In
addition, different devices use different proprietary algorithms to back-­
calculate SBP and DBP from the MAP, making comparison between
devices difficult.

Ambulatory Blood Pressure Monitoring

Ambulatory blood pressure monitoring (ABPM) is frequently
used as a tool to assess pediatric hypertension. The patient wears a
device that records BP every 20-­30 minutes throughout a 24-­hour
period, during usual daily activities, including sleep. This monitoring allows calculation of the mean daytime BP, sleep BP, and mean
* https://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article/140/3/e20171904/38358/ClinicalPractice-Guideline-for-Screening-and.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 494 u Systemic Hypertension
BP over 24 hours. The physician can also determine the proportion
of BP measurements that are in the hypertensive range (BP load)
and whether there is an appropriate decrease in BP during sleep
(nocturnal dip), generally considered normal if there is a decrease
in nocturnal BP of >10% from awake values. The cuff should be
placed on the patient’s nondominant arm. It is recommended that
the patient keep a journal of sleep and awake times, medication timing, and other events that may be relevant to BP readings. Clinicians
should only perform ABPM if they have had specific training in
performing and interpreting the results.
ABPM readings are more strongly correlated with target-­organ
damage in children than casual/office BP readings and are more
sensitive for a diagnosis of hypertension than either manual or
automated office blood pressures. The 2017 AAP guideline strongly
recommends that ABPM be performed on all patients with elevated
office readings to confirm the diagnosis of hypertension. In addition, ABPM is necessary to diagnose white coat hypertension
(elevated office BP but normal ambulatory BP) and masked hypertension (normal office BP but elevated ambulatory BP). It should
be noted that white coat hypertension is not a benign condition,
and children with white coat hypertension may be at increased risk
of developing sustained hypertension in the future. In adults, white
coat hypertension has been associated with higher all-­cause and
cardiovascular mortality compared to normotensive individuals.
ABPM is also a useful tool for evaluating effectiveness of antihypertensive therapy. ABPM is recommended to assess BP patterns
in high-­risk patient populations, such as children with CKD, solid-­
organ transplant, diabetes mellitus, and severe obesity.
ABPM is an extremely useful tool for evaluating and managing hypertension in appropriate patient populations, but it does
have limitations. Not every patient will tolerate APBM, including
younger children (although there are reports of successful ABPM
in toddlers 18 months old) and some children with developmental
delay. Nonetheless, it is usually feasible to perform ABPM in children ≥6-­7 years. The most accepted normative data come from the
German Working Group on Pediatric Hypertension. However, there
are concerns with this dataset: (1) it includes only Central European
White children and thus might not be generalizable to other ethnicities; (2) there were relatively few shorter children included, which

Table 494.1  Simplified Table of Screening Blood Pressure
Values (mm Hg) Requiring Further Evaluation
MALES
AGE (YR)

FEMALES

SYSTOLIC

DIASTOLIC

SYSTOLIC

DIASTOLIC

1

98

2

100

52

98

54

55

101

58

3

101

58

102

60

4

102

60

103

62

5

103

63

104

64

6

105

66

105

67

7

106

68

106

68

8

107

69

107

69

9

107

70

108

71

10

108

72

109

72

11

110

74

111

74

12

113

75

114

75

≥13

120

80

120

80

From Flynn JT, Kaelber DC, Baker-­Smith CM, et al. Clinical practice guideline for
screening and management of high blood pressure in children and adolescents.
Pediatrics. 2017;140(3):e20171904, Table 6.

2911

may limit its application to patients with chronic diseases such as
CKD; and (3) there was very little variability in DBP values, which
is not consistent with data from other BP measurement techniques
showing that DBP varies with both age and height.

ETIOLOGY AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

Blood pressure is the product of cardiac output (CO) and peripheral
vascular resistance (PVR). An increase in either CO or PVR results in
an increase in BP; if either of these factors increases while the other
decreases, BP may not increase. When hypertension is the result of
another disease process, it is referred to as secondary hypertension.
When no identifiable cause can be found, it is referred to as primary
hypertension.
Secondary hypertension is most common in infants and younger
children. It is most often caused by kidney abnormalities; additional
etiologies include cardiovascular disease and endocrinopathies.
Younger age, severely elevated BP, and symptomatic hypertension
make a secondary cause of hypertension more likely. Many childhood
diseases can be responsible for chronic hypertension (Table 494.2) or
acute/intermittent hypertension (Table 494.3). The most likely cause
varies with age. Hypertension in the premature infant is sometimes

Table 494.2  Conditions Associated with Chronic
Hypertension in Children
RENAL
Recurrent pyelonephritis/renal scarring
Chronic glomerulonephritis
Prematurity
Congenital dysplastic kidney
Polycystic kidney disease
Vesicoureteral reflux nephropathy
Segmental hypoplasia (Ask-­Upmark kidney)
Obstructive kidney disease
Renal tumors
Renal trauma
Systemic lupus erythematosus (other connective tissue diseases)
VASCULAR
Coarctation of thoracic or abdominal aorta
Renal artery lesions (stenosis, fibromuscular dysplasia, thrombosis,
aneurysm)
Umbilical artery catheterization with thrombus formation
Neurofibromatosis (intrinsic or extrinsic narrowing for vascular lumen)
Renal vein thrombosis
Vasculitis (ANCA associated, polyarteritis nodosa, Takayasu arteritis)
Arteriovenous shunt
Williams-­Beuren syndrome
Moyamoya disease
ENDOCRINE
Hyperthyroidism
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (11β-­hydroxylase and 17-­hydroxylase
defect)
Cushing syndrome
Primary hyperaldosteronism
Apparent mineralocorticoid excess
Glucocorticoid remedial aldosteronism (familial aldosteronism type 1)
Glucocorticoid resistance (Chrousos syndrome)
Pseudohypoaldosteronism type 2 (Gordon syndrome)
Pheochromocytoma
Other neural crest tumors (neuroblastoma, ganglioneuroblastoma,
ganglioneuroma)
Liddle syndrome
Geller syndrome
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
Intracranial mass
Hemorrhage
Residual after brain injury
Quadriplegia (dysautonomia)
Sleep disordered breathing
ANCA, Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2912 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 494.3  Conditions Associated with Transient or
Intermittent Hypertension in Children
RENAL
Acute postinfectious glomerulonephritis
Henoch-­Schönlein purpura with nephritis
Hemolytic-­uremic syndrome
Acute kidney injury
After renal transplantation (immediately and during episodes of
rejection)
Hypervolemia
Pyelonephritis
Renal trauma
Leukemic infiltration of the kidney
DRUGS AND POISONS
Cocaine
Oral contraceptives
Sympathomimetic agents
Amphetamines
Phencyclidine
Corticosteroids and adrenocorticotropic hormone
Cyclosporine, sirolimus, or tacrolimus treatment after transplantation
Licorice (glycyrrhizic acid)
Lead, mercury, cadmium, thallium
Antihypertensive withdrawal (clonidine, methyldopa, propranolol)
Vitamin D intoxication
Ma-­huang
CENTRAL AND AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM
Increased intracranial pressure
Guillain-­Barré syndrome
Burns
Familial dysautonomia
Stevens-­Johnson syndrome
Posterior fossa lesions
Porphyria
Poliomyelitis
Encephalitis
Spinal cord injury (autonomic storm)
MISCELLANEOUS
Preeclampsia
Pain, anxiety
Hypercalcemia
After coarctation repair
White blood cell transfusion
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation

associated with umbilical artery catheterization, renal artery thrombosis, or bronchopulmonary dysplasia. Hypertension during early
childhood may be caused by kidney disease, coarctation of the aorta,
endocrine disorders, or medications.
Kidney disease (e.g., acute or chronic glomerulonephritis, reflux
or obstructive nephropathy, hemolytic-­uremic syndrome, polycystic kidney disease, congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary
tract) and renovascular hypertension account for approximately
90% of children with secondary hypertension. Parenchymal kidney
disease and renal artery stenosis lead to water and sodium retention
thought to be, in part, secondary to increased renin secretion. Coarctation of the aorta must always be considered, even in adolescents.
Obstructive sleep apnea is associated with hypertension in children,
and patients with hypertension and symptoms of obstructive sleep
apnea (snoring, daytime somnolence, insomnia, pauses in breathing) should be referred for polysomnography. Several endocrinopathies are associated with hypertension, usually those involving the
thyroid, parathyroid, and adrenal glands. Systolic hypertension and
tachycardia are common in hyperthyroidism; DBP is not usually
elevated. Hypercalcemia, whether secondary to hyperparathyroidism or other causes, often results in mild elevation in BP because
of an increase in vascular tone. Adrenocortical disorders (e.g.,

aldosterone-­secreting tumors, sodium-­retaining congenital adrenal hyperplasia, Cushing syndrome) may produce hypertension in
patients with increased mineralocorticoid secretion. It is important
to consider conditions associated with real or apparent mineralocorticoid excess and thus a suppressed renin level (with or without
hypokalemia) form of secondary hypertension (Table 494.4 and Fig.
494.1). Pheochromocytomas are catecholamine-­secreting tumors
that give rise to hypertension because of the cardiac and peripheral vascular effects of epinephrine and norepinephrine. Children with pheochromocytoma usually have sustained rather than
the intermittent or exercise-­induced hypertension seen in adults.
Pheochromocytoma develops in approximately 5% of patients with
neurofibromatosis and can also be seen in certain genetic disorders
such as von Hippel-­Lindau disease. Rarely, secondary hypertension can be caused by pseudohyperaldosteronism, which leads to
elevated BP in the face of a suppressed renin level. Such disorders
include Liddle syndrome, apparent mineralocorticoid excess, and
glucocorticoid-­
remediable aldosteronism. Altered sympathetic
tone can be responsible for acute or intermittent elevation of BP in
children with Guillain-­Barré syndrome, poliomyelitis, burns, and
Stevens-­Johnson syndrome. Intracranial lesions also affect sympathetic outflow from the central nervous system.
A number of drugs of misuse, therapeutic agents, and toxins may cause hypertension (Table 494.5). Cocaine may provoke
a rapid increase in BP and can result in seizures or intracranial
hemorrhage. Phencyclidine causes transient hypertension that
may become persistent in chronic abusers. Tobacco use may also
increase BP. Sympathomimetic agents used as nasal decongestants,
appetite suppressants, and stimulants for attention-­deficit disorder
produce peripheral vasoconstriction and varying degrees of cardiac
stimulation. Individuals vary in their susceptibility to these effects.
Oral contraceptives should be suspected as a contributor to elevated
BP in adolescent girls, although the incidence is lower with the use
of low-­estrogen preparations. Immunosuppressant agents such as
cyclosporine and tacrolimus cause hypertension in organ transplant
recipients, and the effect is exacerbated by the coadministration of
corticosteroids. BP may be elevated in patients with poisoning by a
heavy metal (lead, cadmium, mercury).
In older school-­age children and adolescents, primary hypertension becomes increasingly common. These patients often are overweight, have a strong family history of hypertension, and have BP
values at, or only slightly above, the 95th percentile for age. Isolated
systolic hypertension is also more consistent with primary hypertension, whereas diastolic hypertension may suggest a secondary cause.
The cause of primary hypertension is likely to be multifactorial;
obesity, genetic alterations in calcium and sodium transport, vascular smooth muscle reactivity, the renin-­angiotensin-­aldosterone
system (RAAS), sympathetic nervous system overactivity, and
insulin resistance have been implicated in this disorder. Elevated
uric acid levels may play a role in the pathophysiology of primary
hypertension, and elevated uric acid levels have been associated
with higher SBP and DBP in children. Proof-­of-­concept studies
have confirmed that lowering of uric acid levels results in lower BP
in overweight youth with hypertension or prehypertension. Some
children and adolescents demonstrate salt-­sensitive hypertension.
This is more common in children with primary hypertension and
may be ameliorated by weight loss and sodium restriction.
Normotensive children of hypertensive parents may show abnormal
physiologic responses that are similar to those of their parents. When
subjected to stress or competitive tasks, the offspring of hypertensive
adults, as a group, respond with greater increases in heart rate and BP
than do children of normotensive parents. Similarly, some children of
hypertensive parents may excrete higher levels of urinary catecholamine metabolites or may respond to sodium loading with greater
weight gain and increases in BP than do those without a family history of hypertension. The abnormal responses in children with affected
parents tend to be greater in the Black population than among White
individuals.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 494 u Systemic Hypertension

2913

Table 494.4  Clinical Findings in Patients with Mineralocorticoid Excess
CONDITION

INVOLVED GENE

CLINICAL PRESENTATION

CAH: 11β-­hydroxylase deficiency

CYP11B1
(autosomal recessive)

Early growth spurt initially, then short adult stature,
advanced bone age, premature adrenarche, acne,
precocious puberty in males, amenorrhea/hirsutism/
virilism in females

CAH: 17α-­hydroxylase deficiency

CYP17A1
(autosomal recessive)

Pseudohermaphroditism (male), sexual infantilism (female)

Apparent mineralocorticoid excess

HSD11β; deficiency of 11β hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase
(autosomal recessive)

Growth stunting/short stature, nephrocalcinosis,
hypokalemia, low renin, hypoaldosteronism

Liddle syndrome

SCNN1A
SCNN1B
SCNN1G
(autosomal dominant)

Severe hypertension, hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis,
muscle weakness

Geller syndrome (exacerbated by
pregnancy)

GOF variant in mineralocorticoid receptor
gene NR3C2
(autosomal dominant)

Early onset of hypertension (before age 20 yr), exacerbated
in pregnancy: hypokalemia, low renin

Glucocorticoid remediable
aldosteronism (GRA) (familial
aldosteronism type 1)

Chimeric gene with ACTH responsive
promoter of 11β hydroxylase fused with
aldosterone synthase gene
(autosomal dominant)

Early onset of hypertension, presence of family history of
mortality or morbidity from early hemorrhagic stroke

Pseudohypoaldosteronism type 2
(Gordon syndrome)

WNK1
WNK4
KLHL3
CUL3
(autosomal dominant)

Short stature, hyperkalemic and hyperchloremic metabolic
acidosis, borderline blood pressure, low renin

Glucocorticoid resistance (children)
(Chrousos syndrome)

NR3C1
(autosomal dominant or sporadic)

Ambiguous genitalia, precocious puberty; women may have
androgen excess: acne, excessive hair, oligo/anovulation,
infertility

CAH, Congenital adrenal hyperplasia; GOF, gain of function.
Modified from Melcescu E, Phillips J, Moll G, et al. 11 Beta-­hydroxylase deficiency and other syndromes of mineralocorticoid excess as a rare cause of endocrine hypertension. Horm
Metab Res. 2012;44:867–878, Table 1.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Monogenic hypertension combined
with hypokalemia

Salt insensitive

Familial
pheochromocytoma
(KIF1B, SDHB, TMEM127,
VHL, GDNF, RET, SDHD,
MAX, SDHC, SDHA,
SDHAF2, NF1)

Salt sensitive

Low aldosterone

High aldosterone

Apparent mineralocorticoid
excess (HSD11B2)
11-hydroxylase deficiency
(CYP11B1)
17-hydroxylase deficiency
(CYP17A1)
Glucocorticoid resistance
(NR3C1)
Geller syndrome (NR3C2)
Liddle syndrome (SCNN1A,
SCNN1B, SCNN1G)

Familial
hyperaldosteronism-I
(CYP11B1/CYP11B2
hybrid gene)
Familial
hyperaldosteronism-II
(CLCN2)
Familial
hyperaldosteronism-III
(KCNJ5)
Familial
hyperaldosteronism-IV
(CACNA1H)

Fig. 494.1 Algorithm showing the overall categorization of mono-

genic hypertension combined with hypokalemia. Involved genes are
italicized and in parentheses. (From Lu YT, Fan P, Zhang D, et al. Overview of monogenic forms of hypertension combined with hypokalemia.
Frontiers Pediatr. 2021;8:Article 543309, Fig. 1.)

Children and adolescents with primary hypertension are usually
asymptomatic; the BP elevation is usually mild and is detected during a routine examination or evaluation before athletic participation.
These children may also be obese. Children with secondary hypertension can have BP elevations ranging from mild to severe. Unless
the BP has been sustained or is rising rapidly, hypertension does not
usually produce symptoms. Therefore clinical manifestations may
instead reflect the underlying disease process, such as growth failure
in children with CKD. Children and adolescents with acute severe
hypertension, in contrast, present with BP elevation well above stage
2 hypertension and severe symptoms that may represent acute target-­
organ injury.
Subclinical hypertensive target-­organ injury is a common clinical
manifestation in children with primary hypertension. Using echocardiography with pediatric normative data, left ventricular hypertrophy
is detected in up to 40% of hypertensive children. Other markers of
target-­organ damage that have been demonstrated in hypertensive
children include hypertensive retinopathy, increased carotid intima-­to-­
media thickness, and increased vascular stiffness. Studies have shown
that children with hypertension perform worse on tests of neurocognition than normotensive children and that these test results improve
with successful treatment of hypertension. Target-­
organ effects of
increased BP can be detected in adolescents even at BP levels below
what is currently considered hypertensive.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2914 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Documented hypertension

Table 494.5  Drugs That May Elevate Blood Pressure
CLASS

DRUG

Antiinflammatory agents

COX-­2 inhibitors (celecoxib)
NSAIDs (ibuprofen, ketorolac)

Corticosteroids

Prednisone
Hydrocortisone
Dexamethasone

CNS stimulants

ADHD medications
(methylphenidate,
atomoxetine)
Caffeine

Drugs of misuse

Amphetamines
Cocaine
MDMA
Phencyclidine
Tobacco

Estrogen-­and progesterone-­
containing agents

HRT
Oral contraceptives

Heavy metals

Cadmium
Lead
Mercury

Immunosuppressive agents

Cyclosporine
Sirolimus
Tacrolimus

Psychiatric agents

SNRI
SSRI
Tricyclic antidepressants

Supplements

Ephedra
Guarana
Ginseng
Licorice
St. John’s wort
Ma-­huang

Sympathomimetic agents

Appetite suppressants
Decongestants

COX-­2, Cyclooxygenase-­2; NSAID, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug; ADHD,
attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder; HRT, hormone replacement therapy; SNRI,
serotonin-­norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor; SSRI, selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitor.

DIAGNOSIS

The first step in diagnosing hypertension is recognition of elevated BP.
BP readings taken in the office should be compared to normative BP
tables (see 2017 AAP guidelines), indexed by height and sex, to ensure
that the patient is normotensive. Multiple studies have shown substantial underrecognition of hypertension in children and adolescents,
with less than half of elevated BP readings recognized, and even fewer
with appropriate follow-­up. This may be related to the complexity of
the normative tables, although other factors such as provider experience and the presence or absence of obesity have also been shown to
affect recognition of elevated BP readings. In addition to use of the
simplified screening table found in the 2017 AAP guideline (see Table
494.1), this issue could also be overcome by building alerts into the
electronic medical record. Elevated office BP readings should be confirmed using ABPM to identify children with white coat hypertension,
who may not require further evaluation. This may require referral to an
appropriate subspecialist.
Once the diagnosis of sustained hypertension is made, the evaluation
should be directed toward uncovering potential underlying causes of the
hypertension (Fig. 494.2), evaluating for comorbidities, and screening
for evidence of target-­organ damage. The extent of the evaluation for
underlying causes of hypertension depends on the type of hypertension that is suspected. An extensive evaluation may be necessary when
secondary hypertension is a strong consideration, such as in younger

Gradient between upper and
lower blood pressures
Yes

No

Coarctation
of aorta

Abnormal urinalysis
Yes

No

Predominant
white blood cells

Predominant
red blood cells

Reflux nephritis
Recurrent urinary
tract infections
Renal anomaly
(and infection)

Postinfectious
nephritis
Lupus nephritis
Henoch Schönlein
purpura
Nephrocalcinosis
Nephrolithiasis
Other nephritis
Renal vein
thrombosis
Thromboembolism
Tumor

Endocrine

Renovascular lesion

Essential hypertension

Fig. 494.2 Initial diagnostic algorithm in the evaluation of hypertension. (From Kliegman RM, Greenbaum LA, Lye PS, eds. Practical Strategies in Pediatric Diagnosis and Therapy, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2004, p. 222.)

children, or in older children with severe, symptomatic hypertension.
Alternatively, school-­age children and adolescents with overweight/
obesity and a family history of hypertension who have mild elevations
of BP may only need limited testing.
In all patients, a careful history and physical examination are warranted. Birth history should be documented to screen for prematurity
and other perinatal events that may affect later BP. A family history
for metabolic disease, kidney disease, early cardiovascular events, and
other forms of secondary hypertension should be obtained. Growth
parameters should be determined to detect evidence of chronic disease. BP should be obtained in all four extremities to detect coarctation (thoracic or abdominal) of the aorta. Table 494.6 identifies other
features of the physical examination that may provide evidence of an
underlying cause of hypertension. Unless the history and physical
examination suggest another cause, children with confirmed hypertension should have an evaluation to detect kidney disease, including
urinalysis, electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, and complete blood count. Standard renal ultrasound should be considered in
patients with a higher suspicion of secondary hypertension to assess
for discrepancies in kidney size, structural abnormalities, and other
potential causes of hypertension. Table 494.7 provides a more complete
list of studies to consider in the clinical evaluation of a child with confirmed hypertension. Measuring serum potassium is essential because
hypokalemia may be present in renovascular hypertension and many
monogenic forms of hypertension (including Liddle syndrome, glucocorticoid remedial aldosteronism, and apparent mineralocorticoid
excess), whereas hyperkalemia may be seen in Gordon syndrome (see
Fig. 494.1). Hypokalemia may also be seen with a pheochromocytoma.
Renovascular hypertension is often associated with other diseases but
may be isolated (Table 494.8). Magnetic resonance (MR) or computed
tomography (CT) angiography can reveal renal artery stenosis, but formal intraarterial angiography may be needed to detect intrarenal vascular stenoses (Fig. 494.3) and in infants and young children, in whom
noninvasive imaging techniques often are not helpful because of small
vessel size. Doppler renal ultrasonography is of similar limited utility

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 494 u Systemic Hypertension

2915

Table 494.6  Physical Examination Findings in Patients with Hypertension
PHYSICAL FINDINGS

POTENTIAL RELEVANCE

GENERAL
Pale mucous membranes, edema, growth retardation

Chronic renal disease

Elfin facies, upturned nose, short stature, cognitive impairment

Williams syndrome

Webbing of neck, low hairline, widespread nipples, wide carrying angle

Turner syndrome

Moon face, buffalo hump, hirsutism, truncal obesity, striae, acne

Cushing syndrome

HABITUS
Thinness

Pheochromocytoma, renal disease, hyperthyroidism

Virilization

Congenital adrenal hyperplasia

Rickets

Chronic renal disease

SKIN
Café-­au-­lait spots, neurofibromas

Neurofibromatosis, pheochromocytoma

Tubers, “ash-­leaf” spots

Tuberous sclerosis

Rashes

Systemic lupus erythematosus, vasculitis (Henoch-­Schönlein purpura),
impetigo with acute nephritis

Pallor, evanescent flushing, sweating

Pheochromocytoma

Needle tracks

Illicit drug use

Bruises, striae

Cushing syndrome

Acanthosis nigricans

Type 2 diabetes, insulin resistance

EYES
Extraocular muscle palsy

Nonspecific, chronic, severe

Fundal changes

Nonspecific, chronic, severe

Proptosis

Hyperthyroidism

HEAD AND NECK
Goiter

Thyroid disease

Adenotonsillar hypertrophy

Sleep-­disordered breathing

Webbed neck

Turner syndrome

CARDIOVASCULAR SIGNS
Absent of diminished femoral pulses, low leg pressure relative to arm
pressure

Aortic coarctation

Heart size, rate, rhythm; murmurs; respiratory difficulty, hepatomegaly

Aortic coarctation, congestive heart failure

Bruits over great vessels

Arteritis or arteriopathy

Rub

Pericardial effusion secondary to chronic renal disease

PULMONARY SIGNS
Pulmonary edema

Congestive heart failure, acute nephritis

Picture of bronchopulmonary dysplasia

Bronchopulmonary dysplasia–associated hypertension

ABDOMEN
Epigastric bruit

Primary renovascular disease or in association with Williams syndrome,
neurofibromatosis, fibromuscular dysplasia, or arteritis

Abdominal masses

Wilms tumor, neuroblastoma, pheochromocytoma, polycystic kidneys,
hydronephrosis, dysplastic kidneys

Jaundice

Alagille arteriohepatic dysplasia

NEUROLOGIC SIGNS
Neurologic deficits

Chronic or severe acute hypertension with stroke

Muscle weakness
GENITALIA
Ambiguous, virilized
SKELETAL
Short metacarpal (fourth, fifth) bones, short stature

Hyperaldosteronism, Liddle syndrome (hypokalemic low renin
hypertension)
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (11β-­or 17α-­hydroxylase deficiencies)
Autosomal dominant hypertension with brachydactyly (Bilginturan
disease)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2916 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 494.7  Clinical Evaluation of Confirmed Hypertension
STUDY OR PROCEDURE

PURPOSE

TARGET POPULATION

EVALUATION FOR IDENTIFIABLE CAUSES
History, including sleep history, family history,
risk factors, diet, and habits such as smoking
and drinking alcohol; physical examination

History and physical examination help focus
subsequent evaluation

All children with persistent BP ≥90th percentile

Blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, electrolytes,
urinalysis, and urine culture

R/O renal disease and chronic pyelonephritis,
mineralocorticoid excess states

All children with persistent BP ≥95th percentile

Complete blood count

R/O anemia, consistent with chronic renal
disease

All children with signs of chronic kidney
disease

Renal ultrasound

R/O renal scar, congenital anomaly, or
disparate renal size

All children with signs or symptoms concerning
for secondary cause of hypertension

Identify hyperlipidemia, identify metabolic
abnormalities

Overweight patients with BP at 90th to
94th percentile; all patients with BP ≥95th
percentile; family history of hypertension or
cardiovascular disease; child with chronic
renal disease

Drug screen

Identify substances that might cause
hypertension

History suggestive of possible contribution by
substances or drugs

Polysomnography

Identify sleep-­disordered breathing

History of loud, frequent snoring, or daytime
somnolence

EVALUATION FOR COMORBIDITY
Fasting lipid panel, fasting glucose

EVALUATION FOR TARGET-­ORGAN DAMAGE
Echocardiogram
Identify left ventricular hypertrophy and other
indications of cardiac involvement
Retinal exam

ADDITIONAL EVALUATION AS INDICATED
Ambulatory blood pressure monitoring
Renovascular imaging
Magnetic resonance or CT angiography

Patients with comorbid risk factors* and BP
90th to 94th percentile; all patients with BP
≥95th percentile

Identify retinal vascular changes

Patients with comorbid risk factors and BP
90th to 94th percentile; all patients with BP
≥95th percentile

Identify white coat hypertension, abnormal
diurnal BP pattern, BP load

All children with persistent BP ≥95th percentile

Identify renovascular disease

Young children with stage 1 hypertension
and any child or adolescent with stage 2
hypertension

Identify catecholamine-­mediated hypertension

Patients with signs and symptoms concerning
for pheochromocytoma

Arteriography: digital subtraction or classic
Plasma and urine catecholamines

*Comorbid risk factors also include diabetes mellitus and kidney disease.
R/O, Rule out.
From National High Blood Pressure Education Program Working Group on High Blood Pressure in Children and Adolescents. The fourth report on the diagnosis, evaluation, and
treatment of high blood pressure in children and adolescents. Pediatrics. 2004;114(2 Suppl 4th Report):562.

in children because of poor patient cooperation, imaging difficulties
related to obesity, and operator inexperience. Doppler renal ultrasonography has a sensitivity of approximately 60–65% in patients with
renovascular disease; specificity is 95%. CT angiography has a sensitivity and specificity of 88% and 81%, respectively, compared to 80% and
63% for MR angiography. Doppler ultrasonography is not recommended
when screening for renovascular hypertension in the 2017 AAP guideline
except in selected patients.
The presence of primary hypertension often clusters with other risk
factors. All hypertensive children should be screened for comorbidities
that may increase cardiovascular risk, including dyslipidemia and glucose intolerance. A nonfasting lipid panel is usually sufficient to screen
for dyslipidemia but should be followed up by a fasting panel if abnormal. Similarly, a random fasting glucose level may be obtained initially
but will need to be followed up with a fasting level if abnormal. In addition, a sleep history should be obtained in children with confirmed
hypertension to screen for sleep-­disordered breathing, an entity that

is associated with high BP, particularly in overweight children. Patients
with symptoms of sleep-­disordered breathing should be referred to a
sleep specialist for evaluation.
Left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) is the most common manifestation of target-­organ damage in hypertensive children. Left ventricular (LV) mass measurements should be indexed to height to
account for the effect of body size and body surface area (BSA).
LVH is defined as LV mass >51 g/m 2.7 in those 8 years of age and
older, or LV mass >115 g/BSA for boys and >95 g/BSA for females
<8 years of age. According to the 2017 AAP guideline, echocardiography should be obtained when treatment with antihypertensive
medications is being considered.

PREVENTION

Prevention of high BP may be viewed as part of the prevention of cardiovascular disease and stroke, the leading cause of death in adults in
the United States. Other risk factors for cardiovascular disease include

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 494 u Systemic Hypertension
Table 494.8  Causes of Renovascular Hypertension in
Children
Fibromuscular dysplasia
Syndromic causes
Neurofibromatosis type 1
Tuberous sclerosis
Williams syndrome
Marfan syndrome
Other syndromes
Vasculitis
Takayasu arteritis (disease)
Polyarteritis nodosa
Kawasaki disease
Other systemic vasculitides
Extrinsic compression
Neuroblastoma
Wilms tumor
Other tumors
Other causes
Radiation
Umbilical artery catheterization
Trauma
Congenital rubella syndrome
Transplant renal artery stenosis
From Tullus K, Brennan E, Hamilton G, et al. Renovascular hypertension in children.
Lancet. 2008;371:1453–1463, Panel 1.

Step 1

Begin with the recommended
initial dose of desired medication

Step 2

Increase dose until desired BP target
is reached, or maximum dose is reached

If BP control is not achieved:

If BP control is not achieved:
Add a second medication with
a complementary mechanism of action

Step 3

Proceed to highest recommended dose if necessary and desirable

If BP control is not achieved:
Step 4

Add a third
antihypertensive drug
of a different class

OR

Consult a physician
experienced in treating
childhood and adolescent
hypertension

Fig. 494.4 Stepped-­care approach to antihypertensive therapy in

children and adolescents. BP, Blood pressure. (From Flynn JT, Daniels
SR. Pharmacologic treatment of hypertension in children and adolescents. J Pediatr. 2006;149:746–754, Fig 2.)

TREATMENT

Fig. 494.3 Renal angiogram in 7-­yr-­old child with hypertension. Right
renal artery is visible with a string-­of-­beads appearance characteristic of
fibromuscular dysplasia (arrows). The aorta and left renal artery appear
normal. (From Tullus K, Brennan E, Hamilton G, et al. Renovascular hypertension in children. Lancet. 2008;371:1453–1463, Fig 1.)

obesity, elevated serum cholesterol levels, high dietary sodium intake,
and a sedentary lifestyle, as well as alcohol and tobacco use. The increase
in arterial wall rigidity and blood viscosity that is associated with
exposure to the components of tobacco may exacerbate hypertension.
Public health, population-­based approaches to prevention of primary
hypertension in both adults and children include a reduction in obesity,
reduced sodium intake, avoidance of tobacco intake, and an increase
in physical activity through school-­and community-­based programs.

2917

The mainstay of therapy for children with asymptomatic mild
hypertension without evidence of target-­organ damage is therapeutic lifestyle modification with dietary changes and regular exercise.
Weight loss is the primary therapy in obesity-­related hypertension. It is recommended that all hypertensive children have a diet
increased in fresh fruits, fresh vegetables, fiber, and nonfat dairy
and reduced in sodium. The DASH (Dietary Approaches to Stop
Hypertension) diet has been suggested as a nutritional approach to
prevent or treat hypertension (www.dashdiet.org). The diet focuses
on lowering sodium intake and increasing potassium-­, calcium-­,
and magnesium-­containing foods, such as six to eight servings of
whole grains, four to five servings of fruits, and four to five servings
of vegetables per day and low-­fat dairy foods. For adults, the standard DASH diet contains 2,300 mg of sodium (also recommended
by the American Heart Association) and the low-­sodium DASH
diet recommends up to 1,500 mg of sodium per day. Studies suggest that although the DASH diet has potential beneficial effects on
blood pressure, adherence to the diet remains low among adolescents. In addition, regular aerobic physical activity for at least 30-­60
minutes on most days along with a reduction of sedentary activities
to <2 hours a day is recommended.
Indications for pharmacologic therapy include symptomatic
hypertension, stage 2 hypertension without a modifiable risk factor,
hypertension in patients with comorbidities such as diabetes (types
1 and 2) or CKD, and persistent hypertension despite nonpharmacologic measures. When indicated, antihypertensive medication
should be initiated as a single agent at a low dose (Fig. 494.4). The
dose can then be increased until the goal BP is achieved. Once the
highest recommended dose is reached, or if the child develops side
effects, a second drug from a different class can be added.
Most classes of antihypertensive agents have been shown to
reduce blood pressure in children and adolescents, although no
data exist demonstrating one class to be superior. Per the 2017 AAP
practice care guidelines, ACEIs, ARBs, thiazide diuretics, and calcium channel blockers are considered acceptable initial agents for
use in children. The choice of antihypertensive agent for a patient
should be tailored to the etiology of that patient’s hypertension
whenever possible. Table 494.9 gives recommended dosing information for antihypertensive agents in children and adolescents.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2918 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 494.9  Recommended Doses for Selected Antihypertensive Agents for Use in Hypertensive Children and Adolescents
CLASS

DRUG

STARTING DOSE

INTERVAL

MAXIMUM DOSE*

Aldosterone receptor
antagonist

Eplerenone

25 mg/day

qd-­bid

100 mg/day

Spironolactone†

1 mg/kg/day

qd-­bid

3.3 mg/kg/day up to 100 mg/day

Angiotensin-­converting
enzyme inhibitors

Benazepril†

0.2 mg/kg/day up to
10 mg/day
0.5 mg/kg/dose (0.05 mg/
kg/dose in infants)
0.08 mg/kg/day
0.1 mg/kg/day up to
10 mg/day
0.07 mg/kg/day up to
5 mg/day
5-­10 mg/day
1.6 mg/m2/day

qd

0.6 mg/kg/day up to 40 mg/day

tid

6 mg/kg/day up to 450 mg/day

qd
qd

0.6 mg/kg/day up to 40 mg/day
0.6 mg/kg/day up to 40 mg/day

qd

0.6 mg/kg/day up to 40 mg/day

qd
qd

80 mg/day
6 mg/m2/day up to 10 mg/day

1-­6 yr: 0.2 mg/kg/day
6-­17 yr:
<50 kg 4-­8 mg qd
>50 kg 8-­16 mg qd
0.75 mg/kg/day up to
50 mg/day
20 to <35 kg 10 mg qd;
≥35 kg 20 mg qd
6-­17 yr: 1.3 mg/kg/day up
to 40 mg/day

qd

1-­6 yr: 0.4 mg/kg up to 4 mg/day
6-­17 yr:
<50 kg: 16 mg qd
>50 kg: 32 mg qd
1.4 mg/kg/day up to 100 mg/day

Captopril†
Enalapril†
Fosinopril
Lisinopril†
Quinapril
Ramipril
Angiotensin receptor
blockers

Candesartan

Losartan†
Olmesartan
Valsartan†

qd
qd
qd

20 to <35 kg: 20 mg qd
≥35 kg: 40 mg qd
6-­17 yr: 2.7 mg/kg/day up to
160 mg/day

α-­ and β-­adrenergic
antagonists

Labetalol†
Carvedilol

2-­3 mg/kg/day
0.1 mg/kg/dose up to
6.25 mg bid

bid
bid

10-­12 mg/kg/day up to 1.2 g/day
0.5 mg/kg/dose up to 25 mg bid

β-­adrenergic antagonists

Atenolol†
Bisoprolol/HCTZ
Metoprolol
Propranolol

0.5-­1 mg/kg/day
2.5/6.25 mg/day
1-­2 mg/kg/day
1 mg/kg/day

qd-­bid
qd
bid
bid-­tid

2 mg/kg/day up to 100 mg/day
10/6.25 mg/day
6 mg/kg/day up to 200 mg/day
8 mg/kg/day up to 640 mg/day

Calcium channel blockers

Amlodipine†

1-­5 yr: 0.1 mg/kg/day
≥6 yr: 2.5 mg/day

qd

Felodipine
Isradipine†
Extended-­release
nifedipine

2.5 mg/day
0.05-­0.15 mg/kg/dose
0.2-­0.5 mg/kg/day

qd
tid-­qid
qd-­bid

1-­5 yr: 0.6 mg/kg/day up to 5 mg/
day
≥6 yr: 10 mg/day
10 mg/day
0.6 mg/kg/day up to 10 mg/day
3 mg/kg/day up to 120 mg/day

Central α-­agonist

Clonidine†

5-­10 μg/kg/day

bid-­tid

25 μg/kg/day up to 0.9 mg/day

Diuretics

Amiloride
Chlorthalidone
Chlorothiazide
Furosemide
HCTZ

5-­10 mg/day
0.3 mg/kg/day
10 mg/kg/day
0.5-­2.0 mg/kg/dose
0.5-­1 mg/kg/day

qd
qd
bid
qd-­bid
qd

20 mg/day
2 mg/kg/day up to 50 mg/day
20 mg/kg/day up to 375 mg/day
6 mg/kg/day
3 mg/kg/day up to 37.5 mg/day

Vasodilators

Hydralazine
Minoxidil

0.25 mg/kg/dose
0.1-­0.2 mg/kg/day

tid-­qid
bid-­tid

7.5 mg/kg/day up to 200 mg/day
1 mg/kg/day up to 50 mg/day

*The maximum recommended adult dose should never be exceeded.
†Information on preparation of a stable extemporaneous suspension is available for these agents.
bid, Twice daily; HCTZ, hydrochlorothiazide; qd, once daily; qid, 4 times daily; tid, 3 times daily.
Adapted from Flynn JT. Management of hypertension in the young: role of antihypertensive medications. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 2011;58(2):111–120.

There have been changes in the recommended BP goals for the treatment of hypertension in children and adolescents. Data from the SPRINT
(SBP intervention) trial group suggests that stricter goals (SBP goal of 120
vs 140 mm Hg) improve cardiovascular outcomes in adults. In children
with CKD, the ESCAPE (Effects of Strict BP Control and Angiotensin-­
Converting Enzyme Inhibition on the Progress of Chronic Renal Failure in
Pediatric Patients) trial group showed slower progression of CKD if the 24-­
hour MAP was kept below the 50th percentile on ABPM compared to the
50th to 95th percentile. It is now recommended that treatment achieve BP

<90th percentile for age or <130/80 mm Hg, whichever is lower. A lower
goal based on ABPM (24-­hour MAP <50th percentile) is recommended
for children and adolescents with CKD. ACEIs or ARBs should be used
for children with diabetes and microalbuminuria or proteinuric kidney
disease.
Acute severe hypertension, sometimes referred to as accelerated
hypertension or hypertensive crisis, is defined as severe hypertension (often with BP values well in excess of stage 2 hypertension)
accompanied by symptoms such as headache, dizziness, or nausea/

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 494 u Systemic Hypertension

Fig. 494.5 MRI of the brain of a 6-­yr-­old child with end-­stage kidney

disease and hypertensive encephalopathy (i.e., posterior reversible leukoencephalopathy syndrome). Bilateral occipital high signal intensity
is more pronounced on the left side. (From Daroff RB, Fenichel GM,
Jankovic J, et al., eds. Bradley’s Neurology in Clinical Practice, 6th ed.
Philadelphia: Saunders; 2012: Fig. 49B.4, p. 924.)

2919

vomiting, and in more severe cases, retinopathy, encephalopathy,
cardiac failure, acute kidney injury, and seizures. These situations
have also been described as hypertensive urgency and hypertensive
emergency, respectively. This nomenclature can lead to confusion
because there is often no absolute distinction between the two
situations, and treatment will often depend on clinical judgment.
Hypertensive encephalopathy (generalized or posterior reversible
encephalopathy syndrome) is suggested by the presence of headache, vomiting, temperature elevation, visual disturbances, ataxia,
depressed level of consciousness, imaging abnormalities, and seizures (Fig. 494.5); it is one of the more common presentations of
acute severe hypertension in children and adolescents. Acute severe
hypertension may also manifest with decreased vision (cortical
blindness) and papilledema, congestive heart failure, or accelerated
deterioration of kidney function.
For patients with acute severe hypertension and life-­threatening
symptoms, intensive care unit (ICU) admission and intravenous
(IV) drug infusion are indicated so that decreases in BP can be
carefully monitored and titrated (Table 494.10). Ideally, arterial
lines should be used for continuous BP monitoring; if this is not
available, oscillometric devices can be used for frequent/repeated
BP measurement. Drug choices include labetalol, nicardipine, and
sodium nitroprusside. Because too rapid a reduction in BP may
interfere with adequate organ perfusion, a stepwise reduction in
pressure should be planned. In general, BP should be reduced by

Table 494.10  Antihypertensive Drugs for Management of Severe Hypertension in Children Age 1-­17 Years
DRUG

CLASS

DOSE

ROUTE

USEFUL FOR SEVERELY HYPERTENSIVE PATIENTS WITH LIFE-­THREATENING SYMPTOMS
Esmolol
β-­Adrenergic blocker
100-­500 μg/kg/min
IV infusion

COMMENTS
Very short acting—constant infusion
preferred; may cause profound
bradycardia

Hydralazine

Direct vasodilator

0.2-­0.4 mg/kg/dose

IV, IM

Should be given every 4 hr when given
IV bolus

Labetalol

α-­ and β-­Adrenergic
blocker

Bolus: 0.20-­1.0 mg/kg/dose,
up to 40 mg/dose
Infusion: 0.25-­3.0 mg/kg/hr

IV bolus or infusion

Asthma and overt heart failure are
relative contraindications

Nicardipine

Calcium channel blocker

Bolus: 30 μg/kg up to 2 mg/
dose
Infusion: 0.5-­4 μg/kg/min

IV bolus or infusion

May cause reflex tachycardia

Sodium
nitroprusside

Direct vasodilator

0.5-­10 μg/kg/min

IV infusion

Monitor cyanide levels with prolonged
(>72 hr) use or in renal failure or
coadminister with sodium thiosulfate

USEFUL FOR SEVERELY HYPERTENSIVE PATIENTS WITH LESS SIGNIFICANT SYMPTOMS
Clonidine
Central α-­agonist
0.05-­0.1 mg/dose, may be
PO
repeated up to 0.8 mg total
dose

Side effects include dry mouth and
drowsiness

Fenoldopam

Dopamine receptor
agonist

0.2-­0.8 μg/kg/min

IV infusion

Produced modest reductions in blood
pressure in a pediatric clinical trial in
patients up to age 12 yr

Hydralazine

Direct vasodilator

0.25 mg/kg/dose, up to 25 mg/
dose

PO

Extemporaneous suspension stable for
only 1 wk

Isradipine

Calcium channel blocker

0.05-­0.15 mg/kg/dose, up to
5 mg/dose

PO

Stable suspension can be compounded

Minoxidil

Direct vasodilator

0.1-­0.2 mg/kg/dose, up to
10 mg/dose

PO

Most potent oral vasodilator; long acting

IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous; PO, oral.
Adapted from Flynn JT, Tullus K. Correction to severe hypertension in children and adolescents: pathophysiology and treatment. Pediatr Nephrol. 2012;27(3):503–504.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2920 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
no more than 25% of the planned reduction over the first 8 hours,
with a gradual normalization of BPs over the next 24-­48 hours. For
patients with less severe symptoms, such as headache or nausea/
vomiting, oral medications such as clonidine or isradipine can be
used if the patient can tolerate oral medications. Short-­acting IV
medications such as hydralazine or labetalol are acceptable if the
patient cannot take oral drugs.
Treatment of secondary hypertension must also focus on the underlying disease, such as CKD, hyperthyroidism, pheochromocytoma,

coarctation of the aorta, or renovascular hypertension. The treatment
of renovascular hypertension includes antihypertensive medications,
angioplasty, or surgery. If bilateral renovascular hypertension or renovascular disease in a solitary kidney is suspected, drugs acting on the
RAAS are usually contraindicated because they may reduce glomerular
filtration rate and lead to acute kidney injury.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

