The Respiratory System
Section 1

Development and
Function
Chapter 421

Diagnostic Approach to
Respiratory Disease
Daniel J. Lesser, Julie Ryu,
Kelan G. Tantisira, and Gabriel G. Haddad
HISTORY

The history of the illness begins with a narrative provided by the parent/
caretaker with input from the patient when possible. It should include
questions about respiratory symptoms (dyspnea, cough, pain, wheezing, snoring, apnea, cyanosis, exercise intolerance), as well as their
chronicity, timing during day or night, and associations with environmental exposures and activities including exercise or food intake. The
respiratory system interacts with a number of other systems, and questions related to cardiac, gastrointestinal, central nervous, hematologic,
and immune systems may be relevant. Questions related to gastrointestinal reflux, congenital abnormalities (airway anomalies, ciliary dyskinesia), or immune status may be important in a patient with repeated
pneumonia. The family history is essential and should include inquiries about siblings and other close relatives with similar symptoms or
any chronic disease with respiratory components.

PHYSICAL EXAMINATION

Respiratory dysfunction usually produces detectable alterations in the
pattern of breathing. Values for normal respiratory rates are presented
in Table 79.1 and depend on many factors—most importantly, age.
Repeated respiratory rate measurements are necessary because respiratory rates, especially in the young, are exquisitely sensitive to extraneous stimuli. Sleeping respiratory rates are more reproducible in infants
than those obtained during feeding or activity. These rates vary among
infants but average 40-­50 breaths/min in the first few weeks of life and
usually <60 breaths/min in the first few days of life.
Respiratory control abnormalities can cause the child to breathe at a
low rate or periodically. Mechanical abnormalities produce compensatory changes that are generally directed at altering minute ventilation
to maintain alveolar ventilation. Decreases in lung compliance require
increases in muscular force and breathing rate, leading to variable
increases in chest wall retractions and nasal flaring. The respiratory
excursions of children with restrictive disease are shallow. An expiratory grunt is common as the child attempts to raise the functional
residual capacity (FRC) by closing the glottis at the end of expiration. The FRC is the amount of air left in the lungs after tidal expiration. Children with obstructive disease might take slower, deeper
breaths. When the obstruction is extrathoracic (from the nose to the
mid-­trachea), inspiration is more prolonged than expiration, and an
inspiratory stridor (a predominant inspiratory monophonic noise) can

PART

XVII

usually be heard (Fig. 421.1). When the obstruction is intrathoracic,
expiration is more prolonged than inspiration, and the patient often
has to make use of accessory expiratory muscles. Intrathoracic obstruction results in air trapping and therefore a larger residual volume along
with a possible increase in FRC (Fig. 421.2).
Lung percussion has limited value in small infants because it cannot discriminate between noises originating from tissues that are close
to each other. In adolescents and adults, percussion is usually dull in
restrictive lung disease (pleural effusion, pneumonia, atelectasis), but it
is tympanitic in obstructive disease (asthma, pneumothorax).
Auscultation confirms the presence of inspiratory or expiratory prolongation and provides information about the symmetry and quality
of air movement. In addition, it often detects abnormal or adventitious
sounds such as stridor; crackles or rales, high-­pitched, interrupted
sounds found during inspiration and, more rarely, during early expiration, which denote opening of previously closed air spaces; or wheezes,
musical, continuous sounds usually caused by the development of turbulent flow in narrow airways (Table 421.1). Digital clubbing is a sign
of chronic hypoxia and chronic lung disease (Fig. 421.3) but may be a
result of nonpulmonary etiologies (Table 421.2).

BLOOD GAS ANALYSIS

The main function of the respiratory system is to remove carbon dioxide from and add oxygen to the systemic venous blood brought to the
lung. The composition of the inspired gas, ventilation, perfusion, diffusion, and tissue metabolism has a significant influence on the arterial
blood gases.
The total pressure of the atmosphere at sea level is 760 torr. With
increasing altitude, the atmospheric pressure decreases. The total
atmospheric pressure is equal to the sum of partial pressures exerted
by each of its component gases. Alveolar air is 100% humidified, so in
alveolar gas calculations, the inspired gas is also presumed to be 100%
humidified. At a temperature of 37°C (98.6°F) and 100% humidity,
water vapor exerts a pressure of 47 torr, regardless of altitude. In a natural setting, the atmosphere consists of 20.93% oxygen. Partial pressure
of oxygen in inspired gas (Pio2) at sea level is therefore (760 − 47) ×
20.93% = 149 torr. When breathing 40% oxygen at sea level, Pio2 is
(760 − 47) × 40% = 285 torr. At higher altitudes, breathing different
concentrations of oxygen, Pio2 is less than at sea level, depending on
the prevalent atmospheric pressures. In Denver (altitude of 5,000 feet
and barometric pressure of 632 torr), Pio2 in room air is (632 − 47) ×
20.93% = 122 torr, and in 40% oxygen, it is (632 − 47) × 40% = 234 torr.
Minute volume is a product of VT and respiratory rate. Part of the
VT occupies the conducting airways (anatomic dead space), which
does not contribute to gas exchange in the alveoli. Alveolar ventilation
is the volume of atmospheric air entering the alveoli and is calculated
as (VT − dead space) × respiratory rate. Alveolar ventilation is inversely
proportional to arterial Pco2 (Paco2). When alveolar ventilation is
halved, Paco2 is doubled. Conversely, doubling of alveolar ventilation decreases Paco2 by 50%. Alveolar Po2 (Pao2) is calculated by the
alveolar air equation as follows, where R is the respiratory quotient.
For practical purposes, PAco2 is substituted by arterial Pco2 (Paco2),
and R is assumed to be 0.8. According to the alveolar air equation, for a
given Pio2, a rise in Paco2 of 10 torr results in a decrease in PAo2 by 10
÷ 0.8, or 10 × 1.25, or 12.5 torr. Thus proportionately inverse changes in
PAo2 occur to the extent of 1.25 times the changes in PAco2 (or Paco2).
After the alveolar gas composition is determined by the inspired
gas conditions and the process of ventilation, gas exchange occurs by
the process of diffusion and equilibration of alveolar gas with pulmonary capillary blood. Diffusion depends on the alveolar capillary barrier and the amount of available time for equilibration. In health, the

2513
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2514 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Fig. 421.1 A, In extrathoracic air-

way obstruction, the increased negative pressure during inspiration is
transmitted up to the site of obstruction. This results in collapse of the
extrathoracic airway below the site of
obstruction, making the obstruction
worse during inspiration. Note that
the pressures are compared with the
atmospheric pressure, which is traditionally represented as 0 cm. Terminal airway pressure is calculated as
intrapleural pressure plus lung recoil
pressure. Lung recoil pressure is arbitrarily chosen as 5 cm for the sake
of simplicity. B, During expiration,
the positive pressure below the site
of obstruction results in distention
of the extrathoracic airway and amelioration of symptoms. (Courtesy Dr.
Ashok Sarnaik.)

5

5

0 30 0

0 40 0

Airway collapse

40

40

40

Airway distention
40

40

40

40
40

40

40
5
45

40
5
35
40

40

40

40

B

A

0 3

0

40

Airway distention

0 3
40

40

0

Airway collapse
40

5

5

40

40

Fig. 421.2 A and B, In intrapul-

monary airway obstruction, an even
wider segment of intrathoracic airway is subjected to pressure changes
compared with those observed in
intrathoracic-­extrapulmonary airway
obstruction. Such lesions are associated with marked increase in airway
obstruction during expiration. (Courtesy Dr. Ashok Sarnaik.)

40

40

40
5
45

40
5
35
40

40

40

40

B

A

Table 421.1  Respiratory Sounds
BASIC SOUNDS

MECHANISMS

ORIGIN

ACOUSTICS

RELEVANCE

Lung

Turbulent flow, vortices,
other

Central (expiration),
lobar to segmental
airways (inspiration)

Low-­pass filtered noise (<100 to >1,000 Hz)

Regional ventilation,
airway caliber

Tracheal

Turbulent flow, flow
impinging on airway
walls

Pharynx, larynx, trachea,
large airways

Noise with resonances (<100 to >3,000 Hz)

Upper airway
configuration

ADVENTITIOUS SOUNDS
Wheezes
Airway wall flutter, vortex
shedding, other

Central and lower
airways

Sinusoidal (<100 to >1,000 Hz, duration
typically >80 msec)

Airway obstruction,
flow limitation

Rhonchi

Rupture of fluid films,
airway wall vibration

Larger airways

Series of rapidly dampened sinusoids
(typically <300 Hz and duration <100 msec)

Secretions, abnormal
airway collapsibility

Crackles

Airway wall stress-­
relaxation

Central and lower
airways

Rapidly dampened wave deflections
(duration typically <20 msec)

Distal airway and
alveolar closure,
secretions

Modified from Pasterkamp H, Kraman SS, Wodicka GR. Respiratory sounds. Advances beyond the stethoscope. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1997;156(3):974–987.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 421 u Diagnostic Approach to Respiratory Disease

2515

Table 421.2  Nonpulmonary Diseases Associated with
Clubbing
CARDIAC
Cyanotic congenital heart disease
Bacterial endocarditis
Chronic heart failure

A

HEMATOLOGIC
Thalassemia
Congenital methemoglobinemia (rare)

IPD

B
a

GASTROINTESTINAL
Crohn disease
Ulcerative colitis
Celiac disease
Chronic dysentery, sprue
Polyposis coli
Severe gastrointestinal hemorrhage
Small bowel lymphoma
Liver cirrhosis (including α1-­antitrypsin deficiency)
Chronic active hepatitis
OTHER
Thyroid deficiency (thyroid acropachy)
Thyrotoxicosis
Chronic pyelonephritis (rare)
Toxic (e.g., arsenic, mercury, beryllium)
Lymphomatoid granulomatosis
Fabry disease
Raynaud disease, scleroderma
Hodgkin disease
Familial

C

D
Fig. 421.3 A, Normal and clubbed finger viewed in profile. B, The

normal finger demonstrates a distal phalangeal finger depth (DPD)/
interphalangeal finger depth (IPD) ratio <1. The clubbed finger demonstrates a DPD/IPD ratio >1. C, The normal finger on the left demonstrates a normal profile (abc) with an angle less than 180 degrees. The
clubbed finger demonstrates a profile angle >180 degrees. D, Schamroth sign is demonstrated in the clubbed finger with the loss of the
diamond-­shaped window in between finger beds (arrow) that is demonstrated in the normal finger. (From Wilmott RW, Deterding RR, Li A,
et al, eds. Kendig’s Disorders of the Respiratory Tract in Children, 9th
ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019: Fig. 1.14, p. 20.)

equilibration of alveolar gas and pulmonary capillary blood is complete for both oxygen and carbon dioxide. In diseases in which the
alveolar capillary barrier is abnormally increased (alveolar interstitial
diseases) and/or when the time available for equilibration is decreased
(increased blood flow velocity), diffusion is incomplete. Because of its
greater solubility in liquid medium, carbon dioxide is 20 times more
diffusible than oxygen. Therefore diseases with diffusion defects are
characterized by marked alveolar-­arterial oxygen (A-­aO2) gradients
and hypoxemia. Significant elevation of CO2 does not occur as a result
of a diffusion defect unless there is coexistent hypoventilation.
Venous blood brought to the lungs is “arterialized” after diffusion
is complete. After complete arterialization, the pulmonary capillary
blood should have the same Po2 and Pco2 as in the alveoli. The arterial blood gas composition is different from that in the alveoli, even in
normal conditions, because there is a certain amount of dead space
ventilation and venous admixture in a normal lung. Dead space ventilation results in a higher Paco2 than PAco2, whereas venous admixture or right-­to-­left shunting results in a lower Pao2 compared with
the alveolar gas composition (Fig. 421.4). Pao2 is a reflection of the
amount of oxygen dissolved in blood, which is a relatively minor component of total blood oxygen content. For every 100 torr Po2, there
is 0.3 mL of dissolved O2 in 100 mL of blood. The total blood oxygen
content is composed of the dissolved oxygen and the oxygen bound
to hemoglobin (Hb). Each gram of Hb carries 1.34 mL of O2 when

UNILATERAL CLUBBING
Vascular disorders (e.g., subclavian arterial aneurysm, brachial
arteriovenous fistula)
Subluxation of shoulder
Median nerve injury
Local trauma
From Pasterkamp H. The history and physical examination. In: Wilmott RW, Boat TF,
Bush A, et al., eds. Kendig and Chernick’s Disorders of the Respiratory Tract in Children,
8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2012.

100% saturated with oxygen. Thus 15 g of Hb carry 20.1 mL of oxygen.
Arterial oxygen content (Cao2), expressed as mL O2/dL blood, can be
calculated as (Pao2 × 0.003) + (Hb × 1.34 × So2), where Hb is grams of
Hb per deciliter of blood and So2 is the percentage of oxyhemoglobin
saturation. The relationship of Po2 and the amount of oxygen carried
by the Hb is the basis of the O2-­Hb dissociation curve (Fig. 421.5). The
Po2 at which Hb is 50% saturated is referred to as P50. At a normal pH,
Hb is 94% saturated at Po2 of 70, and little further gain in saturation
is accomplished at a higher Po2. At Po2 <50, there is a steep decline in
saturation and therefore the oxygen content.
Oxygen delivery to tissues is a product of oxygen content and cardiac output. When Hb is near 100% saturated, blood contains approximately 20 mL of oxygen per 100 mL or 200 mL/L. In a healthy adult,
cardiac output is approximately 5 L/min, oxygen delivery 1,000 mL/
min, and oxygen consumption 250 mL/min. Mixed venous blood
returning to the heart has a Po2 of 40 torr and is 75% saturated with
oxygen. Blood oxygen content, cardiac output, and oxygen consumption are important determinants of mixed venous oxygen saturation.
Given a steady-­state blood oxygen content and oxygen consumption,
the mixed venous saturation is an important indicator of cardiac output. A declining mixed venous saturation in such a state indicates
decreasing cardiac output.
Clinical observations and interpretation of blood gas values are
critical in localizing the site of the lesion and estimating its severity
(Table 421.3). In airway obstruction above the carina (subglottic stenosis, vascular ring), blood gases reflect overall alveolar hypoventilation.
This is manifested by an elevated PAco2 and a proportionate decrease
in Pao2 as determined by the alveolar air equation. A rise in Paco2
of 20 torr decreases Pao2 by 20 × 1.25 or 25 torr. In the absence of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2516 Part XVII u The Respiratory System

C

75%

A

B

60

75%

100

90%
75%

99%

75%
88%

Fig. 421.4 Diagram demonstrating the effects of decreased

ventilation-­perfusion ratios on arterial oxygenation in the lungs. Three
alveolar-­capillary units are illustrated. Unit A has normal ventilation and
an alveolar Po2 of 100 mm Hg (shown by the number in the middle of
the space). The blood that circulates through this unit raises its oxygen
saturation from 75% (the saturation of mixed venous blood) to 99%.
Unit B has a lower ventilation-­perfusion ratio and a lower alveolar Po2
of 60 mm Hg. The blood that circulates through this unit reaches a
saturation of only 90%. Finally, unit C is not ventilated at all. Its alveolar
Po2 is equivalent to that of the venous blood, which travels through the
unit unaltered. The oxygen saturation of the arterial blood reflects the
weighted contributions of these three units. If it is assumed that each
unit has the same blood flow, the arterial blood would have a saturation of only 88%. Ventilation-­perfusion mismatch is the most common
mechanism of arterial hypoxemia in lung disease. Supplemental oxygen increases the arterial Po2 by raising the alveolar Po2 in lung units
that, like B, have a ventilation-­perfusion ratio >0.

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

P50

Normal mixed venous blood

40

has a higher Po2 and lower Pco2, whereas that coming from hypoventilated regions has a lower Po2 and higher Pco2. A lower blood Pco2
can compensate for the higher Pco2 because the Hb-­CO2 dissociation
curve is relatively linear. In mild disease, the hyperventilated areas
predominate, resulting in hypocarbia. An elevated Pao2 in hyperventilated areas cannot compensate for the decreased Pao2 in hypoventilated areas because of the shape of the O2-­Hb dissociation curve. This
results in venous admixture, arterial desaturation, and decreased Pao2
(see Fig. 421.4). With increasing disease severity, more areas become
hypoventilated, resulting in normalization of Paco2 with a further
decrease in Pao2. A normal or slightly elevated Paco2 in asthma should
be viewed with concern as a potential indicator of impending respiratory failure. In severe intrapulmonary airway obstruction, hypoventilated areas predominate, leading to hypercarbia, respiratory acidosis,
and hypoxemia. The degree to which supplemental oxygenation raises
Pao2 depends on the severity of the illness and the degree of venous
admixture.
In alveolar and interstitial diseases, blood gas values reflect both intrapulmonary right-­to-­left shunting and a diffusion barrier. Hypoxemia is a
hallmark of such conditions occurring early in the disease process. Paco2
is either normal or decreased. An increase in Paco2 is observed only later
in the course, as muscle fatigue and exhaustion result in hypoventilation.
Response to supplemental oxygen is relatively poor with shunting and
diffusion disorders compared with other lesions.

Percent oxygen-hemoglobin saturation

significant parenchymal disease and intrapulmonary shunting, such
lesions respond very well to supplemental oxygen in reversing hypoxemia. Similar blood gas values, demonstrating alveolar hypoventilation
and response to supplemental oxygen, are observed in patients with a
depressed respiratory center and ineffective neuromuscular function,
resulting in respiratory insufficiency. Such patients can be easily distinguished from those with airway obstruction by their poor respiratory
effort.
In intrapulmonary airway obstruction (asthma, bronchiolitis), blood
gases reflect ventilation-­perfusion imbalance and venous admixture. In
these diseases, the obstruction is not uniform throughout the lungs,
resulting in areas that are hyperventilated and others that are hypoventilated. Pulmonary capillary blood coming from hyperventilated areas

0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
PO2 (torr)

Fig. 421.5 Oxygen-­hemoglobin dissociation curve. P50 of adult blood

is around 27 torr. Under basal conditions, mixed venous blood has a Po2
of 40 torr and oxygen-­hemoglobin saturation of 75%. In arterial blood,
these values are 100 torr and 97.5%, respectively. Note that there is a
steep decline in oxygen-­hemoglobin saturation at Pao2 <50 torr, but
relatively little increase in saturation is gained at Po2 >70 torr. (Courtesy
Dr. Ashok Sarnaik.)

Table 421.3  Interpretation of Arterial Blood Gas Values
LESION

EFFECT

TYPICAL ABG

Central (above the carina) airway obstruction
or
Depressed respiratory center
or
Ineffective neuromuscular function

Uniform alveolar
hypoventilation

Early increase in Pco2.
Proportionate decrease in Po2 depending on alveolar air equation
Response to supplemental oxygen: excellent

Intrapulmonary airway obstruction

Venous admixture
mismatch

Mild: ↓ Pco2, ↓ Po2
Moderate: “normal” Pco2, ↓↓ Po2
Severe: ↑↑ Pco2, ↓↓↓ Po2
Response to supplemental oxygen: good

Alveolar-­interstitial pathology

Diffusion defect R → L
shunt

Early decrease in Po2 depending on severity
Normal or low Pco2, ↑ Pco2 if fatigue develops
Response to supplemental oxygen: fair to poor

ABG, Arterial blood gas.
Courtesy Dr. Ashok Sarnaik.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 421 u Diagnostic Approach to Respiratory Disease
Most clinical entities present with mixed lesions. A child with a vascular ring might also have an area of atelectasis; the arterial blood gas
reflects both processes. The blood gas values reflect the more dominant
lesion.
An arterial blood gas analysis is probably the single most useful rapid
test of pulmonary function. Although this analysis does not specify the
cause of the condition or the specific nature of the disease process, it
can give an overall assessment of the functional state of the respiratory
system and clues about the pathogenesis of the disease. Because the
detection of cyanosis is influenced by skin color, perfusion, and blood
Hb concentration, the clinical detection by inspection is an unreliable
sign of hypoxemia. Arterial hypertension, tachycardia, and diaphoresis
are late, and not exclusive, signs of hypoventilation.
Blood gas exchange is evaluated most accurately by the direct measurement of arterial pressure of oxygen (Po2), pressure of carbon dioxide (Pco2), and pH. The blood specimen is best collected anaerobically
in a heparinized syringe containing only enough heparin solution to
displace the air from the syringe. The syringe should be sealed, placed
in ice, and analyzed immediately. Although these measurements have
no substitute in many conditions, they require arterial puncture and
have been replaced to a great extent by less invasive monitoring, such
as capillary samples and/or oxygen saturation.
The age and clinical condition of the patient need to be taken into
account when interpreting blood gas tensions. With the exception of
neonates, values of arterial Po2 <85 mm Hg are usually abnormal for a
child breathing room air at sea level. Calculation of the alveolar-­arterial
oxygen gradient is useful in the analysis of arterial oxygenation, particularly when the patient is not breathing room air or in the presence
of hypercarbia. Values of arterial Pco2 >45 mm Hg usually indicate
hypoventilation or a severe ventilation-­perfusion mismatch, unless
they reflect respiratory compensation for metabolic alkalosis (see
Chapter 73).
In general practice pulse oximetry is used to monitor a patient’s
peripheral arterial saturation (SpO2). This noninvasive method uses
spectrophotometry to assess oxygenated and deoxygenated hemoglobin ratios to determine the SpO2. Values are most accurate with arterial
saturations above 90%; with saturations <90%, the accuracy is reduced.
Pulse oximetry often produces falsely high SpO2 values in Black and darkskinned patients, creating a risk for missed (occult) hypoxia, which may
lead to underuse of oxygen therapy for Black patients.

TRANSILLUMINATION OF THE CHEST

In infants up to at least 6 months of age, a pneumothorax (see Chapter
132) can often be diagnosed by transilluminating the chest wall using
a fiberoptic light probe. Free air in the pleural space often results in
an unusually large halo of light in the skin surrounding the probe.
Comparison with the contralateral chest is often helpful in interpreting findings. This test is unreliable in older patients and in those with
subcutaneous emphysema or atelectasis.

RADIOGRAPHIC TECHNIQUES
Chest X-­Rays

A posteroanterior and a lateral view (upright and in full inspiration)
should be obtained, except in situations in which the child is medically
unstable (Fig. 421.6). Portable images, although useful in the latter situation, can give a somewhat distorted image. Expiratory images can be
misinterpreted, although a comparison of expiratory and inspiratory
images may be useful in evaluating a child with a suspected foreign
body (localized failure of the lung to empty reflects bronchial obstruction: see Chapter 435). Although images taken in a recumbent position
are difficult to interpret when there is fluid within the pleural space or a
cavity, if pleural fluid is suspected (see Chapter 451), decubitus images
are indicated.

Upper Airway Film

A lateral view of the neck can yield invaluable information about upper
airway obstruction (see Chapter 433) and particularly about the condition of the retropharyngeal, supraglottic, and subglottic spaces (which
should also be viewed in an anteroposterior projection) (Fig. 421.7).

*

Ao

A

2517

Ao
R

L

B

Fig. 421.6 Normal appearance of the trachea and lungs on chest ra-

diography. A, On the frontal view, there is normal shouldering of the
subglottic trachea (arrow). The trachea courses inferiorly with a fairly
uniform diameter to the level of the carina apart from a mild, smooth
indentation at the level of the aortic arch (Ao). The lungs are symmetrically inflated, with normal arborization of the vasculature. The hemidiaphragms are domed, not flattened. The normal heart size is less than
50% of the transverse dimension of the chest. B, On the lateral view, the
trachea is of uniform diameter to the level of the aortic arch, with the
exception of a mild, smooth impression from the aortic arch anteriorly
(Ao). The hemidiaphragms are domed. The heart occupies less than
50% of the anteroposterior dimension of the chest and should not fill
the retrosternal clear space (asterisk). The bronchus intermedius (arrow)
courses posterior to the right pulmonary artery (R), and the arch of the
left pulmonary artery (L) projects posterior to the carina. (From Walters
MM, Robertson RL, eds. Pediatric Radiology: The Requisites, 4th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017: Fig. 2.11.)

Knowing the phase of respiration during which the film was taken is
often essential for accurate interpretation. Magnified airway images are
often helpful in delineating the upper airways. Patients with suggested
obstruction should not be unattended in the radiology department.

Sinus and Nasal Images

The general utility of radiologic examination of the sinuses is uncertain
because a large number of images have positive findings (low sensitivity and specificity). Imaging studies are not necessary to confirm the
diagnosis of sinusitis in children younger than age 6 years. CT scans
are indicated if surgery is required, in cases of complications caused by
sinus infection, in immunodeficient patients, in those with cystic fibrosis, and for recurrent infections unresponsive to medical management.

Chest Ultrasound

Chest ultrasound, which has no radiation and is more available in low-­
resource settings, has been shown to have more sensitivity and similar
specificity in diagnosing community-­acquired pneumonia compared
to chest x-­ray. Chest ultrasound can also detect pleural effusions and
differentiate atelectasis from pneumonia.

Chest Computed Tomography

Chest CT often provides images of higher quality and sensitivity compared with radiography. Chest CT identifies early abnormalities such
as air trapping, mucus plugging, or bronchiectasis in young children
with cystic fibrosis before pathologic changes are detectable by either
plain chest radiographs or pulmonary function testing. However, several caveats must be noted. Conventional chest CT involves higher
radiation doses than plain images (see Chapter 758). The time required
to perform chest CT examinations and the complications of respiratory
and body motion mandate the use of sedation for this procedure in
many infants and young children. However, improvements in imaging
protocols and techniques have drastically reduced required radiation
doses and imaging time. Chest CT is particularly useful in evaluating pulmonary nodules, pleural lesions, solid or cystic parenchymal
lesions, pulmonary embolism, bronchiectasis, interstitial lung disease,
and air trapping. The use of intravenous contrast material during CT

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2518 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Nasopharynx
Uvula

Oropharynx
Hypopharynx

Epiglottis

Base of tongue

Aryepiglottic folds

Vallecula

Pyriform sinus

Laryngeal ventricle

Subglottic trachea

B

A

C

Fig. 421.7 A, Diagram depicting the normal anatomy of the upper airway. B, Corresponding lateral radiograph of the neck soft tissues. C, Sagittal

T1-­weighted magnetic resonance image. The hyoid bone “points to” the epiglottis on the radiograph (arrow). (From Walters MM, Robertson RL,
eds. Pediatric Radiology: The Requisites, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017: Fig. 2.5.)

imaging enhances vascular structures, distinguishing vessels from
other soft tissue densities.

Magnetic Resonance Imaging

Although CT is often considered the gold standard for chest imaging,
advances in MRI techniques have broadened the indications for pediatric chest MRI. Pediatric chest MRI has shown utility in imaging several disease processes. In cases of pneumonia, chest MRI can be used
to demonstrate pulmonary consolidation in addition to complications
such as abscess, necrosis, and effusions with or without loculation. Congenital malformations can also be visualized using chest MRI. Bronchogenic cysts, congenital pulmonary airway malformation, sequestration,
and pulmonary aplasia or agenesis can be well characterized using MR
techniques. Furthermore, MRI can be applied to imaging congenital
large airway disorders such as airway malacia and external airway compression caused by vascular rings and slings. Last, dynamic techniques
using cine MR imaging provide four-­dimensional imaging as airway
structure changes throughout the breathing cycle. Cine MRI assesses
both lower airway caliber in children with trachea or bronchomalacia
and upper airway anatomy to diagnose a site of obstruction in children
with obstructive sleep apnea. Aside from imaging time, MR may in some
cases be inferior to CT for imaging of bronchiectasis without airway wall
thickening, focal air trapping, signs of interstitial lung disease, and small
pulmonary nodules. MR protocols currently vary across centers, and
collaboration with radiologists experienced in specialized chest imaging
will result in high-­quality imaging with minimization of ionizing radiation while weighing the need for sedation.

Fluoroscopy

Fluoroscopy can be used to assess diaphragm function in cases of suspected paralysis and to differentiate from eventration. Occasionally,
the modality is used to evaluate airway dynamics with the benefit of
visualization during awake and spontaneous breathing. The use of ionizing radiation with this modality should be taken into consideration,
especially if repeated studies in the same patient are undertaken. Procedures such as needle aspiration or biopsy of a peripheral lesion may
be accomplished with the aid of fluoroscopy, CT, or ultrasonography.

Barium Swallow

A barium swallow study, performed with fluoroscopy and spot images,
is indicated in the evaluation of patients with recurrent pneumonia,
persistent cough of undetermined cause, stridor, or persistent wheezing. The technique can be modified by using barium of different textures and thicknesses, ranging from thin liquid to solids, to evaluate
swallowing mechanics and test for laryngeal penetration or pulmonary
aspiration. Imaging of the esophageal phase is important and can be

used to detect the presence of esophageal dysfunction, vascular rings
(see Chapter 434), and tracheoesophageal fistulas (see Chapter 365).
A contrast esophagram has been used in evaluating newborns with
suggested esophageal atresia, but this procedure entails a high risk of
pulmonary aspiration and is not usually recommended for this indication. Barium swallows have lower utility in evaluating gastroesophageal reflux (see Chapter 369).

Pulmonary Arteriography and Aortograms

Pulmonary arteriography has been used to allow detailed evaluation of
the pulmonary vasculature. This imaging technique has also been helpful in assessing pulmonary blood flow and in diagnosing congenital
anomalies, such as lobar agenesis, unilateral hyperlucent lung, vascular
rings, and arteriovenous malformations. Thoracic aortograms demonstrate the aortic arch, its major vessels, and the systemic (bronchial)
pulmonary circulation. They are useful in evaluating vascular rings and
suspected pulmonary sequestration.

Ventilation-­Perfusion Relation and Radionuclide Lung
Scans

Gravitational force pulls the lung away from the nondependent part
of the parietal pleura. Consequently, alveoli and airways in the nondependent parts (the upper lobes in upright position) of the lung are
subjected to greater negative intrapleural pressure during tidal respiration and are kept relatively more inflated compared with the dependent alveoli and airways (the lower lobes in upright position). The
nondependent alveoli are less compliant because they are already more
inflated. Ventilation therefore occurs preferentially in the dependent
portions of the lung that are more amenable to expansion during tidal
inspiration. Although perfusion is also greater in the dependent portions of the lung because of greater pulmonary arterial hydrostatic
pressure from gravity, the increase in perfusion is greater than the
increase in ventilation in the dependent portions of the lung. Thus the
ratios favor ventilation in the nondependent portions and perfusion
in the dependent portions. Because the airways in the dependent portion of the lung are narrower, they close earlier during expiration. The
lung volume at which the dependent airways start to close is referred
to as the closing capacity. In normal children, the FRC is greater than
the closing capacity. During tidal respiration, airways remain patent
both in the dependent and the nondependent portions of the lung. In
newborns, the closing capacity is greater than the FRC, resulting in
perfusion of poorly ventilated alveoli during tidal respiration. Therefore normal neonates have a lower Pao2 compared with older children.
The relationship is adversely affected in a variety of pathophysiologic
states. Air movement in areas that are poorly perfused is referred to
as dead space ventilation. Examples of dead space ventilation include

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 421 u Diagnostic Approach to Respiratory Disease
Normal

Restrictive
Disease

Inspiratory
capacity

2519

Obstructive
Disease
(Intrathoracic)

FEV1

Total Vital
lung capacity
capacity

Tidal
volume

Functional
residual
capacity

Expiratory
reserve
volume

1 sec
Residual
volume

Fig. 421.8 Spirogram showing lung volumes and capacities. Forced expiratory volume 1 (FEV1) is the maximum volume exhaled in 1 second after

maximum inspiration. Restrictive diseases are usually associated with decreased lung volumes and capacities. Intrathoracic airway obstruction is
associated with air trapping and abnormally high functional residual capacity and residual volume. FEV1 and vital capacity are decreased in both
restrictive and obstructive diseases. The ratio of FEV1 to vital capacity is normal in restrictive disease but decreased in obstructive disease.

PULMONARY FUNCTION TESTING

Traditionally, lung volumes are measured with a spirogram (Fig. 421.8).
Tidal volume (VT) is the amount of air moved in and out of the lungs
during each breath; at rest, VT is normally 6-­7 mL/kg body weight.
Inspiratory capacity is the amount of air inspired by maximum inspiratory effort after tidal expiration. Expiratory reserve volume is the
amount of air exhaled by maximum expiratory effort after tidal expiration. The volume of gas remaining in the lungs after maximum expiration is residual volume. Vital capacity (VC) is defined as the amount
of air moved in and out of the lungs through maximum inspiration and
expiration. VC, inspiratory capacity, and expiratory reserve volume are
decreased in lung pathology but are also effort dependent. Total lung
capacity (TLC) is the volume of gas occupying the lungs after maximum inhalation.
The flow-­volume relationship offers a valuable means at the bedside or in an office setting to detect abnormal pulmonary mechanics
and response to therapy with relatively inexpensive and easy-­to-­use
devices. After maximum inhalation, the patient forcefully exhales

FEFmax

FEF25%
Normal flow volume
loop with forced
expiration and inspiration
FEF25%-75%

FEF75%

Expiration
Flow

pulmonary thromboembolism and hypovolemia. Perfusion of poorly
ventilated alveoli is referred to as intrapulmonary right-­to-­left shunting or venous admixture. Examples include pneumonia, asthma, and
hyaline membrane disease. In intrapulmonary airway obstruction, the
closing capacity is abnormally increased and can exceed the FRC. In
such situations, perfusion of poorly ventilated alveoli during tidal respiration results in venous admixture.
The usual scan uses intravenous injection of material (macroaggregated human serum albumin labeled with 99mTc) that will be trapped in
the pulmonary capillary bed. The distribution of radioactivity, proportional to pulmonary capillary blood flow, is useful in evaluating pulmonary embolism, as well as congenital cardiovascular and pulmonary
defects. Acute changes in the distribution of pulmonary perfusion can
reflect alterations of pulmonary ventilation.
The distribution of pulmonary ventilation can also be determined
by scanning after the patient inhales a radioactive gas such as xenon­133. After the intravenous injection of xenon-­133 dissolved in saline,
pulmonary perfusion and ventilation can be evaluated by continuous
recording of the rate of appearance and disappearance of the xenon
over the lung. Appearance of xenon early after injection is a measure
of perfusion, and the rate of washout during breathing is a measure of
ventilation in the pediatric population. The most important indication
for this test is the demonstration of defects in the pulmonary arterial
distribution that can occur with congenital malformations or pulmonary embolism. Spiral reconstruction CT with contrast medium
enhancement is helpful in evaluating pulmonary thrombi and emboli.
Abnormalities in regional ventilation are also easily demonstrable in
congenital lobar emphysema, cystic fibrosis, and asthma.

25%

50%

75%

Volume

FEV1

Inspiration

Fig. 421.9 Flow-­volume loop in a normal person performed after

maximal inspiration followed by forced complete expiration and forced
complete inhalation. Maximum forced expiratory flow (FEFmax) represents maximum flow during expiration. This is attained soon after initiation of the expiration. Fall in expiratory flow is gradual until it reaches
zero after exhalation is complete. FEF25–75% represents mean flow from
25% (FEF25%) to 75% (FEF75%) of exhaled forced expiratory volume
(FEV), also termed forced vital capacity (FVC). FEV1 is the amount of
volume after 1 second of forced exhalation. Normally FEV1 is around
80% of FVC. (Courtesy Dr. Ashok Sarnaik.)

through a mouthpiece into the device until residual volume is reached,
followed by maximum inhalation (Fig. 421.9). Flow is plotted against
volume. Maximum forced expiratory flow (FEFmax) is generated
in the early part of exhalation, and it is a commonly used indicator
of airway obstruction in asthma and other obstructive lesions. Provided maximum pressure is generated consistently during exhalation, a decrease in flow is a reflection of increased airway resistance

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2520 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
FEFmax
FEF25%

FEFmax
Intrapulmonary
Airway Obstruction

FEF25%-75%
Restrictive
Disorder

FEF25%
FEF25%-75%

Volume

FEV1

Inspiration

Expiration

FEF75%

Flow

intrapulmonary airway obstruction and
restrictive disorders. Note that in intrapulmonary airway obstruction, there
is a decrease in maximum forced expiratory flow (FEFmax), FEF25–75%, and forced
expiratory volume 1/forced vital capacity (FEV1/FVC%). The middle part of the
expiratory loop appears concave. In restrictive disorders, the flow-­volume loop
assumes a more vertically oblong shape
with reduction in FVC but not the FEV1/
FVC%. Expiratory and inspiratory flow
rates are relatively unaffected. (Courtesy
Dr. Ashok Sarnaik.)

Expiration

Flow

volume loops in
Fig. 421.10 Flow-­

FEF75%

Inspiration

Infant

Volume (percent of total
lung capacity)

tion between chest wall and lung recoil in infants compared with adults.
The elastic recoil of a relatively more
compliant chest wall is balanced by the
lung recoil at a lower-­volume functional
residual capacity (FRC) in infants compared with adults. (Courtesy Dr. Ashok
Sarnaik.)

Adult

Chest wall

100

Fig. 421.11 Schematic of interac-

Volume

FEV1

Lung

Chest wall

100

80

80

60

60

40

40

Lung

FRC
20

20

FRC

20 10

0

10 20 30 40

Pressure (cm H2O)

(RAW). The total volume exhaled during this maneuver is forced vital
capacity (FVC). Volume exhaled in 1 second is referred to as forced
expiratory volume 1 (FEV1). FEV1/FVC is expressed as a percentage
of FVC. FEF25–75% is the mean flow between 25% and 75% of FVC,
and is considered relatively effort independent. Individual values and
shapes of flow-­volume curves show characteristic changes in obstructive and restrictive respiratory disorders (Fig. 421.10). In intrapulmonary airway obstruction such as asthma or cystic fibrosis, there is a
reduction of FEFmax, FEF25–75%, FVC, and FEV1/FVC. Also, there is
a characteristic concavity in the middle part of the expiratory curve.
In restrictive lung disease such as interstitial pneumonia (see Chapter
448.5) and kyphoscoliosis (see Chapter 467.5), FVC is decreased with
relative preservation of airflow and FEV1/FVC. The flow-­volume curve
assumes a vertically oblong shape compared with normal. Changes in
shape of the flow-­volume loop and individual values depend on the
type of disease and the extent of severity. Serial determinations provide valuable information regarding disease evolution and response
to therapy.
FRC has important pathophysiologic implications. Chest wall compliance is a major determinant of FRC. Because the chest wall and the

30 20 10

0

10 20 30 40

Pressure (cm H2O)

lungs recoil in opposite directions at rest, FRC is reached at the point
where the outward elastic recoil of the thoracic cage counterbalances
the inward lung recoil. This balance is attained at a lower lung volume
in a young infant’s ribs because they are oriented much more horizontally and the diaphragm is flatter and less domed. Consequently,
the infant is unable to duplicate the efficiency of upward and outward
movement of obliquely oriented ribs or the downward displacement of
a domed diaphragm in an adult to expand the thoracic capacity. This
creates an extremely high thoracic compliance compared with older
children and adults (Fig. 421.11). The measured FRC in infants is
higher than expected because infant respiratory muscles maintain the
thoracic cage in an inspiratory position at all times. In addition, young
infants experience some amount of air trapping during expiration.
Alveolar gas composition changes during inspiration and expiration.
Alveolar Po2 (PAo2) increases and alveolar Pco2 (PAco2) decreases
during inspiration as fresh atmospheric gas enters the lungs. During
exhalation, PAo2 decreases and PAco2 increases as pulmonary capillary blood continues to remove oxygen from and add CO2 into the
alveoli (Fig. 421.12). FRC acts as a buffer, minimizing the changes in
PAo2 and PAco2 during inspiration and expiration. FRC represents the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 421 u Diagnostic Approach to Respiratory Disease
Inspiration

Expiration

c

101
100
99

mean

Volume

PAO2 (torr)

102

2521

98

b

PACO2 (torr)

41
40

mean

39

a

38
37

Distending Pressure
Time (seconds)

Fig. 421.12 Alveolar Po2 rises and Pco2 falls during inspiration as

fresh atmospheric gas is brought into the lungs. During expiration, the
opposite changes occur as pulmonary capillary blood continues to remove O2 and add CO2 from the alveoli without atmospheric enrichment. Note that during the early part of inspiration, alveolar Po2 continues to fall and Pco2 continues to rise because of inspiration of the
dead space that is occupied by the previously exhaled gas. (Courtesy
Dr. Ashok Sarnaik; modified from Comroe JH. Physiology of Respiration, 2nd ed. Chicago: Year Book Medical Publishers; 1974:12.)

environment available for pulmonary capillary blood for gas exchange
at all times.
A decrease in FRC is often encountered in alveolar interstitial diseases and thoracic deformities. The major pathophysiologic consequence of decreased FRC is hypoxemia. Reduced FRC results in a
sharp decline in PAo2 during exhalation because a limited volume is
available for gas exchange. Po2 of pulmonary capillary blood therefore
falls excessively during exhalation, leading to a decline in arterial Po2
(PAo2). Any increase in PAo2 (and therefore Pao2) during inspiration cannot compensate for the decreased Pao2 during expiration. The
explanation for this lies in the shape of the O2-­Hb dissociation curve,
which is sigmoid shaped (see Fig. 421.5). Because most of the oxygen
in blood is combined with Hb, it is the percentage of oxyhemoglobin
(So2) that gets averaged rather than the Po2. Although an increase in
arterial Po2 cannot increase O2-­Hb saturation >100%, there is a steep
desaturation of Hb below a Po2 of 50 torr; thus decreased So2 during exhalation as a result of low FRC leads to overall arterial desaturation and hypoxemia. The adverse pathophysiologic consequences of
decreased FRC are ameliorated by applying positive end-­expiratory
pressure (PEEP) and increasing the inspiratory time during mechanical ventilation.
The lung pressure-­volume relationship is markedly influenced by
FRC (Fig. 421.13). Pulmonary compliance is decreased at abnormally
low or high FRC.
FRC is abnormally increased in intrathoracic airway obstruction,
which results in incomplete exhalation, and is abnormally decreased
in alveolar-­interstitial diseases. At excessively low or high FRC, tidal
respiration requires higher inflation pressures compared to normal
FRC. Abnormalities of FRC result in increased work of breathing with
spontaneous respiration and increased barotrauma in mechanical
ventilation.
The measurement of respiratory function in infants and young children can be difficult because of the lack of cooperation. Attempts have
been made to overcome this limitation by creating standard tests that
do not require the patient’s active participation. Respiratory function
tests still provide only a partial insight into the mechanisms of respiratory disease at early ages.
Whether restrictive or obstructive, most forms of respiratory disease
cause alterations in lung volume and its subdivisions. Restrictive diseases typically decrease TLC. TLC includes residual volume, which is

Fig. 421.13 Lung compliance is significantly influenced by the func-

tional residual capacity (FRC). The same change in pressure is associated with less change in volume when FRC is abnormally decreased (a)
or abnormally increased (c) compared with the normal state (b). (Courtesy Dr. Ashok Sarnaik.)

not accessible to direct determinations. It must therefore be measured
indirectly by gas dilution methods or, preferably, by plethysmography.
Restrictive disease also decreases VC. Obstructive diseases produce
gas trapping and thus increase residual volume and FRC, particularly
when these measurements are considered with respect to TLC.
Lung Clearance Index (LCI) is a test that uses multiple-­breath
washouts to demonstrate airway physiology. The test involves the
gradual replacement of a tracer gas such as nitrogen, which is normally in the lungs or within biologically inert gas, with 100% oxygen.
This gradual washout of the tracer gas requires no complex respiratory
maneuvers but has some technical challenges. The variability of LCI
in healthy children and adolescents is low, and LCI has been shown
to discriminate against healthy individuals and patients with chronic
conditions such as cystic fibrosis or asthma. LCI reports gas mixing
efficiency, which is an index of lung function, with the diseased lung
taking a longer time to wash out the tracer gas than a healthy lung.
LCI has been shown to be able to detect lung disease before FEV1 and
therefore may be a tool for early detection of lung pathology.
Airway obstruction is most commonly evaluated from determinations of gas flow in the course of a forced expiratory maneuver. The
peak expiratory flow is reduced in advanced obstructive disease. The
wide availability of simple devices that perform this measurement at
the bedside makes it useful for assessing children who have airway
obstruction. Evaluation of peak flows requires a voluntary effort, and
peak flows may not be altered when the obstruction is moderate or
mild. Other gas flow measurements require that the child inhale to
TLC and then exhale as far and as fast as possible for several seconds.
Cooperation and good muscle strength are therefore necessary for the
measurements to be reproducible. FEV1 correlates well with the severity of obstructive diseases. The maximal midexpiratory flow rate, the
average flow during the middle 50% of the forced VC, is a more reliable indicator of mild airway obstruction. Its sensitivity to changes in
residual volume and VC, however, limits its use in children with more
severe disease. The construction of flow-­volume relationships during the forced VC maneuvers overcomes some of these limitations by
expressing the expiratory flows as a function of lung volume.
A spirometer is used to measure VC and its subdivisions and expiratory (or inspiratory) flow rates (see Fig. 421.8). A simple manometer
can measure the maximal inspiratory and expiratory force a subject
generates, normally at least 30 cm H2O. This is useful in evaluating
the neuromuscular component of ventilation. Expected normal values
for VC, FRC, TLC, and residual volume are obtained from prediction
equations based on body height.
Flow rates measured by spirometry usually include the FEV1 and the
maximal midexpiratory flow rate. More information results from a
maximal expiratory flow-­volume curve, in which expiratory flow rate

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2522 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
is plotted against expired lung volume (expressed in terms of either VC
or TLC). Flow rates at lung volumes less than approximately 75% VC
are relatively independent of effort. Expiratory flow rates at low lung
volumes (<50% VC) are influenced much more by small airways than
flow rates at high lung volumes (FEV1). The flow rate at 25% VC is a
useful index of small airway function. Low flow rates at high lung volumes associated with normal flow at low lung volumes suggest upper
airway obstruction.
Airway resistance (RAW) is measured in a plethysmograph, or alternatively, the reciprocal of RAW, airway conductance, may be used.
Because RAW measurements vary with the lung volume at which they
are taken, it is convenient to use specific airway resistance, SRAW
(SRAW = RAW/lung volume), which is nearly constant in subjects older
than age 6 years (normally <7 sec/cm H2O).
Impulse oscillometry (IOS) is a tool that can be used in minimally
cooperative patients such as young children. This technology uses
properties of sound waves at different frequencies during normal tidal
breathing to estimate resistance in airflow. This tool can differentiate
small from large airway obstruction and measures bronchodilatory
response. Although the tool is fairly easy to use, normative values are
few, which limits the use across patients, but it may be a good tool to
track airway resistance across time in conditions such as asthma.
The diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide is related to oxygen diffusion and is measured by rebreathing from a container with a known
initial concentration of carbon monoxide or by using a single-­breath
technique. Decreases in diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide reflect
decreases in effective alveolar capillary surface area or decreases in diffusibility of the gas across the alveolar-­capillary membrane. Primary
diffusion abnormalities are unusual in children; therefore this test is
most commonly employed in children with rheumatologic or autoimmune diseases and in children exposed to toxic drugs to the lungs (e.g.,
oncology patients) or chest wall radiation. Regional gas exchange can
be conveniently estimated with the perfusion-­ventilation xenon scan.
Determining arterial blood gas levels also discloses the effectiveness of
alveolar gas exchange.
Pulmonary function testing, although rarely resulting in a diagnosis, is helpful in defining the type of process (obstruction, restriction)
and the degree of functional impairment, in following the course and
treatment of disease, and in estimating the prognosis. It is also useful
in preoperative evaluation and in confirming functional impairment in
patients with subjective complaints but a normal physical examination.
In most patients with obstructive disease, a repeat test after administering a bronchodilator is warranted.
Most tests require some cooperation and understanding by the
patient. Interpretation is greatly facilitated if the test conditions and
the patient’s behavior during the test are known. Infants and young
children who cannot or will not cooperate with test procedures can
be studied in a limited number of ways, which often require sedation.
Flow rates and pressures during tidal breathing, with or without transient interruption of the flow, may be useful to assess some aspects of
RAW or obstruction and to measure compliance of the lungs and thorax. Expiratory flow rates can be studied in sedated infants with passive
compression of the chest and abdomen using a rapidly inflatable jacket.
Gas dilution or plethysmographic methods can also be used in sedated
infants to measure FRC and RAW.
The measurement of fractional exhaled nitric oxide (FENO) is
used as a surrogate measure for eosinophilic inflammation of the lower
airways. It can be used as a part of a diagnostic evaluation for asthma, a
tool for predicting or assessing an individual’s response to antiinflammatory therapy, and in monitoring adherence to treatment. A number of commercially available devices are available for measurement
of FENO. Some degree of cooperation is required, but FENO has been
measured in preschool-­age children. Normal cutoff values vary by age
and device. FENO has been used to distinguish asthma (particularly
allergic asthma) from other wheezing phenotypes. FENO achieves
moderate diagnostic performance for the detection of asthma in children, with sensitivity, specificity, and diagnostic odds ratios of 0.79,
0.81, and 16.52, respectively. Children managed using FENO may have
fewer asthma exacerbations. A decrease of FENO by 20% is considered

indicative of a positive response to antiinflammatory therapy. Some
studies using FENO have contradictory results, and it is likely that
FENO may be more useful in some asthma phenotypes than in others.
The measurement of nasal nitric oxide (nNO) is accomplished by
collecting exhaled gas from a nostril during glottic closure and correlates to nasal mucosal inflammation. There is great interest in the
use of nNO to diagnose primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD, see Chapter
425), because of challenges diagnosing PCD with currently available
techniques. A cutoff value of less than or equal to 77 nL/min showed
excellent sensitivity and specificity using a standardized technique at
multiple centers. Equipment for measurement of nNO is not yet FDA-­
approved in the United States.

MICROBIOLOGY: EXAMINATION OF LUNG
SECRETIONS

The specific diagnosis of infection in the lower respiratory tract
depends on the proper handling of an adequate specimen obtained in
an appropriate fashion. Nasopharyngeal or throat cultures are often
used but might not correlate with cultures obtained by more direct
techniques from the lower airways. Sputum specimens are preferred
and are often obtained from patients who do not expectorate by deep
throat swab immediately after coughing or by saline nebulization.
Specimens can also be obtained directly from the tracheobronchial tree
by nasotracheal aspiration (usually heavily contaminated), by transtracheal aspiration through the cricothyroid membrane (useful in adults
and adolescents but hazardous in children), and in infants and children
by a sterile catheter inserted into the trachea either during direct laryngoscopy or through a freshly inserted endotracheal tube. A specimen
can also be obtained at bronchoscopy.
A specimen obtained by direct expectoration is usually assumed to
be of tracheobronchial origin, but often, especially in children, it is not
from this source. The presence of alveolar macrophages (large mononuclear cells) is the hallmark of tracheobronchial secretions. Nasopharyngeal and tracheobronchial secretions can contain ciliated epithelial
cells, which are more commonly found in sputum. Nasopharyngeal
and oral secretions often contain large numbers of squamous epithelial
cells. Sputum can contain both ciliated and squamous epithelial cells.
During sleep, mucociliary transport continually brings tracheobronchial secretions to the pharynx, where they are swallowed. An
early-­morning fasting gastric aspirate often contains material from the
tracheobronchial tract that is suitable for culture for acid-­fast bacilli.
The absence of polymorphonuclear leukocytes in a Wright-­stained
smear of sputum or bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid containing adequate numbers of macrophages may be significant evidence
against a bacterial infectious process in the lower respiratory tract,
assuming that the patient has normal neutrophil counts and function.
Eosinophils suggest allergic disease. Iron stains can reveal hemosiderin
granules within macrophages, suggesting pulmonary hemosiderosis.
Specimens should also be examined by Gram stain. Bacteria within or
near macrophages and neutrophils can be significant. Viral pneumonia
may be accompanied by intranuclear or cytoplasmic inclusion bodies
visible on Wright-­stained smears, and fungal forms may be identifiable
on Gram or silver stains.
With advances in the area of genomics and the speed with which
it is possible to identify microbes, microbiologic analysis has been
expanded. Specific bacteria in the lungs of children with cystic fibrosis (see Chapter 454) are linked to morbidity and mortality. There is
a correlation between patient age and morbidity and mortality (as
expected), but important microbes also are correlated either negatively
or positively with early or late pathogenic processes. Haemophilus
influenzae (see Chapter 240) is negatively correlated, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Stenotrophomonas maltophilia (see Chapter 251.3)
have a strong positive correlation with patient age in cystic fibrosis.
The microbiota diversity is much broader in those who are healthier
individuals or those who are younger patients with cystic fibrosis than
the older and sicker population.
In addition, the microbiomes in the respiratory tract of smokers and
nonsmokers differ substantially. In all patients, most of the bacteria
found in the lungs are also present in the oral cavity, but some bacteria,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 421 u Diagnostic Approach to Respiratory Disease

2523

such as Haemophilus and enterobacteria, are much more represented in
the lungs than in the mouth. Principal differences in microbiome composition between smokers and nonsmokers are found in the mouth.
For example, Neisseria levels are much lower in smokers as compared
with nonsmokers. Overall, the microbiome diversity in smokers was
also reduced compared with nonsmokers.

THE MICROBIOME

Whereas some studies have looked at the microbiome in the lungs and
others in the gut, there is evidence to believe that there is a gut-­lung
axis regarding the microbiome. For example, the airway epithelium
regulates local immunity (IgA antibodies, defensins) and can stimulate
a Th2 airway response. Other cytokines are also involved such as transforming growth factor beta (TGFB). Bacteriophages are also important in the airways because these may protect the airways from certain
bacteria. Importantly, the gut microbiome, influenced by many factors
such as diet, environment, mode of childbirth, socioeconomic status,
and antibiotic use, affects in a major way the development of immunity in the growing infant and child. Similarly, the lungs are not sterile,
and bacteria exist in the lungs of children. It is possible therefore that
the microbiome in one site affects the response to the microbiome in
another through either immunity or predisposition to inflammation.
The Amish and Hutterite populations are genetically identical, but
they have very different asthma prevalence, with the Hutterite having
4-­6 times more asthma than the Amish population. One study showed
that the Amish household had ∼7 times more dust endotoxin. Extracts
from the Amish dust inhibited airway hyper-­responsiveness, but this
did not happen from the Hutterite samples. Although this does not
separate between the lung and gut, it suggests that the hygiene hypothesis is important and that microbes and immunity are tied together
in the genesis of asthma, especially in children, and in the formative
stages of immunity and allergic diseases.

Ciliary Structure and Function

Cilia are cellular organelles that project from respiratory epithelial
surfaces into the lumen. They are microscopic hairlike structures, are
motile, and beat in a coordinated fashion from distal to proximal airways to clear mucus, fluid, and inhaled particles. They generally beat at
a fast pace, on the order of 10-­20 Hz.
Their structure is typical, consisting of nine peripheral doublet
microtubules arranged in a circular fashion, with two single microtubules centrally located. As such, this structure is called an axoneme.
Each microtubule has an inner and an outer dynein arm, with radial
spokes connecting each peripheral pair with the central microtubules.
Each epithelial cell lining the respiratory tract has around 200 such
cilia. The cilia on the surface beat synchronously not only over the surface of one such cell but across many cells. How cells communicate to
induce the rhythmic beating function of cilia across a sheet of cells is
not well understood.
Hundreds of proteins make up each cilium in the respiratory tract,
and many pathogenic variants have been described. Such variants render these cilia dysfunctional, leading to a respiratory disease, PCD.
Often the structure is also abnormal, but cilia can be dysfunctional
without an apparent EM abnormal structure (Fig. 421.14).

Cardiopulmonary Exercise Testing

Exercise testing (see Chapter 472.5) is a direct approach for measuring
respiratory gas exchange and assessing causes of exercise limitations.
Measurements of heart and respiratory rate, minute ventilation, oxygen consumption, carbon dioxide production, and arterial blood gases
during incremental exercise loads often provide invaluable information about the physiologic source of the symptom. Exercise is a strong
provocateur of bronchospasm in susceptible patients, so exercise testing can be useful in the diagnosis of asthma as the cause of difficulty
breathing with exertion. Several diseases or physiologic states distinct
from asthma may mimic symptoms of exercise-­induced bronchoconstriction. In addition to cardiac disease and decreased fitness, exercise-­
induced laryngeal obstruction (EILO) leads to significant limitations. In
selected cases, performance of laryngoscopy during cardiopulmonary

A

100 nm

B

100 nm

Fig. 421.14 A, Cross-­section of a normal EM cilium structure. Note

the typical axoneme structure, consisting of the nine peripheral doublet
microtubules arranged in a circular fashion, with two single microtubules centrally located. Each microtubule has an inner and an outer
dynein arm. B, Abnormal axoneme, as there are a number of doublets
missing the dynein arms, which are clear in A, with normal cilium. Note
also the disorganized location of the nine peripheral microtubules in
some of the cilia. (Courtesy Dr. Denise Malicki, UCSD/Rady Children’s
Hospital.)

exercise testing lends essential diagnostic information. Application of
cardiopulmonary testing for assessment of aerobic fitness and disease
limitations provides invaluable diagnostic information to aid clinicians
investigating exercise intolerance.

Sleep Studies
See Chapter 31.

AIRWAY VISUALIZATION AND LUNG SPECIMEN–
BASED DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
Laryngoscopy

The evaluation of stridor, problems with vocalization, and other upper
airway abnormalities usually requires direct inspection. Although indirect (mirror) laryngoscopy may be reasonable in older children and
adults, it is rarely feasible in infants and small children. Direct laryngoscopy may be performed with either a rigid or a flexible instrument.
The safe use of the rigid scope for examining the upper airway requires
topical anesthesia and either sedation or general anesthesia, whereas
the flexible laryngoscope can often be used in the office setting with or
without sedation. Further advantages to the flexible scope include the
ability to assess the airway without the distortion that may be introduced by the use of the rigid scope and the ability to assess airway
dynamics more accurately. Because there is a relatively high incidence
of concomitant lesions in the upper and lower airways, it is often prudent to examine the airways above and below the glottis, even when the
primary indication is in the upper airway (stridor).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2524 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Bronchoscopy and Bronchoalveolar Lavage

Bronchoscopy is the inspection of the airways. Flexible bronchoscopy
is commonly used in pediatrics to visualize the airways. There are several sizes of scopes that enable visualization of the proximal and distal
airways. Many fiberoptic bronchoscopes also have a channel that allows
for the collection of fluids, or in larger scopes allows for the insertion
of tools such as forceps, baskets, or brushes. The smallest scope is a
2.2-­mm-­outer-­diameter bronchoscope that does not have a channel;
therefore only visualization of the airways is possible. The smallest
bronchoscope with a channel is a 2.8-­mm-­outer-­diameter scope, which
has a 1.2-­mm working channel. This scope is commonly used in pediatrics and is predominately used to visualize the airways and to collect
a lavage sample. In larger “adult” scopes (4.9-­5.5 mm outer diameter
and 2.0 mm working channel), small instruments such as forceps can
be inserted. Therapeutic bronchoscopes require an even larger channel (2.8 mm working channel, which requires a larger outer diameter
of 6.0-­6.3 mm), so they are not used often in the pediatric population. A smaller scope (4.1 mm outer diameter) with a larger working
channel (2.0 mm) has become available and may make interventional
pediatric bronchoscopy more common in the future. For urgent or
emergent therapeutic interventions, such as foreign body aspiration or
large volume hemoptysis, surgical rigid bronchoscopy remains the preferred approach, as it provides the largest working channel and permits
simultaneous ventilation during the procedure.
Visualization of the airway has improved through advances in optics
and insertable tools. Narrow-­band imaging and autofluorescence
imaging bronchoscopes are two types of bronchoscopes that can aid
in the detection of airway lesions. These scopes appear no different
than the conventional bronchoscope but use different bandwidths of
lights to highlight mucosal and submucosal vasculature. These bronchoscopes allow the operator to see airway mucosal lesions that would
be difficult to see or not be seen under normal white light. The autofluorescence imaging bronchoscope uses the fluorophores, such as
tryptophan, collagen, elastin, and porphyrins, within the airway tissue
to emit fluorescence when irradiated with a light source. Changes in
concentrations of the fluorophores in bronchial mucosa would appear
as an irregular lesion when viewed with an autofluorescence imaging bronchoscope. The narrow-­band imaging bronchoscope also uses
light absorption characteristics of Hb to enhance images of blood vessels. This bronchoscope uses blue wavelengths in the range of 390-­445
nm to visualize the mucosal layer capillaries and green wavelengths
at 530 and 550 nm to detect deeper submucosal thick blood vessels.
Both types of bronchoscopes allow the operator to detect findings that
would not be seen under normal white light. These scopes are being
used more often in adults, where lesions are biopsied to detect premalignant and malignant lesions, although use has been described to better delineate characteristics of a subglottic cyst in a 3-­month-­old infant.
These scopes are noninvasive and would be well tolerated in children,
but are currently only available in larger “adult” sizes.
The most common diagnostic tool used in conjunction with fiberoptic bronchoscopy is bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL). BAL is a method
used to obtain a representative specimen of fluid and secretions from
the lower respiratory tract, which is useful for the cytologic and microbiologic diagnosis of lung diseases, especially in those who are unable
to expectorate sputum. BAL is performed after the general inspection of the airways and before tissue sampling with a brush or biopsy
forceps. It is accomplished by gently wedging the scope into a lobar,
segmental, or subsegmental bronchus and sequentially instilling and
withdrawing sterile nonbacteriostatic saline in a volume sufficient to
ensure that some of the aspirated fluid contains material that originated
from the alveolar space. Nonbronchoscopic BAL can be performed in
intubated patients by instilling and withdrawing saline through a catheter passed though the artificial airway and blindly wedged into a distal
airway, although nonbronchoscopic BAL is less accurate and therefore
has less reliable results. In either case, the presence of alveolar macrophages documents that an alveolar sample has been obtained. Because
the methods used to perform BAL involve passage of the equipment
through the upper airway, there is a risk of contamination of the specimen by upper airway secretions. Careful cytologic examination and

quantitative microbiologic cultures are important for correct interpretation of the data. BAL can often obviate the need for more invasive
procedures such as open lung biopsy, especially in immunocompromised patients.
Indications for diagnostic bronchoscopy and BAL include recurrent
or persistent pneumonia or atelectasis, unexplained or localized and
persistent wheeze, the suspected presence of a foreign body, hemoptysis, suspected congenital anomalies, mass lesions, interstitial disease,
and pneumonia in the immunocompromised host. Indications for
therapeutic bronchoscopy and BAL include bronchial obstruction by
mass lesions, foreign bodies or mucus plugs, and general bronchial toilet and bronchopulmonary lavage. The patient undergoing bronchoscopy ventilates around the flexible scope, whereas with the rigid scope,
ventilation is accomplished through the scope. Rigid bronchoscopy is
preferentially indicated for extracting foreign bodies and removing tissue masses. It is also indicated in patients with massive hemoptysis. In
other cases, the flexible scope has multiple advantages: it can be passed
through endotracheal or tracheostomy tubes, can be introduced into
bronchi that come off the airway at acute angles, and can be safely and
effectively inserted with topical anesthesia and conscious sedation.
Transbronchial and endobronchial biopsies. Transbronchial biopsies are performed by passing forceps (1.2 mm pediatric or 2.0 mm
adult) through the distal visualized airways to sample small airways and
alveolar tissues. Transbronchial biopsy (TBB) in children is standard
practice to monitor the lung allograft after transplantation, either as a
surveillance or clinically indicated procedure. For the nontransplant
patient, transbronchial biopsies can be used to facilitate the diagnosis
of diffuse lung disease (such as interstitial pneumonitis, bronchiolitis
obliterans, lymphoma, eosinophilic pneumonia, sarcoidosis, or hypersensitivity pneumonia) or large focal processes (such as infections or
unresolving pneumonia). Transbronchial biopsies do produce smaller
samples than video-­assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) or open
lung biopsies, but with a lower attendant risk; the risk of pneumothorax has been estimated to be 2–8%. Endobronchial biopsies can be performed in children, but there are relatively few clinical situations where
they are broadly applied.
The endobronchial ultrasound (EBUS), is a scope that allows ultrasound images to be captured from the tip of the scope and also contains a working channel to collect a needle biopsy. This technology is
particularly useful in the evaluation of mediastinal lymph nodes. This
scope may be useful in the diagnosis of other conditions such as sarcoidosis, tuberculosis, and the staging of lung cancers. EBUS has been
investigated in older pediatric patients as an alternative to CT-­guided
transthoracic fine needle aspiration for the evaluation of mediastinal
lymph nodes and can be safely performed in children age 9+ years. A
meta-­analysis of 153 pediatric patients revealed a pooled sampling adequacy and combined diagnostic yield of EBUS of 98% (95% confidence
interval [CI], 92–100%) and 61% (95% CI, 43–77%), respectively, and
was generally safely tolerated.
Bronchial thermoplasty (BT) is a technology that can be used
to treat patients with severe asthma. This technique uses the working channel of a fiberoptic bronchoscope to deliver targeted thermal
energy to the airways to ablate the airway smooth muscle (ASM). The
ablation of ASM may reduce the ability to bronchoconstrict. It may
also affect the ASM’s role in immunomodulation, ultimately altering
the pathophysiology of asthma. BT requires a minimum of a 2.0-­mm
working channel, which limits this technology to bronchoscopes of at
least an outer diameter of 4.1 mm. BT is performed over three bronchoscopy sessions to ablate different sections of the lung: right lower
lobe, left lower lobe, and bilateral upper lobes. The right middle lobe is
usually not ablated because of the potential risk of stenosis. The treatments are divided into three separate procedures to allow for shorter
procedure times (30-­60 minutes per session) and decrease the risk of
widespread irritation. Patients are also given oral steroids for 3 days
before the procedure to decrease airway inflammation associated with
the ablation procedure. Although BT is gaining momentum in the
treatment of severe asthma in the adult population, the long-­term ramifications of ASM ablation in a child are still unknown. In adult studies that investigated BT as a therapeutic tool for asthma, small studies

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 421 u Diagnostic Approach to Respiratory Disease
demonstrated an improvement in clinical symptoms, and in a smaller
cohort of patients (12 patients), no significant structural abnormalities
were seen on chest radiographs 5 years after the procedure.
Complications: Regardless of the instrument used, the procedure
performed, or the resulting indications, the most common complications are related to sedation. The relatively more common complications related to the bronchoscopy itself include transient hypoxemia,
laryngospasm, bronchospasm, and cardiac arrhythmias. Iatrogenic
infection, bleeding, pneumothorax, and pneumomediastinum are rare
but reported complications of bronchoscopy or BAL, with increased
complications when concomitant biopsies are taken. Bronchoscopy in
the setting of possible pulmonary abscess or hemoptysis must be undertaken with advance preparations for definitive airway control, mindful
of the possibility that pus or blood might flood the airway. Subglottic
edema is a more common complication of rigid bronchoscopy than of
flexible procedures, in which the scopes are smaller and less likely to
traumatize the mucosa. Post-­bronchoscopy croup is treated with oxygen, mist, vasoconstrictor aerosols, and corticosteroids as necessary.

Thoracoscopy

The pleural cavity can be examined through a thoracoscope, which is
similar to a rigid bronchoscope. The thoracoscope is inserted through
an intercostal space and the lung is partially deflated, allowing the
operator to view the surface of the lung, the pleural surface of the mediastinum and the diaphragm, and the parietal pleura. Multiple thoracoscopic instruments can be inserted, allowing endoscopic biopsy of the
lung or pleura, resection of blebs, abrasion of the pleura, and ligation
of vascular rings.

Thoracentesis

For diagnostic or therapeutic purposes, fluid can be removed from the
pleural space by needle. In general, as much fluid as possible should be
withdrawn, and an upright chest roentgenogram should be obtained
after the procedure. Complications of thoracentesis include infection,
pneumothorax, and bleeding. Thoracentesis on the right may be complicated by puncture or laceration of the capsule of the liver and, on the
left, by puncture or laceration of the capsule of the spleen. Specimens
obtained should always be cultured, examined microscopically for evidence of bacterial infection, and evaluated for total protein and total
differential cell counts. Lactic acid dehydrogenase, glucose, cholesterol,
triglyceride (chylous), and amylase determinations may also be useful.
If malignancy is suspected, cytologic examination is imperative.
Transudates result from mechanical factors influencing the rate of
formation or reabsorption of pleural fluid and generally require no further diagnostic evaluation. Exudates result from inflammation or other
disease of the pleural surface and underlying lung, so they require a
more complete diagnostic evaluation. In general, transudates have a
total protein of <3 g/dL or a ratio of pleural protein to serum protein
<0.5, a total leukocyte count of less than 2,000/mm3 with a predominance of mononuclear cells, and low lactate dehydrogenase levels.
Exudates have high protein levels and a predominance of polymorphonuclear cells (although malignant or tuberculous effusions can have a
higher percentage of mononuclear cells). Complicated exudates often
require continuous chest tube drainage and have a pH <7.2. Tuberculous effusions can have low glucose and high cholesterol content.

Lung Biopsy

Lung biopsy may be the only way to establish a diagnosis, especially
in protracted, noninfectious disease. In infants and small children,
thoracoscopic or open surgical biopsies are the procedures of choice,
and in expert hands there is low morbidity. Biopsy through the
3.5-­mm-­diameter pediatric bronchoscopes limits the sample size and
diagnostic abilities. In addition to ensuring that an adequate specimen
is obtained, the surgeon can inspect the lung surface and choose the site
of biopsy. In older children, transbronchial biopsies can be performed
using flexible forceps through a bronchoscope, an endotracheal tube, a
rigid bronchoscope, or an endotracheal tube, usually with fluoroscopic

2525

guidance. This technique is most appropriately used when the disease
is diffuse, as in the case of Pneumocystis pneumonia, or after rejection
of a transplanted lung. The diagnostic limitations related to the small
size of the biopsy specimens can be mitigated by the ability to obtain
several samples. The risk of pneumothorax related to bronchoscopy is
increased when transbronchial biopsies are part of the procedure; however, the ability to obtain biopsy specimens in a procedure performed
with topical anesthesia and conscious sedation is advantageous.

Genetic Testing

Genetic testing enables precise diagnosis of an expanding array of
respiratory diseases. In addition to diagnosis, genetic testing can contribute to discussions of disease severity and prognosis, aids counseling
surrounding family planning, and serves as a cornerstone for development and application of novel therapeutics. Applications range from
identification of known diseases in a child with nonspecific symptoms
to early identification in an otherwise asymptomatic individual. Whole
genome sequencing can be applied to rapidly diagnose children presenting with rare diseases or new phenotypes of known disorders.
Acute respiratory distress in the neonatal period rarely occurs secondary to several known genetic disorders. Genetic testing can be
considered for full-­term infants with unexplained severe respiratory
disease or premature infants with lung disease out of proportion to what
would be expected for gestational age. Genetic pulmonary disorders
causing neonatal respiratory distress include surfactant dysfunction
from pathogenic variants in ABCA3, SFTPB, or SFTPC genes; brain-­
lung-­thyroid syndrome due to variants in NKX2-­1; pulmonary alveolar
proteinosis associated with abnormalities in the granulocyte macrophage colony-­stimulating factor (GM-­CSF) receptor; and primary disorders of lung development, such as alveolar capillary dysplasia, caused
by pathogenic variants in FOXF1.
Although disorders associated with obstructive lung disease, abnormal mucus clearance, and bronchiectasis may present at any age, newborn screening for cystic fibrosis can often facilitate genetic diagnosis
in infancy with subsequent early interventions to prevent or slow the
onset of lung disease. Although cystic fibrosis is a monogenic disorder, pathogenic variants in many different genes cause PCD. Presently,
the spectrum of genetic variants leading to PCD has not yet been fully
identified, and the disease should still be suspected even if a genetic
panel is negative. As clinical genetic panels and understanding of variants of unknown significance expand, it is expected that diagnosis of
PCD will streamline.
Several systemic diseases associated with diffuse lung disease can be
diagnosed genetically, including Birt-­Hogg-­Dube, Ehlers-­Danlos, Marfan, hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia, and Hermansky-­Pudlak
syndrome. Children presenting with unexplained alveolar hypoventilation suspected of congenital central hypoventilation syndrome
should undergo PHOX2B pathogenic variant specific testing, the gold
standard for diagnosis. The previous disorders are only a partial list
of the many known childhood diseases associated with a genetic and
respiratory component. When there is high suspicion for a genetic condition but gene panels or single-­gene analysis are normal, practitioners
can pursue whole exome/genome sequencing. Whole exome/genome
sequencing can also be applied as first-­line genetic testing in critically
ill patients in need of rapid diagnosis. Genetic counseling is paramount
when pursuing genetic testing, especially in the pediatric population.
The spectrum of diseases able to be diagnosed using genetic testing will
continue to grow and is expected to not only encompass the rare disorders discussed earlier but also the more common respiratory disorders
seen in childhood.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The editors are grateful to Dr. Ashok Sarnaik, much of whose work on
the “Blood Gas Analysis” and “Pulmonary Function Testing” sections
from previous editions of this chapter is retained here.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2526 Part XVII u The Respiratory System

Chapter 422

Chronic or Recurrent
Respiratory Symptoms
Anne G. Griffiths
Respiratory tract symptoms, including cough, dyspnea, wheeze, and stridor, may persist for long periods in a number of children; other children
have persistent or recurring lung infiltrates with or without symptoms.
Determining the cause of these chronic findings can be difficult because
symptoms can be caused by a close succession of unrelated acute respiratory tract infections or by a single pathophysiologic process. Specific
and easily performed diagnostic tests do not exist for many acute and
chronic respiratory conditions. Pressure from the affected child’s family
for a quick remedy because of concern over symptoms related to breathing may complicate diagnostic and therapeutic efforts.
A systematic approach to the diagnosis and treatment of these children consists of assessing whether the symptoms are the manifestation of a minor problem or a life-­threatening process; determining
the likely underlying pathogenic mechanism; selecting the simplest
effective therapy for the underlying process, which often is only symptomatic therapy; and then carefully evaluating its effect. Failure of this
approach to identify the process responsible or to effect improvement
signals the need for more extensive and perhaps invasive diagnostic
efforts, including bronchoscopy.

JUDGING THE SERIOUSNESS OF CHRONIC
RESPIRATORY COMPLAINTS

Clinical manifestations suggesting that respiratory tract illness
may be life-­threatening or associated with the potential for chronic
disability are listed in Table 422.1. If none of these findings is
detected, the chronic respiratory process is less likely to be serious. Active, well-­nourished, and appropriately growing infants who
present with intermittent noisy breathing but no other physical or
laboratory abnormalities require only symptomatic treatment and
parental reassurance. Benign-­appearing but persistent symptoms
are occasionally the harbinger of a serious lower respiratory tract
problem. By contrast, occasionally children (e.g., with infection-­
related asthma) have recurrent life-­threatening episodes but few
or no symptoms in the intervals. Repeated examinations over an
extended period, both when the child appears healthy and when the
child is symptomatic, may be helpful in sorting out the severity and
chronicity of lung disease.

RECURRENT OR PERSISTENT COUGH

Cough is a reflex response of the lower respiratory tract to stimulation of irritant or cough receptors in the airways’ mucosa. The most
common cause of recurrent or persistent cough in children is airway reactivity (asthma). Because cough receptors also reside in the
pharynx, paranasal sinuses, stomach, and external auditory canal,
the source of a persistent cough may need to be sought beyond the
lungs. Specific lower respiratory stimuli include excessive secretions,
aspirated foreign material, inhaled dust particles or noxious gases,
cold or dry air, and an inflammatory response to infectious agents or
allergic processes. Table 422.2 lists some of the conditions responsible
for chronic cough. Table 422.3 presents characteristics of cough that
can aid in distinguishing a cough’s origin. Additional useful information can include a history of atopic conditions (asthma, eczema,
urticaria, allergic rhinitis), a seasonal or environmental variation
in frequency or intensity of cough, and a strong family history of
atopic conditions, all suggesting an allergic cause; symptoms of malabsorption or a family history indicating cystic fibrosis; symptoms
related to feeding, suggesting aspiration or gastroesophageal reflux;

a choking episode, suggesting foreign body aspiration; headache or
facial edema associated with sinusitis; and a smoking or vaping history in older children and adolescents or the presence of a smoker in
the home (Table 422.4).
The physical examination can provide further information pertaining to the cause of chronic cough. Posterior pharyngeal drainage
combined with a nighttime cough suggests chronic upper airway disease such as sinusitis. An overinflated chest suggests chronic airway
obstruction, as in asthma or cystic fibrosis. An expiratory wheeze,
with or without diminished intensity of breath sounds, strongly suggests asthma or asthmatic bronchitis, but may also be consistent with
a diagnosis of cystic fibrosis, bronchomalacia, vascular ring, aspiration
of foreign material, or pulmonary hemosiderosis. Careful auscultation
during forced expiration may reveal expiratory wheezes that are otherwise undetectable and that are the only indication of underlying reactive airways. Coarse crackles suggest bronchiectasis, including cystic
fibrosis, but can also occur with an acute or subacute exacerbation of
asthma. Clubbing of the digits is often seen in most patients with bronchiectasis but in only a few other respiratory conditions with chronic
cough (see Table 422.2). Tracheal deviation suggests foreign body aspiration, pleural effusion, a mediastinal mass or an enlarged lymph node.
Allowing sufficient examination time to detect a spontaneous cough
is important. If a spontaneous cough does not occur, asking the child to
take a maximal breath and forcefully exhale repeatedly usually induces
a cough reflex. Most children can cough on request by 4-­5 years of age.
Children who cough as often as several times a minute with regularity are
likely to have a habit (tic) cough (see Chapter 37). If the cough is loose,
every effort should be made to obtain sputum; many older children can
comply. It is sometimes possible to pick up sputum with a throat swab
quickly inserted into the lower pharynx while the child coughs with the
tongue protruding. Clear mucoid sputum is most often associated with
an allergic reaction or asthmatic bronchitis. Cloudy (purulent) sputum
suggests a respiratory tract infection but can also reflect increased cellularity (eosinophilia) from an asthmatic process. Very purulent sputum
is characteristic of bronchiectasis (see Chapter 452). Malodorous expectorations suggest anaerobic infection of the lungs. In cystic fibrosis (see
Chapter 454), the sputum, even when purulent, is rarely foul smelling.
Laboratory tests can help in the evaluation of a chronic cough. Sputum
quality assessment includes a low number of squamous epithelial cells,
found only in the upper airway, and a higher number of leukocytes. However, laboratories use different values, and in the case of cystic fibrosis,
pathogens found are associated with lower respiratory infection even in
the absence of satisfactory quality by various criteria. Sputum eosinophilia
suggests asthma, asthmatic bronchitis, or hypersensitivity reactions of the
lung (see Chapter 448), but a polymorphonuclear cell response suggests
infection; if sputum is unavailable, the presence of eosinophilia in nasal
secretions also suggests atopic disease. If most of the cells in sputum are
macrophages, postinfectious hypersensitivity of cough receptors should
be suspected. Sputum macrophages can be stained for hemosiderin content, which is diagnostic of pulmonary hemosiderosis (see Chapter 457),
or for lipid content, which in large amounts suggests, but is not specific
for, repeated aspiration. Rarely, children may expectorate partial casts of
the airway, which can be characterized by investigating causes of plastic
bronchitis. However, in young children, bronchoalveolar lavage may be
needed for optimal ascertainment of alveolar macrophages. Children
whose coughs persists for more than 6 weeks should be tested for cystic
fibrosis regardless of their race or ethnicity (see Chapter 454). Sputum culture is helpful in evaluation of cystic fibrosis, but less so for other conditions because throat flora can contaminate the sample.
Hematologic assessment can reveal a microcytic anemia that is the
result of pulmonary hemosiderosis (see Chapter 457) or hemoptysis,
or eosinophilia that accompanies asthma and other hypersensitivity
reactions of the lung. Infiltrates on the chest radiograph suggest cystic fibrosis, bronchiectasis, foreign body, hypersensitivity pneumonitis, tuberculosis, or other infection. When asthma-­equivalent cough is
suggested, a trial of bronchodilator therapy may be diagnostic. If the
cough does not respond to initial therapeutic efforts, more specific
diagnostic procedures may be warranted, including an immunologic or
allergic evaluation, chest and paranasal sinus imaging, esophagograms,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 422 u Chronic or Recurrent Respiratory Symptoms
Table 422.1  Indicators of Serious Chronic Lower
­Respiratory Tract Disease in Children
Persistent fever
Ongoing limitation of activity
Failure to grow
Failure to gain weight appropriately
Clubbing of the digits
Persistent tachypnea and labored ventilation
Shortness of breath and exercise intolerance
Chronic purulent sputum
Persistent hyperinflation
Substantial and sustained hypoxemia
Refractory infiltrates on chest x-­ray
Persistent pulmonary function abnormalities
Hemoptysis
Family history of heritable lung disease
Cyanosis and hypercarbia
Unusual (opportunistic) or recurrent nonpulmonary infections

Table 422.2  Differential Diagnosis of Recurrent and
­Persistent Cough in Children
RECURRENT COUGH
Asthma
Drainage from upper airways
Aspiration
Frequently recurring respiratory tract infections in immunocompetent
or immunodeficient patients
Symptomatic Chiari malformation
Idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis
Hypersensitivity (allergic) pneumonitis
PERSISTENT COUGH
Hypersensitivity of cough receptors after infection
Reactive airway disease (asthma)
Chronic sinusitis
Chronic rhinitis (allergic or nonallergic)
Bronchitis or tracheitis caused by infection or smoke exposure
Bronchiectasis, including cystic fibrosis, primary ciliary dyskinesia,
immunodeficiency
Tic cough
Foreign body aspiration
Recurrent aspiration owing to pharyngeal incompetence,
tracheolaryngoesophageal cleft, or tracheoesophageal fistula
Gastroesophageal reflux, with or without aspiration
Pertussis
Extrinsic compression of the tracheobronchial tract (vascular ring,
neoplasm, lymph node, lung cyst)
Tracheomalacia, bronchomalacia
Endobronchial or endotracheal tumors
Endobronchial tuberculosis
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis
Fungal infections
Inhaled irritants, including tobacco smoke
Irritation of external auditory canal
Angiotensin-­converting enzyme inhibitors

tests for gastroesophageal reflux (see Chapter 369), and special microbiologic studies including rapid viral testing. Evaluation of ciliary morphology, nasal endoscopy, laryngoscopy, and bronchoscopy may also
be indicated.
Tic cough or somatic cough disorder (psychogenic cough or habit
cough) must be considered in any child with a cough that has lasted
for weeks or months, that has been refractory to treatment, and that
disappears with sleep or with distraction. Typically, the cough is abrupt
and loud and has a harsh, honking, or barking quality. A disassociation between the intensity of the cough and the child’s affect is typically
striking. This cough may be absent if the physician listens outside the
examination room, but it will reliably appear immediately on direct
attention to the child and the symptom. It typically begins with an

2527

Table 422.3  Characteristics of Cough and Other Clinical
Features and Possible Causes
SYMPTOMS AND SIGNS

POSSIBLE UNDERLYING
­ETIOLOGY*

Auscultatory findings (wheeze,
crepitations/crackles, differential
breath sounds)

Asthma, bronchitis, pneumonia,
congenital lung disease, foreign
body aspiration, airway
abnormality

Cough characteristics (e.g.,
cough with choking, cough
quality, cough starting from
birth)

Congenital airway or lung
abnormalities

Cardiac abnormalities (including
murmurs)

Any cardiac illness

Chest pain

Asthma, functional, pleuritis

Chest wall deformity

Any chronic lung disease,
neuromuscular disorders

Daily moist or productive cough

Chronic bronchitis, suppurative
lung disease

Digital clubbing

Suppurative lung disease,
arteriovenous shunt

Dyspnea (exertional or at rest)

Compromised lung function of
any chronic lung or cardiac
disease

Failure to thrive

Compromised lung function,
immunodeficiency, cystic fibrosis

Feeding difficulties (including
choking and vomiting)

Compromised lung function,
aspiration, anatomic disorders

Hemoptysis

Bronchitis, foreign body aspiration,
suctioning trauma, pulmonary
hemorrhage

Immune deficiency

Atypical and typical recurrent
respiratory or nonrespiratory
infections

Medications or drugs

Angiotensin-­converting enzyme
inhibitors, puffers, illicit drug
use

Neurodevelopmental
abnormality

Aspiration

Recurrent pneumonia

Immunodeficiency, congenital
lung problem, airway
abnormality

Symptoms of upper respiratory
tract infection

Can coexist or be a trigger for an
underlying problem

*This is not an exhaustive list; only the more common respiratory diseases are
mentioned.
Modified from Chang AB, Landau LI, Van Asperen PP, et al. Cough in children:
definitions and clinical evaluation. Thoracic Society of Australia and New Zealand.
Med J Aust. 2006;184(8):398–403, Table 2.

upper respiratory infection but then lingers. The child misses many
days of school because the cough disrupts the classroom. This disorder accounts for many unnecessary medical procedures and courses of
medication. It is treatable with assurance that a pathologic lung condition is absent and that the child should resume full activity, including school. This assurance, together with speech therapy techniques
that allow the child to reduce musculoskeletal tension in the neck and
chest and that increase the child’s awareness of the initial sensations
that trigger cough, has been highly successful. Self-­hypnosis is another
successful therapy, often effective with one session. The designation “tic
cough” or “somatic cough disorder” is preferable to “habit cough” or
“psychogenic cough” because it carries no stigma and because most of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2528 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Table 422.4  Clinical Clues About Cough
CHARACTERISTIC

THINK OF

Staccato, paroxysmal

Pertussis, cystic fibrosis, foreign
body, Chlamydia spp.,
Mycoplasma spp.

Followed by “whoop”

Pertussis

All day, never during sleep

Tic cough

Barking, brassy

Croup, tic cough, tracheomalacia,
tracheitis, epiglottitis

Hoarseness

Laryngeal involvement (croup,
recurrent laryngeal nerve
involvement), papillomatosis

Abrupt onset

Foreign body, pulmonary
embolism

During or following exercise

Reactive airway disease

Accompanies eating, drinking

Aspiration, gastroesophageal
reflux, tracheoesophageal fistula

Throat clearing

Postnasal drip, vocal tic

Productive (sputum)

Infection, cystic fibrosis,
bronchiectasis

Night cough

Sinusitis, reactive airway disease,
gastroesophageal reflux

Seasonal

Allergic rhinitis, reactive airway
disease

Immunosuppressed patient

Bacterial pneumonia, Pneumocystis
jiroveci, Mycobacterium
tuberculosis, Mycobacterium
avium-­intracellulare,
cytomegalovirus, fungi

Dyspnea

Hypoxia, hypercarbia

Animal exposure

Chlamydia psittaci (birds), Yersinia
pestis (rodents), Francisella
tularensis (rabbits), Q fever
(sheep, cattle), hantavirus
(rodents), histoplasmosis
(pigeons)

Geographic

Histoplasmosis (Mississippi,
Missouri, Ohio River Valley),
coccidioidomycosis
(Southwest), blastomycosis
(North and Midwest)

Workdays with clearing on days
off

Occupational exposure

From Kliegman RM, Greenbaum LA, Lyle PS. Practical Strategies in Pediatric Diagnosis
and Therapy, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2004:19.

these children do not have significant emotional problems. When the
cough disappears, it does not reemerge as another symptom. Nonetheless, other symptoms such as irritable bowel syndrome may be present
in the patient or family.

FREQUENTLY RECURRING OR PERSISTENT
STRIDOR

Stridor, a harsh, medium-­pitched, inspiratory sound associated
with obstruction of the laryngeal area or the extrathoracic trachea,
is often accompanied by a croupy cough and hoarse voice. Stridor
is most commonly observed in children with croup (see Chapter
433); foreign bodies and trauma can also cause acute stridor. A

Table 422.5  Causes of Recurrent or Persistent Stridor in
Children
RECURRENT
Allergic (spasmodic) croup
Respiratory infections in a child with otherwise asymptomatic
anatomic narrowing of the large airways
Laryngomalacia
PERSISTENT
Laryngeal obstruction
Laryngomalacia
Papillomas, hemangiomas, other tumors
Cysts and laryngoceles
Laryngeal webs
Bilateral abductor paralysis of the cords
Foreign body
Tracheobronchial disease
Tracheomalacia
Subglottic tracheal webs
Endobronchial, endotracheal tumors
Subglottic tracheal stenosis, congenital or acquired
Extrinsic masses
Mediastinal masses
Vascular ring
Lobar emphysema
Bronchogenic cysts
Thyroid enlargement
Esophageal foreign body
Tracheoesophageal fistula
OTHER
Gastroesophageal reflux
Macroglossia, Pierre Robin syndrome
Cri-­du-­chat syndrome
Paradoxical vocal cord dysfunction
Hypocalcemia
Vocal cord paralysis
Chiari crisis
Severe neonatal episodic laryngospasm caused by SCN4A
pathogenic variant

few children, however, acquire recurrent stridor or have persistent stridor from the first days or weeks of life (Table 422.5). Most
congenital anomalies of large airways that produce stridor become
symptomatic soon after birth. Increase of stridor when a child is
supine suggests airway malacia, such as laryngomalacia or tracheomalacia. It is important to note that when evaluating for a specific
anatomic cause of abnormal breath sounds, it is not uncommon to
identify additional congenital anomalies of the airway. An accompanying history of hoarseness or aphonia suggests involvement of
the vocal cords. Associated dysphagia may also suggest a vascular ring. In a child with intermittent stridor (with wheezing) that
accompanies physical activity and is not responsive to asthma therapies, paradoxical vocal cord dysfunction may be considered. Paradoxical vocal cord dysfunction may be highly supported by history
and confirmed by laryngoscopy during an exercise challenge test
if symptoms are successfully elicited. Speech therapy and behavior
modification may be therapeutic.
Physical examination for recurrent or persistent stridor is usually
unrewarding, although changes in its severity and intensity resulting from changes of body position should be assessed. Anteroposterior and lateral radiographs, contrast esophagography, fluoroscopy,
computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) are potentially useful diagnostic tools. In most cases, direct
observation by laryngoscopy is necessary for definitive diagnosis.
Undistorted views of the larynx are best obtained with fiberoptic
laryngoscopy.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 422 u Chronic or Recurrent Respiratory Symptoms
RECURRENT OR PERSISTENT WHEEZE

See also Chapter 439.
Parents often complain that their child wheezes, when, in fact,
they are reporting respiratory sounds that are audible without a
stethoscope, produce palpable resonance throughout the chest, and
occur most prominently in inspiration. Some of these children have
stridor, although many have audible sounds when the supraglottic
airway is incompletely cleared of feedings or secretions.
True wheezing is a relatively common and particularly troublesome manifestation of obstructive lower respiratory tract disease in
children. The site of obstruction may be anywhere from the intrathoracic trachea to the small bronchi or large bronchioles, but the
sound is generated by turbulence in larger airways that collapse
with forced expiration (see Chapter 421). Children younger than
2-­3 years are especially prone to wheezing, because bronchospasm,
mucosal edema, and accumulation of excessive secretions have a
relatively greater obstructive effect on their smaller airways. In
addition, the compliant airways in young children collapse more
readily with active expiration. Isolated episodes of acute wheezing, such as can occur with bronchiolitis, are not uncommon, but
wheezing that recurs or persists for more than 4 weeks suggests
other diagnoses. Most recurrent or persistent wheezing in children
is the result of airway reactivity. Nonspecific environmental factors
such as cigarette smoke may be important contributors.
Frequently recurring or persistent wheezing starting at or soon
after birth suggests a variety of other diagnoses, including congenital
structural abnormalities involving the lower respiratory tract or tracheobronchomalacia (see Chapter 434). Wheezing that attends cystic
fibrosis is most common in the first year of life. Sudden onset of severe
wheezing in a previously healthy child should suggest foreign body
aspiration.
Either wheezing or coughing when associated with tachypnea and
hypoxemia may be suggestive of interstitial lung disease (see Chapter 448.5). However, many patients with interstitial lung disease demonstrate no symptoms other than rapid breathing on initial physical
examination. Although chest roentgenograms may be normal in interstitial lung disease, diffuse abnormalities on chest x-­ray may support
further evaluation in patients suspected to have interstitial lung disease
with characteristic findings described on high-­resolution CT scan and
lung biopsy.
Repeated examination may be required to verify a history of wheezing in a child with episodic symptoms and should be directed toward
assessing air movement, ventilatory adequacy, and evidence of chronic
lung disease, such as fixed overinflation of the chest, growth failure,
and digital clubbing. Patients should be assessed for oropharyngeal
dysphagia in cases of suspected recurrent aspiration. Clubbing suggests chronic lung infection and is rarely prominent in uncomplicated
asthma. Tracheal deviation from foreign body aspiration should be
sought. It is essential to rule out wheezing secondary to congestive
heart failure. Allergic rhinitis, urticaria, eczema, or evidence of ichthyosis vulgaris suggests asthma or asthmatic bronchitis. The nose should
be examined for polyps, which can exist with allergic conditions or
cystic fibrosis.
Sputum eosinophilia and elevated serum immunoglobulin E levels suggest allergic reactions. A forced expiratory volume in 1 second increase
of 15% in response to bronchodilators confirms reactive airways. Specific
microbiologic studies, special imaging studies of the airways and cardiovascular structures, diagnostic studies for cystic fibrosis, and bronchoscopy should be considered if the response is unsatisfactory.

RECURRENT AND PERSISTENT LUNG INFILTRATES

Radiographic lung infiltrates resulting from acute pneumonia usually
resolve within 1-­3 weeks, but a substantial number of children, particularly infants, fail to completely clear infiltrates within a 4-­week period.
These children may be febrile or afebrile and may display a wide range
of respiratory symptoms and signs. Persistent or recurring infiltrates
present a diagnostic challenge (Table 422.6).

2529

Table 422.6  Diseases Associated with Recurrent, Persistent,
or Migrating Lung Infiltrates Beyond the
Neonatal Period
Aspiration
Pharyngeal incompetence (e.g., cleft palate)
Laryngotracheoesophageal cleft
Tracheoesophageal fistula
Gastroesophageal reflux
Lipid aspiration
Neurologic dysphagia
Developmental dysphagia
Congenital anomalies
Lung cysts (congenital pulmonary airway malformation)
Bronchopulmonary sequestration
Congenital lobar emphysema
Bronchogenic cysts
Bronchial stenosis or aberrant bronchus
Vascular ring
Congenital heart disease with large left-­to-­right shunt
Pulmonary lymphangiectasia
Genetic conditions
Cystic fibrosis
Primary ciliary dyskinesia
Sickle cell disease (acute chest syndrome)
Immunodeficiency, phagocytic deficiency
Humoral, cellular, combined immunodeficiency states
Chronic granulomatous disease and related phagocytic defects
Hyper–immunoglobulin E syndromes
Complement deficiency states
Immunologic and autoimmune diseases
Asthma
Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis
Pulmonary hemosiderosis
Collagen-­vascular diseases
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis
Infection, congenital
Cytomegalovirus
Rubella
Syphilis
Infection, acquired
Cytomegalovirus
Tuberculosis
HIV
Other viruses
Chlamydia
Mycoplasma, Ureaplasma
Pertussis
Fungal organisms
Pneumocystis jiroveci
Visceral larva migrans
Inadequately treated bacterial infection
Interstitial pneumonitis and fibrosis
Usual interstitial pneumonitis
Lymphocytic interstitial pneumonia (AIDS)
Nonspecific interstitial pneumonia (NSIP)
Genetic disorders of surfactant synthesis, secretion
Desquamative interstitial pneumonia
Cryptogenic organizing pneumonia
Acute interstitial pneumonia (Hamman-­Rich syndrome)
Alveolar proteinosis
Drug-­induced, radiation-­induced inflammation and fibrosis
Neoplasms and neoplastic-­like conditions
Primary or metastatic pulmonary tumors
Leukemia
Histiocytosis
Eosinophilic pneumonias
Other etiologies
Bronchiectasis (congenital, postinfectious)
Sarcoidosis

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2530 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Symptoms associated with chronic lung infiltrates in the first several
weeks of life (but not related to neonatal respiratory distress syndrome)
suggest infection acquired in utero or during descent through the birth
canal. Early appearance of chronic infiltrates can also be associated
with cystic fibrosis or congenital anomalies that result in aspiration or
airway obstruction. A history of recurrent infiltrates such as in middle
lobe syndrome (see Chapter 444), wheezing, and cough may reflect
asthma, even in the first year of life.
A controversial association has been posed regarding recurrent
lung infiltrates in pulmonary hemosiderosis related to cow’s milk
hypersensitivity or unknown causes appearing in the first year of life.
Children with a history of bronchopulmonary dysplasia often have
episodes of respiratory distress attended by wheezing and new lung
infiltrates. Recurrent pneumonia in a child with frequent otitis media,
nasopharyngitis, adenitis, or dermatologic manifestations suggests an
immunodeficiency state, complement deficiency, or phagocytic defect
(see Chapters 164, 167, and 172). Primary ciliary dyskinesia is also of
consideration in patients with frequent otitis media and suppurative
sinopulmonary disease, with or without accompanying heterotaxy or
history of neonatal respiratory distress (see Chapter 455). Pulmonary
sequestration may be suspected in patients with recurrent findings on
radiograph that occur in the same location, both during illness and
when well (see Chapter 444). Traction bronchiectasis may also be suggested on radiography with persistent findings in a given region of the
film after a history of respiratory infection. Particular attention must
be directed to the possibility that the infiltrates represent lymphocytic
interstitial pneumonitis or opportunistic infection associated with HIV
infection or immunocompromise (see Chapter 322). A history of paroxysmal coughing in an infant suggests pertussis syndrome or cystic
fibrosis. Persistent infiltrates in a toddler, especially with loss of volume, may suggest foreign body aspiration.
Overinflation and infiltrates suggest cystic fibrosis or chronic
asthma. A silent chest with infiltrates should arouse suspicion of
alveolar proteinosis (see Chapter 456), Pneumocystis jiroveci infection (see Chapter 290), genetic disorders of surfactant synthesis
and secretion causing interstitial pneumonitis, or tumors. Growth
should be carefully assessed to determine whether the lung process has had systemic effects, indicating substantial severity and
chronicity, as in cystic fibrosis or alveolar proteinosis. Cataracts,
retinopathy, or microcephaly suggest in utero infection. Chronic
rhinorrhea can be associated with atopic disease, cow’s milk intolerance, cystic fibrosis, primary ciliary dyskinesia, or congenital
syphilis. The absence of tonsils and cervical lymph nodes suggests
an immunodeficiency state.
Diagnostic studies should be performed selectively, based on
information obtained from history and physical examination and
on a thorough understanding of the conditions listed in Table 422.6.
Cytologic evaluation of sputum, if available, may be helpful. Chest
CT often provides more precise anatomic detail concerning the
infiltrate or further characterizes a region of anatomic abnormality. Bronchoscopy is indicated for detecting foreign bodies, congenital or acquired anomalies of the tracheobronchial tract, and
obstruction by endobronchial or extrinsic masses (see Chapters 434-­438).
Bronchoscopy provides access to secretions that can be studied
cytologically and microbiologically. Alveolar lavage fluid is diagnostic for alveolar proteinosis and persistent pulmonary hemosiderosis and can suggest aspiration syndromes. Ciliary biopsy may be
obtained from the inferior epithelial surface of nasal turbinates or
from the lower airway during bronchoscopy. If all appropriate studies have been completed and the condition remains undiagnosed,
lung biopsy might yield a definitive diagnosis, such as in interstitial
lung disease or fungal disease.

Optimal medical or surgical treatment of chronic lung infiltrates
often depends on a specific diagnosis, but chronic conditions may
be self-­limiting (severe and prolonged viral infections in infants);
in these cases, symptomatic therapy can maintain adequate lung
function until spontaneous improvement occurs. Helpful measures
include airway clearance therapy for excessive secretions, antibiotics for bacterial infections, supplementary oxygen for hypoxemia,
and maintenance of adequate nutrition. Because the lung of a young
child has remarkable recuperative potential, normal lung function
may ultimately be achieved with treatment despite the severity of
pulmonary insult occurring in infancy or early childhood.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

422.1 Extrapulmonary Diseases with
Pulmonary Manifestations
John Palla and Susanna A. McColley
Respiratory symptoms commonly originate from extrapulmonary
processes. The respiratory system adapts to metabolic demands and
is exquisitely responsive to cortical input; therefore tachypnea is
common in the presence of metabolic stress such as fever, and dyspnea may be related to anxiety. Cough most commonly arises from
upper or lower respiratory tract disorders, but it can originate from
the central nervous system, as with cough tic or somatic cough,
and it can be a prominent symptom in children with gastroesophageal reflux disease. Chest pain does not commonly arise from
pulmonary processes in otherwise healthy (no history of asthma)
children but more often has a neuromuscular, musculoskeletal, or
inflammatory etiology. Cyanosis can be caused by cardiac and/
or hematologic disorders. Dyspnea and exercise intolerance can
have a number of extrapulmonary causes. These extrapulmonary
disorders may be suspected on the basis of the history and physical
examination, or they may be considered in children in whom diagnostic studies have atypical findings or who show poor response
to usual therapy. Table 422.7 lists more common extrapulmonary
causes of such symptoms.

EVALUATION

In the evaluation of a child or adolescent with respiratory symptoms,
it is important to obtain a detailed medical history, family history, and
review of systems to evaluate the possibility of extrapulmonary origin.
A comprehensive physical examination is also essential to identify
signs of extrapulmonary disease.
Disorders of other organ systems, and many systemic diseases,
can have significant respiratory system involvement. Although
it is most common to encounter these complications in patients
with known diagnoses, respiratory system disease is sometimes
the sole or most prominent symptom at the time of presentation.
Acute aspiration during feeding can be the presentation of neuromuscular disease in an infant who initially appears to have normal muscle tone and development. Pulmonary complications can
be life-­threatening, particularly in immunocompromised patients.
The onset of respiratory findings may be insidious; for example,
pulmonary vascular involvement in patients with systemic vasculitis may appear as an abnormality in diffusing capacity of the lung
for carbon monoxide before the onset of symptoms. Table 422.8 lists
disorders that commonly have respiratory complications.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 422 u Chronic or Recurrent Respiratory Symptoms

2531

Table 422.7  Respiratory Signs and Symptoms Originating from Outside the Respiratory Tract
SIGN OR SYMPTOM

NONRESPIRATORY CAUSE(S)

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

CLUES TO DIAGNOSIS

Chest pain

Musculoskeletal

Inflammation (overuse, postviral,
idiopathic), injury

Reproducible pain with palpation

Chest pain

Cardiac disease

Inflammation (pericarditis), ischemia
(anomalous coronary artery, vascular
disease)

Precordial pain, friction rub on
examination; exertional pain,
radiation to arm or neck

Chest pain

Gastroesophageal reflux disease

Esophageal inflammation and/or spasm

Heartburn, abdominal pain

Cyanosis

Congenital heart disease

Right-­to-­left shunt

Neonatal onset, lack of response to
oxygen

Methemoglobinemia

Increased levels of methemoglobin interfere
with delivery of oxygen to tissues

Drug or toxin exposure, lack of
response to oxygen

Toxin exposure, drug side effect,
or overdose

Variable, but often metabolic acidosis

Drug or toxin exposure confirmed by
history or toxicology screen, normal
oxygen saturation measured by
pulse oximetry

Anxiety, panic disorder

Increased respiratory drive and increased
perception of respiratory efforts

Occurs during stressful situation,
other symptoms of anxiety and/or
depression

Exercise intolerance

Anemia

Inadequate oxygen delivery to tissues

Pallor, tachycardia, history of bleeding,
prolonged or heavy menstrual
periods, history of inadequate diet

Exercise intolerance

Deconditioning

Self-­explanatory

History of inactivity, obesity

Hemoptysis

Nasal bleeding

Posterior flow of bleeding leads to
suspicion of pulmonary origin

History and physical findings suggest
nasal source; normal chest examination
and chest radiography

Upper gastrointestinal tract
bleeding

Hematemesis mimics hemoptysis

History and physical examination
suggest gastrointestinal source;
normal chest examination and chest
radiography

Congenital or acquired cardiac
disease

Pulmonary overcirculation (atrioseptal
defect, ventriculoseptal defect,
patent ductus arteriosus), left ventricular
dysfunction

Murmur

Laryngeal and bronchial response to
stomach contents

Emesis, pain, heartburn

Vagally mediated bronchoconstriction

Refractory to bronchodilators

Dyspnea

Wheezing, cough,
dyspnea

Wheezing, cough

Gastroesophageal reflux disease

Refractory to bronchodilators
Radiographic changes (prominent
pulmonary vasculature, pulmonary
edema)

Table 422.8  Disorders with Frequent Respiratory Tract Complications
UNDERLYING DISORDER(S)

RESPIRATORY COMPLICATIONS

DIAGNOSTIC TESTS

Autoimmune disorders

Pulmonary vascular disease, restrictive lung
disease, pleural effusion (especially systemic lupus
erythematosus), upper and lower airway disease
(granulomatosis with polyangiitis)

Spirometry, lung volume determination, oximetry,
diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide,
chest radiography, upper airway endoscopy, and/or CT

Central nervous system disease
(static or progressive)

Aspiration of oral or gastric contents, impaired
airway clearance

Chest radiography, videofluoroscopic swallowing study,
esophageal pH probe, fiberoptic bronchoscopy

Immunodeficiency

Infection, bronchiectasis, impaired mucociliary
clearance

Chest radiography, fiberoptic bronchoscopy, chest CT

Liver disease

Pleural effusion, hepatopulmonary syndrome

Chest radiography, assessment of platypnea-­orthodeoxia

Malignancy and its therapies

Infiltration, metastasis, malignant or infectious
effusion, parenchymal infection, graft versus host
disease (bone marrow transplant), fibrosis

Chest radiography, chest CT, fiberoptic bronchoscopy,
lung biopsy

Neuromuscular disease

Hypoventilation, atelectasis, pneumonia, restrictive
lung disease, impaired airway clearance

Spirometry, lung volume determination, respiratory
muscle force measurements

Obesity

Restrictive lung disease, obstructive sleep apnea
syndrome, asthma

Spirometry, lung volume determination, nocturnal
polysomnography

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2532 Part XVII u The Respiratory System

Chapter 423

Sudden Infant Death
Syndrome
Fern R. Hauck, Rebecca F. Carlin,
Rachel Y. Moon, and Carl E. Hunt
Sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) is defined as the sudden,
unexpected death of an infant that remains unexplained after a thorough postmortem examination, which includes a complete autopsy,
investigation of the scene of death, review of the medical history,
and appropriate laboratory testing. An autopsy is essential to identify possible natural explanations for sudden unexpected death such
as congenital anomalies or infection and to diagnose nonaccidental trauma. The autopsy typically cannot distinguish between SIDS
and intentional suffocation, but the scene investigation and medical
history may be of help if inconsistencies are evident. Sudden unexpected infant death (SUID) is a term that generally encompasses
all SUIDs that occur during sleep, including SIDS (ICD-­10 R95),
accidental suffocation and strangulation in bed (ICD-­10 W75), and
ill-­defined deaths, also known as undetermined (ICD-­10 R99).

EPIDEMIOLOGY

SIDS, accidental suffocation and strangulation in bed, and illdefined deaths are among the most common causes of overall infant
mortality. SIDS is one of the leading causes of postneonatal (28 days
to 1 year of age) mortality. The annual rate of SIDS in the United
States was stable at 1.3-­1.4 per 1,000 live births (approximately
7,000 infants per year) before 1992, when it was recommended that
infants sleep nonprone as a way to reduce the risk for SIDS. Since
then, particularly after initiation of the national Back to Sleep (now
called Safe to Sleep) campaign in 1994, the rate of SIDS progressively
declined and then leveled off in 2001 at 0.55 per 1,000 live births
(2,234 infants). There has been a slower rate of decline since that
time; in 2020 the rate was 0.38 per 1,000 live births (∼1,200 infants).
The initial decline in the number of SIDS deaths in the United
States and other countries has been largely attributed to increasing
use of the supine position for sleep. In 1992, 82% of sampled infants
in the United States were placed prone for sleep. Although several
other countries have decreased prone sleeping prevalence to ≤2%,
in the United States in 2016, only 78% of infants were usually being
placed supine for sleep. Among Black infants, these rates were even
lower, at 62%.
There is increasing evidence that infant deaths previously classified as SIDS are now being classified by medical examiners and
coroners as the result of other causes, notably accidental suffocation and strangulation in bed (ICD 10 W75) and ill-­defined
deaths (ICD 10 R99). Between 1994 and 2018, there was a sevenfold
increase in the rate of accidental suffocation and strangulation in
bed, from 0.03 to 0.22 deaths per 1,000 live births. There was also
a 57% increase in the rate of ill-­defined deaths between 1995 and
2018, from 0.21 to 0.33 deaths per 1,000 live births. These sudden
and unexpected infant deaths are primarily associated with unsafe
sleeping environments, including side and prone positioning, sharing a sleep surface with others, and soft bedding in the sleep environment. Based on these trends and the commonality of many of
the sleep environment risk factors that are associated with both
SIDS and other sleep-­related SUID, risk-­reduction measures that
will be described later are applicable to all sleep-­related SUID.

PATHOLOGY

There are no autopsy findings pathognomonic for SIDS, and no findings
are required for the diagnosis, but some findings are commonly seen
on postmortem examination (Table 423.1). Petechial hemorrhages are
found in 68–95% of infants who died of SIDS and are more extensive
than in explained causes of infant mortality. Pulmonary edema is often
present and may be substantial. The reasons for these findings are
unknown.
SIDS infants have several identifiable changes in the lungs and other
organs (see Table 423.1). Nearly 65% of these infants have structural
evidence of preexisting, chronic, low-­grade asphyxia, and other studies
have identified biochemical markers of asphyxia. Infants who died of
SIDS have higher levels of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). These increases may be related to
VEGF polymorphisms (see “Genetic Risk Factors” and Table 423.3) or
might indicate recent hypoxemic events because VEGF is upregulated
by hypoxia.
Numerous studies have shown brain abnormalities that may cause
or contribute to an impaired autonomic response to an exogenous
stressor, including in the hippocampus and brainstem, the latter being
the major area responsible for respiratory and autonomic regulation
(see Table 423.1). The primary affected sites of chemoreception and
respiratory drive include peripheral chemoreceptors (e.g., carotid
body) and multiple central chemoreceptors, including the retrotrapezoid nucleus, serotonergic raphe nuclei, locus coeruleus, orexinergic
neurons, solitary tract nucleus, and the dorsal motor nucleus of the
vagus.
The ventral medulla has been a particular focus for studies in
infants who died of SIDS (see Table 423.1). It is an integrative area
for vital autonomic functions, including breathing, arousal, and
chemosensory function. Some SIDS infants have hypoplasia of
the arcuate nucleus and up to 60% have histopathologic evidence
of less extensive bilateral or unilateral hypoplasia. Consistent with
the apparent overlap between putative mechanisms for SIDS and
for unexpected late fetal deaths, approximately 30% of sudden
intrauterine unexplained deaths also have hypoplasia of the arcuate
nucleus. Imaging mass spectroscopy of postmortem medullary tissue has identified abnormal expression of multiple peptides, especially in the raphe, hypoglossal, and pyramidal nuclei that include
components for developmental neuronal/glial/axonal growth, cell
metabolism, cytoarchitecture, and apoptosis. These findings suggest that SIDS infants have abnormal neurologic development
Table 423.1  Common Postmortem and Research
Pathologic Abnormalities Observed in
Sudden Infant Death Syndrome Infants
COMMON OBSERVATIONS
Petechial hemorrhages, lungs, and pleura
Pulmonary edema
RESEARCH FINDINGS
Evidence of preexisting chronic low-­grade asphyxia
Increased cerebrospinal levels of vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF)
• Secondary to preexisting asphyxia
• VEGF polymorphisms
NEUROPATHOLOGY RESEARCH FINDINGS
Abnormalities leading to impaired autonomic responses
Peripheral and central chemoreceptor abnormalities
Ventral medullary abnormalities
• Hypoplastic arcuate nucleus
• Abnormalities in serotonin (5-­HT) neurons
• Decreases in 5-­HT1A and 5-­HT2A receptor immunoreactivity
• Extensive serotonergic brainstem abnormalities

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 423 u Sudden Infant Death Syndrome
contributing to pathogenesis, with the impairments suggesting
delayed neurologic maturation.
Neurotransmitter studies of the arcuate nucleus have also identified several receptor abnormalities relevant to state-­dependent autonomic control overall and to ventilatory and arousal responsiveness
in particular. These deficits include significant decreases in binding
to kainate, muscarinic cholinergic, and serotonin (5-­HT) receptors.
Studies of the ventral medulla have identified morphologic and biochemical deficits in 5-­HT neurons and decreased γ-­aminobutyric
acid receptor A receptor binding in the medullary serotonergic system. Immunohistochemical analyses reveal an increased number
of 5-­HT neurons and an increase in the fraction of 5-­HT neurons
showing an immature morphology, suggesting a failure or delay in
the maturation of these neurons (see Table 423.1). High neuronal
levels of interleukin (IL)-­1β are present in the arcuate and dorsal
vagal nuclei in infants with SIDS compared with controls, perhaps
contributing to molecular interactions affecting cardiorespiratory
and arousal responses.
The neuropathologic data provide compelling evidence for
altered 5-­
HT homeostasis creating an underlying vulnerability
contributing to SIDS. 5-­HT is an important neurotransmitter, and
the 5-­HT neurons in the medulla project extensively to neurons
in the brainstem and spinal cord that influence respiratory drive,
arousal, cardiovascular control, circadian regulation and non–rapid
eye movement (NREM) sleep, thermoregulation, and upper airway
reflexes. Decreases in 5-­HT1A and 5-­HT2A receptor immunoreactivity have been observed in the dorsal nucleus of the vagus, solitary
nucleus, and ventrolateral medulla. There are extensive serotoninergic brainstem abnormalities in infants with SIDS, including
increased 5-­HT neuronal count, a lower density of 5-­HT1A receptor-­
binding sites in regions of the medulla involved in homeostatic
function, and a lower ratio of 5-­HT transporter (5-­HTT) binding
density to 5-­HT neuronal count in the medulla (see Table 423.1).
Male infants with SIDS have lower receptor-­binding density than do
female infants with SIDS. Overall, these 5-­HT–related studies suggest that the synthesis and availability of 5-­HT are decreased within
5-­HT pathways, and medullary tissue levels of 5-­HT and its primary
biosynthetic enzyme (tryptophan hydroxylase) are lower in infants
with SIDS compared with age-­matched controls. Although a subset
of infants with SIDS has serotonergic abnormalities in serotonin
neurons in the medullary reticular formation, the neuropathologic
abnormalities in SIDS involve more than just a serotonergic deficiency in specific medullary nuclei and appear to involve failure
of the network of neurochemical transmitters in various subcortical locations. For example, there is a complex relationship between
serotonergic neurotransmission in the medulla and acetylcholine
and nicotinic receptors.

ENVIRONMENTAL RISK FACTORS

Major risk factors for SIDS and SUID are outlined in Table 423.2
and include both nonmodifiable and modifiable risk factors.
The persistent ethnic disparities seen in SIDS and SUID rates likely
reflect broader societal inequities. Low socioeconomic status (SES),
unemployment, housing instability, and other factors that create barriers to optimal health outcomes are highly correlated with race/ethnicity in the United States and are also associated with both higher
risk of SIDS and increased prevalence of known risk factors for these
deaths (see the next section). Although these factors are consistently
associated with higher risk, SIDS affects infants from all social strata.
In the United States, Black, American Indian, and Alaska Native infants
are 2-­3 times more likely than White infants to die of SIDS, whereas
Asian, Pacific Islander, and Hispanic infants have the lowest incidence.
Greater efforts are needed to address this persistent disparity and to
ensure that SIDS risk-­reduction education reaches all parents and
other care providers, including other family members and personnel
at daycare centers.

2533

Table 423.2  Risk Factors Associated with Sudden Infant
Death Syndrome
MATERNAL AND ANTENATAL RISK FACTORS
Elevated second-­trimester serum α-­fetoprotein
Smoking
Alcohol use
Drug use (cocaine, heroin)
Nutritional deficiency
Inadequate prenatal care
Low socioeconomic status
Younger age
Lower education
Single marital status
Shorter interpregnancy interval
Intrauterine hypoxia
Fetal growth restriction
INFANT RISK FACTORS
Age (peak 1-­4 mo)
Male gender
Ethnicity (Black, American Indian, Alaska Native)
Growth failure
No breastfeeding
No pacifier (dummy)
Preterm birth
Prone and side sleep position
Recent febrile illness (mild infections)
Inadequate immunizations
Smoking exposure (prenatal and postnatal)
Unsafe sleep environment, including soft sleeping surface, soft
bedding
Bed sharing with parent(s) or other children
Sleeping in a room separate from parent(s)
Thermal stress, overheating
Colder season, no central heating

Nonmodifiable Environmental Risk Factors

Infants are at greatest risk of SIDS at 1-­4 months of age, with most
deaths having occurred by 6 months. This characteristic age has
decreased in some countries as the SIDS incidence has declined,
with deaths occurring at earlier ages and with a flattening of the
peak age incidence. Similarly, the commonly observed winter seasonal predominance of SIDS has declined or disappeared in some
countries as prone prevalence has decreased, supporting prior findings of an interaction between sleep position and factors more common in colder months (overheating as a consequence of elevated
interior temperatures or bundling with blankets and heavy clothing,
or infection). Male infants are 30–50% more likely to be affected by
SIDS than are female infants.

Modifiable Environmental Risk Factors
Pregnancy-­Related Factors

An increased SIDS risk is associated with numerous obstetric factors, suggesting that the in utero environment of future SIDS infants
is suboptimal. SIDS infants are more commonly of higher birth
order, independent of maternal age, and of gestations after shorter
interpregnancy intervals. Parents of SIDS infants generally receive
less prenatal care and initiate care later in pregnancy, and this likely
reflects difficulties in accessing care. In addition, low birthweight,
preterm birth, and slower intrauterine and postnatal growth rates
are risk factors.

Cigarette Smoking

There is a major association between intrauterine exposure
to cigarette smoking and risk for SIDS. The incidence of SIDS
was 2-­3 times greater among infants of mothers who smoked in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2534 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
studies conducted before SIDS risk-­reduction campaigns and 4
times higher in studies after implementation of SIDS risk-­reduction
campaigns. The risk of death is progressively greater as daily cigarette use increases. The effects of smoking by the infant’s father and
other household members are more difficult to interpret because
they are highly correlated with maternal smoking. There appears
to be a small independent effect of paternal smoking, but data on
other household members have been inconsistent. The effect of prenatal smoking on SIDS risk is not believed to be caused by lower
birthweight, which is often found among infants of smoking mothers, but more likely because of alterations in autonomic function,
cardiovascular reflexes, or arousal making the infants more vulnerable to a sleep-­related death.
It is difficult to assess the independent effect of infant exposure
to environmental tobacco smoke because parental smoking behaviors during and after pregnancy are also highly correlated. However, a twofold increased risk of SIDS is found for infants exposed
only to postnatal maternal environmental tobacco smoke. There is
a dose-­response for the number of household smokers, number of
people smoking in the same room as the infant, and the number of
cigarettes smoked. These data suggest that keeping the infant free
of environmental tobacco smoke can further reduce an infant’s risk
of SIDS.

Drug and Alcohol Use

Most studies link maternal prenatal drug use, especially opiates, with an increased risk of SIDS, ranging from a 2-­to 15-­fold
increased risk. Studies looking at the association between maternal alcohol use prenatally or postnatally and SIDS have conflicting
results. In one study, periconceptional alcohol use and binge drinking in the first trimester were associated with a sixfold and an eightfold increased risk of SIDS, respectively. Similarly, a study from
Western Australia found that a report of maternal alcohol use during pregnancy was associated with an almost sevenfold increased
risk of SIDS. A Danish cohort study found that mothers admitted
to the hospital for an alcohol-­or drug-­related disorder at any time
before or after the birth of their infants had a 3-­times higher risk
of their infant dying from SIDS, and a Dutch study reported that
maternal alcohol consumption in the 24 hours before the infant
died carried an eightfold increased risk of SIDS. Siblings of infants
with fetal alcohol syndrome have a 10-­fold increased risk of SIDS
compared with controls. Although there are conflicting reports of
illicit drug use and SIDS overall, prenatal drug use, especially opiates, is associated with an increased risk of SIDS, ranging from 2-­to
15-­fold. Data on cannabis use and SIDS are extremely limited, with
only one study from New Zealand reporting results for postpartum
maternal use. This study found that nighttime cannabis use was
associated with a twofold increased risk of SIDS, whereas daytime
use was not associated with increased risk.

Infant Sleep Environment

Sleeping prone has consistently been shown to increase the risk of
SIDS. As rates of prone positioning have decreased in the general
population, the odds ratios for SIDS in infants still sleeping prone
have increased. The highest risk of SIDS occurs in infants who are
usually placed nonprone but are placed prone for last sleep (“unaccustomed prone”) or found prone (“secondary prone”). The “unaccustomed prone” position may be more likely to occur in daycare or
other settings outside the home and highlights the need for all infant
caretakers to be educated about appropriate sleep positioning.
Side-­
Sleeping: A Significant Risk Factor. The initial SIDS
risk-­
reduction campaign recommendations considered side-­
sleeping to be nearly equivalent to the supine position in reducing
the risk of SIDS. Subsequent studies documented that side-­sleeping
infants were twice as likely to die of SIDS as infants sleeping supine.
This increased risk may be related to the relative instability of the
position. Infants who are placed on their side and roll to prone are
at exceptional risk, with one study finding they are almost 9 times

more likely to die of SIDS than those placed supine. Although the
majority of SIDS occurrences are still associated with infants being
found prone, a higher proportion of SIDS is now attributed to being
placed on the side for sleeping than for being placed prone. The
current recommendations call for supine position for sleeping for
all infants except those few with specific medical conditions for
which recommending a different position may be justified, such as
those with anatomic or functional upper airway compromise when
supine.
Many parents and healthcare providers were initially concerned
that supine sleeping would be associated with an increase in adverse
consequences, such as difficulty sleeping, vomiting, or aspiration.
However, evidence suggests that the risk of regurgitation and choking is highest for prone-­sleeping infants. Some newborn nursery
staff still tend to favor side positioning, which models inappropriate
infant care practice to parents. Infants sleeping on their backs do
not have more episodes of cyanosis or apnea, and reports of apparent life-­threatening events actually decreased in Scandinavia after
increased use of the supine position. These results provide reassurance for parents and healthcare providers and should contribute to
universal acceptance of supine as the safest and optimal sleep position for infants.
Soft Sleep Surfaces and Soft or Loose Bedding. Infants should
sleep on firm, flat, noninclined surfaces without soft or loose bedding. Soft sleep surfaces and soft or loose bedding, including comforters, pillows of any kind, bumper pads, stuffed animals, mattress
toppers, pillow-­top mattresses, sheepskins, polystyrene bean pillows, and old or soft mattresses, are associated with increased risk
of SIDS. Infant sleep positioners, including pillows and wedges,
which are often marketed to hold infants on their side or at an angle
to help with reflux, are also not recommended. Based on available
research, swaddling infants, or wrapping them in a blanket, is not
recommended as a strategy to reduce SIDS. Infants who roll to the
prone position while swaddled are at particularly high risk of SIDS.
Wearable blankets are an acceptable alternative. Weighted blankets,
weighted sleepers, weighted swaddles, or other weighted objects
should not be placed on or near the sleeping infant.
Overheating. Overheating, based on indicators such as higher
room temperature, a history of fever, sweating, and excessive clothing or bedding, has been associated with increased risk of SIDS.
Some studies have identified an interaction between overheating
and prone sleeping, with overheating increasing the risk of SIDS
only when infants are sleeping prone. Higher external environmental temperatures have not been associated with increased SIDS incidence in the United States.
Bed Sharing. Several studies have implicated bed sharing as a
risk factor for SIDS. Bed sharing is particularly hazardous when
other children are in the same bed; when the parent is sleeping
with an infant on a couch, sofa, or other soft or confining sleeping
surface; when the mother is a smoker; and when the bed sharer
has used alcohol or arousal-­altering drugs or medications. Infants
younger than 4 months of age are at increased risk even when mothers are nonsmokers. A meta-­analysis of 19 studies found that low-­
risk infants (i.e., those who were breastfed and never exposed to
cigarette smoke in utero or after birth) still had a fivefold increased
risk of SIDS until the age of 3 months if bed sharing. Risk is also
increased with longer duration of bed sharing during the night,
whereas returning the infant to the infant’s own crib has not been
associated with increased risk. It is recommended that infants who
are brought into the parents’ bed for feeding or comforting be
returned to their crib or bassinet when the parent is ready to sleep.
Room sharing without bed sharing is associated with lower SIDS
rates and is therefore recommended.
Commercial Devices Marketed to Reduce the Risk of SIDS. A
large number of commercial devices have been marketed that claim to
reduce the risk of SIDS or other sleep-­related infant deaths, including
in-­bed sleepers, but there is no evidence that any of these devices reduce
the risk of these deaths. A 2021 Consumer Product Safety Commission

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 423 u Sudden Infant Death Syndrome
ruling states that any infant sleep product must meet existing federal
safety standards for cribs, bassinets, play yards, and bedside sleepers.

Infant Feeding Care Practices and Exposures
Breastfeeding Is Associated with a Lower Risk of Sudden
Infant Death Syndrome. A meta-­analysis found that breastfeed-

ing was associated with a 45% reduction in SIDS after adjusting for
confounding variables and that this protective effect increased for
exclusive breastfeeding compared with partial breastfeeding. A subsequent meta-­analysis found that breastfeeding for under 2 months
was not associated with a reduced risk of SIDS, but any breastfeeding for 2 months or more and exclusive breastfeeding for 2-­6 months
was associated with an approximate halving of risk. Nursing pillows
are a risk factor for infant suffocation and should be avoided.
Pacifier use is associated with a lower risk of SIDS in the majority of studies. Although it is not known if this is a direct effect of
the pacifier itself or from associated infant or parental behaviors,
use of the pacifier is protective even if it is dislodged during sleep.
Concerns have been expressed about recommending pacifiers
as a means of reducing the risk of SIDS for fear of adverse consequences, particularly interference with breastfeeding. However,
well-­designed clinical trials have found no association between
pacifiers and breastfeeding duration.
Upper respiratory tract infections have generally not been found
to be an independent risk factor for SIDS, but these and other
minor infections may still have a role in the causal pathway of SIDS
when other risk factors are present. Risk for SIDS has been found
to be increased after illness among prone sleepers, those who were
heavily wrapped, and those whose heads were covered during sleep.
No adverse association between immunizations and SIDS has been
found. Indeed, SIDS infants are less likely to be immunized than control infants, and in immunized infants who die of SIDS, no temporal relationship between vaccine administration and death has been
identified. In a meta-­analysis of case-­control studies that adjusted for
potentially confounding factors, the risk of SIDS for infants immunized with diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis was half that for nonimmunized infants.

GENETIC RISK FACTORS

There are some genetic differences identified in infants who died
of SIDS compared with healthy infants and to infants dying from
other causes (see Table 423.3). Pathogenic gene variants occurring
at higher incidence in SIDS infants compared with controls include
multiple cardiac ion channelopathy genes that are proarrhythmic,
autonomic nervous system development genes, proinflammatory
genes related to infection and immunity, and several serotonin
(5-­HT) genes. In ∼15% of patients with SIDS, postmortem gene
sequencing reveals a specific monogenic pathogenic variant (see
Table 423.4; Fig. 423.1). Some of these genes are more plausible
than others in predisposing infants to sudden unexpected death.
Multiple studies have established the importance of a pathway to
SIDS that involves cardiac sodium or potassium channel dysfunction resulting in either long QT syndrome (LQTS) or other proarrhythmic conditions (see Table 423.4 and Fig. 423.1). LQTS is a
known cause of sudden death in children and adults as the result of
a prolonged cardiac action potential causing either increased depolarization or decreased repolarization current. The first evidence
supporting a causal role for LQTS in SIDS was a large Italian study
in which a corrected QT interval >440 msec on an electrocardiogram (ECG) performed on days 3-­4 of life was associated with an
odds ratio of 41 for SIDS. Several case reports have subsequently
provided proof of the concept that cardiac channelopathy polymorphisms are associated with SIDS. LQTS is associated with polymorphisms related mainly to gain-­of-­function variants primarily
in the sodium channel gene (SCN5A) that encodes critical channel
pore-­forming α subunits or essential channel-­interacting proteins.
LQTS also is associated with mainly loss-­of-­function variants in
potassium channel genes. Short QT syndrome (SQTS) is another
cause of life-­threatening arrhythmia or sudden death, often during

2535

Table 423.3  Genetic Risk Factors for Sudden Infant Death
Syndrome (SIDS): Observed Polymorphisms
Multiple cardiac ion channelopathy genes
Autonomic developmental genes
Proinflammatory genes affecting infection and immunity
• Increased proinflammatory function
• Decreased antiinflammatory function
Genes affecting both serotonergic and adrenergic neurons

Table 423.4  Identified and Possible Monogenic
Associations with SIDS
ARRHYTHMIAS/CHANNELOPATHIES
LQTS* (SCN5A, ANK2, CALM2)
SQTS (KCNH2, KCNQ1)
Brugada syndrome* (SCN5A, TRPM4, SCN3B, GPD1L, SCN10A)
Catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia* (RYR2)
EPILEPSY SYNDROMES
Genes associated with sudden unexpected death in epilepsy
(SCN1A, DEPDC5)
Nondystrophic myotonia (SCN4A)
Dravet syndrome (SCN1A)
METABOLIC DISORDERS
Pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency
Medium-­chain acyl-­dehydrogenase deficiency
Systemic primary carnitine deficiency
Carnitine palmitoyltransferase deficiency
Glutaric acidemia type II
Maple syrup urine disease
Congenital disorders of glycosylation
Glycogen storage disease
CARDIAC/CARDIOMYOPATHIES*
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Dilated cardiomyopathy
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (RYR2)
Catecholaminergic ventricular tachycardia (RYR2, CASQ2, CALM2)
Left ventricular noncompaction
Marfan syndrome
Mitral valve prolapse
Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome
*For many phenotypic disorders, most, but not all, genes have been identified
LQTS, Long QT syndrome; SQTS, short QT syndrome.

9%
7%

3%
1%

Ion channelopathy
Cardiomyopathy
Other cardiovascular diseases
Metabolic diseases

80%

No VUS4/VUS3 variants

Fig. 423.1 Percentage of SIDS infants with likely causative variants

in genes associated with cardiomyopathies, ion channelopathies, other
cardiovascular diseases, and metabolic diseases. VUS, variant of unknown significance. (From Neubauer J, Lecca MR, Russo G, et al. Post-­
mortem whole-­exome analysis in a large sudden infant death syndrome
cohort with a focus on cardiovascular and metabolic genetic diseases.
Eur J Hum Genetics. 2017;25:404–409, Fig. 1.)

rest or sleep. Gain-­of-­function variants in genes including KCNH2
and KCNQ1 have been causally linked to SQTS, and some of these
deaths have occurred in infants, suggesting that SQTS may also be
causally linked to SIDS (see Table 423.4).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2536 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Other cardiac ion–related channelopathy pathogenic gene variants
that are also proarrhythmic include Brugada syndrome (BrS1, BrS2)
and catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT1)
(see Table 423.4). Collectively, these pathogenic variants in cardiac ion
channels provide a lethal proarrhythmic substrate in some infants and
may account for 5–10% or more of SIDS cases. In one study, using targeted massively parallel sequencing, 15.7–18.6% of Dutch SIDS cases
were considered to be explained genetically by cardiac arrhythmias.
Impaired central respiratory regulation is an important biologic
abnormality in SIDS, and genetic polymorphisms have been identified
in SIDS infants that affect both serotonergic and adrenergic neurons.
Monoamine oxidase A (MAOA) metabolizes both of these neurotransmitters, and a recent study has observed a high association between
SIDS and low-­expressing MAOA alleles in males, perhaps contributing
to the higher incidence of SIDS in males. Many genes are involved in
the control of 5-­HT synthesis, storage, membrane uptake, and metabolism. Polymorphisms in the promoter region of the 5-­HTT protein gene
occur with greater frequency in SIDS than in control infants. The long
“L” allele increases effectiveness of the promoter and reduces extracellular 5-­HT concentrations at nerve endings compared with the short
“S” allele. The L/L genotype has been associated with increased 5-­HT
transporters in some studies of neuroimaging and postmortem binding, but more recent studies have not found any relationship between
SIDS and the long (L) allele or the LL genotype.
An association has also been observed between SIDS and a 5-­HTT
intron 2 polymorphism, which differentially regulates 5-­HTT expression. There were positive associations between SIDS and the intron 2
genotype distributions in Black infants who died of SIDS compared
with Black controls. The human FEV gene is specifically expressed in
central 5-­HT neurons in the brain, with a predicted role in specification and maintenance of the serotoninergic neuronal phenotype. An
insertion pathogenic variant has been identified in intron 2 of the FEV
gene, and the distribution of this variant differs significantly in SIDS
compared with control infants.
Molecular genetic studies in infants who died of SIDS have also
identified pathogenic genetic variants pertinent to early embryologic
development of the autonomic nervous system. Protein-­
changing
pathogenic variants related to the PHOX2a, RET, ECE1, TLX3, and
EN1 genes have been identified, particularly in Black infants who died
of SIDS. Eight polymorphisms in the PHOX2B gene occurred significantly more frequently in SIDS compared with control infants. Abnormalities in both the structure and expression of the PHOX2B gene,
which is involved in neuronal maturation, have also been reported
in significantly more SIDS infants than in controls. One study has
reported an association between SIDS and a distinct tyrosine hydroxylase gene (THO1) allele, which regulates gene expression and catecholamine production.
Multiple studies have observed altered expression of genes involved
in the inflammatory process and immune system regulation. Differences in SIDS infants compared with controls have been reported for
two complement C4 genes. Some SIDS infants have loss-­of-­function
polymorphisms in the gene promoter region for IL-­10, another antiinflammatory cytokine. IL-­10 polymorphisms associated with decreased
IL-­10 levels could contribute to SIDS by delaying initiation of protective antibody production or reducing capacity to inhibit inflammatory
cytokine production. However, other studies have not found differences
in IL-­10 genes in SIDS infants compared with age-­matched controls.
An association has been reported between single-­nucleotide polymorphisms in the proinflammatory gene encoding IL-­8 and SIDS
infants found prone compared with SIDS infants found in other sleep
positions. IL-­1 is another proinflammatory gene, and a higher prevalence of the IL-­1 receptor antagonist, which would predispose to higher
risk for infection, has been reported in infants who died of SIDS. Significant associations with SIDS are also reported for polymorphisms
in VEGF, IL-­6, and tumor necrosis factor-­α (TNF-­α). These three
cytokines are proinflammatory, and these gain-­of-­function polymorphisms would result in increased inflammatory response to infectious
or inflammatory stimuli and hence contribute to an adverse imbalance between proinflammatory and antiinflammatory cytokines. As

apparent proof of principle, elevated levels of IL-­6 and VEGF have been
reported from CSF in SIDS infants. There were no group differences
in the IL6-­174G/C polymorphism in a Norwegian SIDS study, but the
aggregate evidence nevertheless suggested an activated immune system in SIDS and implicated genes involved in the immune system.
Almost all SIDS infants in one study had positive histories for prone
sleeping and fever before death and positive HLA-­DR expression in
laryngeal mucosa, and high HLA-­DR expression was associated with
high levels of IL-­6 in CSF.

GENE-­ENVIRONMENT INTERACTIONS

Interactions between genetic and environmental risk factors determine the actual risk for SIDS in individual infants (see Fig. 423.2; Table
423.5). Equally important, there is a dynamic interaction between
genetic or intrinsic vulnerability and the sleep environment (see Fig.
423.3). There appears to be an interaction between prone sleep position and impaired ventilatory and arousal responsiveness. Facedown
or nearly facedown sleeping does occasionally occur in prone-­sleeping
infants, but normal healthy infants arouse before such episodes
become life-­threatening. However, infants with insufficient arousal
responsiveness to hypoxia may be at risk for sudden death from resulting episodes of airway obstruction and asphyxia. There may also be
links between modifiable risk factors (such as soft bedding, prone sleep
position, and thermal stress) and genetic risk factors, such as ventilatory and arousal abnormalities and temperature or metabolic regulation deficits. Cardiorespiratory control deficits could be related to

First 6 months
(peak 1–4 months)
Intrinsic
risk factors

Critical
developmental
period

• Genetic
susceptibility
SIDS
• Smoking*
Vulnerable
• Prematurity
infant
• Alcohol and (e.g.,
illicit drugs*
brainstem
dysfunction)

Exogenous
stressors

Extrinsic
risk factors
• Prone/side
sleep position*
• Soft bedding
• Overbundling/
overheating*
• Bed sharing*
• Upper
respiratory
infection

*Modifiable risk factors

Fig. 423.2 Schematic of the triple-­risk model for sudden infant death

syndrome (SIDS) showing the critical interactions between intrinsic risk
factors (including genetic risk factors) resulting in a vulnerable infant, a
critical developmental period or age, and exogenous stressors or extrinsic risk factors. (Modified from Filiano JJ, Kinney HC. A perspective
on the neuropathologic findings in victims of the sudden infant death
syndrome: the triple risk model. Biol Neonate. 1994;65:194–197.)

Table 423.5  Interactions Between Genetic and Environmental
Risk Factors that Determine the Actual Risk for
SIDS in Individual Infants
GENETIC RISK FACTOR

ENVIRONMENTAL RISK FACTOR

Intrinsic vulnerability
Impaired ventilatory and
arousal responses

Sleep environment
Nonsupine sleep position
Soft bedding

Cardiac ion channelopathy

Sleep-­related hypoxemia or
hypercarbia leading to acidosis

Diminished immune responses
to infections

Respiratory or other benign
infections

Diminished brainstem
autonomic control

Cigarette smoke exposure

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 423 u Sudden Infant Death Syndrome
5-­HTT polymorphisms, for example, or to polymorphisms in genes
pertinent to autonomic nervous system development. Affected infants
could be at increased risk for sleep-­related hypoxemia and hence more
susceptible to adverse effects associated with unsafe sleep position or
sleep environment. Infants at increased risk for sleep-­related hypoxemia could also be at greater risk for fatal arrhythmias in the presence
of a cardiac ion channelopathy polymorphism.
In >50% of SIDS victims, recent febrile illnesses, often related to
upper respiratory infection, have been documented (see Table 423.2).
Benign infections might increase the risk for SIDS if interacting
with genetically determined proinflammatory or impaired immune
responses. Deficient inflammatory responsiveness can also occur as
a result of mast cell degranulation, which has been reported in SIDS
infants. This is consistent with an anaphylactic reaction to a bacterial
toxin, and some family members of SIDS infants also have mast cell
activation and degranulation, suggesting that increased susceptibility
to an anaphylactic reaction is another genetic factor influencing fatal
outcomes to otherwise minor infections. Interactions between upper
respiratory infections or other minor illnesses and factors such as
prone sleeping might also play a role in the pathogenesis of SIDS.
The increased risk of SIDS associated with fetal and postnatal exposure to cigarette smoke may be related at least in part to genetic or
epigenetic factors, including those affecting brainstem autonomic
control. Infant studies document decreased ventilatory and arousal
responsiveness to hypoxia after fetal nicotine exposure, and impaired
autoresuscitation after apnea has been associated with postnatal nicotine exposure. Decreased brainstem immunoreactivity to selected
protein kinase C and neuronal nitric oxide synthase isoforms occurs
in rats exposed to cigarette smoke prenatally, another potential cause
of impaired hypoxic responsiveness. Tobacco smoke exposure also
increases susceptibility to viral and bacterial infections and increases
bacterial binding after passive coating of mucosal surfaces with smoke
components, implicating interactions between smoking, cardiorespiratory control, and immune status. Flavin-­monooxygenase 3 (FMO3) is
one of the enzymes that metabolizes nicotine, and a polymorphism has
been identified that occurs more frequently in SIDS infants compared
with controls and more frequently in infants whose mothers reported
heavy smoking. This polymorphism would result in increased nicotine
levels and hence is a potential genetic risk factor for SIDS in infants
exposed to cigarette smoke.
In infants with a cardiac ion channelopathy, risk for a fatal arrhythmia during sleep may be significantly enhanced by predisposing perturbations that increase electrical instability. These perturbations could
Brainstem dysfunction
Prematurity
Prenatal
Severe
Infant
smoking,
vulnerability
alcohol
exposure
Interactions can occur anywhere
Critical period
along the continuum
of development
Non
asphyxiating

Sleep environment

Normal

Potentially severe
asphyxiating

SIDS SLEEP-RELATED RISK FACTORS
(Prone sleep, soft bedding, over-bundling, head
covered, bed sharing)
Bluer shades =
increased probability
of death

Fig. 423.3 Dynamic interactions between intrinsic vulnerability to

sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) and degree of risk in the sleep
environment, ranging from nonasphyxiating (completely safe) to potentially severe asphyxiating (highly unsafe). Intrinsic vulnerability could be
related to genetic risk factors, fetal or early infant exposures, or other
factors. (Modified from Hunt CE, Darnall RA, McEntire BL, Hyma BA.
Assigning cause for sudden unexpected infant death. Forensic Sci Med
Pathol. 2015;11:283–288.)

2537

include REM sleep with bursts of vagal and sympathetic activation,
minor respiratory infections, or any other cause of sleep-­related hypoxemia or hypercarbia, especially if resulting in acidosis. The prone sleeping position is associated with increased sympathetic activity.

INFANT GROUPS AT INCREASED RISK FOR
SUDDEN INFANT DEATH SYNDROME
Subsequent Siblings of an Infant Who Died of
Sudden Infant Death Syndrome

The next-­born siblings of first-­born infants dying of any noninfectious
natural cause are at significantly increased risk for infant death from
the same cause, including SIDS. The relative risk is 9.1 for the same
cause of recurrent death versus 1.6 for a different cause of death. The
relative risk for recurrent SIDS (range: 5.4-­5.8) is similar to the relative risk for non-­SIDS causes of recurrent death (range: 4.6-­12.5). The
risk for recurrent infant mortality from the same cause as in the index
sibling thus appears to be increased to a similar degree in subsequent
siblings for both explained causes and for SIDS. This increased risk for
recurrent SIDS in families is consistent with genetic risk factors interacting with environmental risk factors (see Table 423.5 and Figs. 423.2
and 423.3). Recurrent SIDS in a family should also alert the clinician to
consider other causes of sudden and unexpected death, such as metabolic
diseases, cardiac channelopathies, or nonaccidental causes.

Preterm Birth

Despite reductions of more than 50% in SIDS and SUID among infants
born preterm since initiation of the Back to Sleep (Safe to Sleep) campaign in the United States in 1994, the risk of death remains significantly higher for these infants than for those born full term. The risk
increases as gestational age decreases. Compared with infants born at
37-­42 weeks, the odds ratio for SIDS is greatest for infants born at 24-­
28 weeks of gestation (2.57, 95% confidence interval 2.08, 3.17). Even
at 33-­36 weeks gestational age at birth, the risk of SIDS remains significantly increased compared with infants born at term. The peak chronological age for SIDS is later in infants born preterm, with chronological
age at death inversely proportional to gestational age at birth.
Although infants born preterm are at increased risk for apnea, apnea
of prematurity per se does not seem to be related to the increased SIDS
risk. Premature infants’ increased risk is instead likely related in part
to immaturity of brainstem responses; physiologic studies have found
impaired cortical arousals, lower baroreflex sensitivity, and impaired
autonomic control. Sociodemographic and environmental risk are also
important. Infants born preterm have more sociodemographic risk factors overall than infants born at term. In addition, infants born preterm
are more likely to be placed prone at home; this may be in part because
these infants are often placed prone while mechanically ventilated in
the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU), and safe sleep practices are
often not well-­modeled during the remainder of the NICU admission.
The association between prone position and SIDS in preterm and low
birthweight infants is equal to or greater than this association in infants
born full term.

Physiologic Studies

Physiologic studies have been performed in healthy infants in early
infancy, a few of whom later died of SIDS. Physiologic studies have
also been performed on infant groups who were believed to be at
increased risk for SIDS, especially those with brief resolved unexplained events (BRUEs; see Chapter 424) and subsequent siblings
of infants who died of SIDS. In the aggregate, these studies have
indicated brainstem abnormalities in the neuroregulation of cardiorespiratory control or other autonomic functions and are consistent with the autopsy findings and genetic studies in infants
who died of SIDS. In addition to physiologic abnormalities in chemoreceptor sensitivity, other observed physiologic abnormalities
have been found in respiratory pattern, control of heart and respiratory rate or variability, and arousal responsiveness to asphyxial
situations. A deficit in arousal responsiveness may be a necessary
prerequisite for death to occur but may be insufficient to cause
death in the absence of other genetic or environmental risk factors.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2538 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Autoresuscitation (gasping) is a critical component of the arousal
response to asphyxia, and a failure of autoresuscitation in infants
may be the final and most devastating physiologic failure. In one
study, most normal full-­term infants younger than 9 postnatal
weeks of age aroused in response to mild hypoxia, whereas only
10–15% of infants older than 9 weeks of age aroused. These data
suggest that ability to arouse to mild to moderate hypoxic stimuli
may be at a nadir at the age range of greatest risk for SIDS.
The ability to shorten the QT interval as heart rate increases appears
to be impaired in some infants who died of SIDS, suggesting that such
infants may be predisposed to ventricular arrhythmia. Although this
is consistent with the observations of cardiac ion channel gene polymorphisms in some infants who subsequently die of SIDS, there are
no antemortem QT interval data for these infants that confirm the
importance of this finding. Infants who were studied physiologically
and then died of SIDS a few weeks later had higher heart rates and
lower heart rate variability in all sleep-­wake states and diminished
heart rate variability during wakefulness. These infants also had longer QT intervals than control infants during both REM and NREM
sleep, especially in the late hours of the night when SIDS most likely
occurs. However, the QT interval exceeded 440 msec in only one of
these infants who subsequently died.
It has been postulated that the decreased heart rate variability and
increased heart rate observed in infants who later died of SIDS may in
part be related to decreased vagal tone, perhaps from vagal neuropathy or brainstem damage in areas responsible for parasympathetic
cardiac control. The power spectrum analysis of heart rate variability
is one way to assess sympathetic and parasympathetic cardiac control.
In a comparison of heart rate power spectra before and after obstructive apneas in clinically asymptomatic infants, infants later dying of
SIDS did not have the decreases in low-­frequency to high-­frequency
power ratios observed in infants who survived. Some infants may
thus have different autonomic responsiveness to obstructive apnea,
perhaps indicating impaired autonomic nervous system control associated with higher vulnerability to external or endogenous stresses,
and hence reduced electrical stability of the heart; this may create a
vulnerability for SIDS.
Home cardiorespiratory monitors with memory capability have
recorded the terminal events in some infants who died of SIDS.
However, these recordings did not include pulse oximetry and could
not identify obstructed breaths because of reliance on transthoracic
impedance for breath detection. In most instances, there was sudden and rapid progression of severe bradycardia that was either
unassociated with central apnea or appeared to occur too soon to
be explained by the central apnea. These observations are consistent
with an abnormality in autonomic control of heart rate variability
or with obstructed breaths resulting in bradycardia or hypoxemia
and associated with impaired autoresuscitation or arousal.

CLINICAL STRATEGIES
Home Monitoring

SIDS cannot be prevented in individual infants because it is not possible to identify prospectively infants who will go on to have SIDS,
and no effective intervention has been established even if infants
at risk could be prospectively identified. Studies of cardiorespiratory pattern or other autonomic abnormalities do not have sufficient sensitivity and specificity to be clinically useful as screening
tests. Although there are a growing number of consumer products
marketed to monitor infants during sleep, there is no evidence that
home electronic surveillance using existing technology reduces
the risk of SIDS. Although a prolonged QT interval in an infant
may be treated if diagnosed, neither the role of routine postnatal
electrocardiographic screening, the cost-­effectiveness of diagnosis and treatment, nor the safety of treatment in infants has been

established. Parental electrocardiographic screening is not helpful,
in part because spontaneous pathogenic variants are common.

Reducing the Risk of SIDS and SUID

Reducing risk behaviors and increasing protective behaviors among
infant caregivers to achieve further reductions and eventual elimination of SIDS and SUID is a critical goal. Plateaus in placing
infants supine for sleep and persistent high rates of soft bedding
use and surface sharing in the United States are cause for concern
and require renewed educational efforts. Recent studies indicate
soft or loose bedding is present in the sleep environment of greater
than 50% of infants in the United States. A 2015 Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC) survey of parents in 14 states and
New York City found that 52.7% of White non-­Hispanic, 76.5% of
Black non-­Hispanic, 66.7% of Hispanic, 76.8% of Asian or Pacific
Islander, and 83.9% of American Indian or Alaska Native parents
reported surface sharing with their infants. The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) guidelines for reducing infant deaths in the
sleep environment were updated in 2022 and are aimed at reducing
the risk of all sudden and unexpected sleep-­related infant deaths.
The guidelines are appropriate for most infants, but physicians and
other healthcare providers might, on occasion, need to consider
alternative approaches. The major components of the AAP guidelines are:
• Full-­term and premature infants should be placed for sleep in the
supine position. There are no adverse health outcomes from supine
sleeping. Side-­sleeping is not recommended.
• Infants should be put to sleep on a noninclined, firm mattress.
Waterbeds, sofas, soft mattresses, or other soft surfaces should
not be used. In addition, car seats, strollers, swings, and other
sitting devices should not be used for sleeping. Sleeping in such
sitting devices can increase the risk of gastroesophageal reflux
and upper airway obstruction from head or neck flexion. Sleeping on an inclined surface can also increase the risk of head or
neck flexion and makes it easier for infants to roll into an unsafe
side or prone position.
• Feeding of human milk is recommended. Unless it is contraindicated
or the parent is unable to do so, it is recommended that infants be fed
with human milk (i.e., not offered any formula or other nonhuman
milk-based supplements) exclusively for ~6 months, with continuation of human milk feeding for 1 year or longer as mutually desired
by parent and infant.
• It is recommended that infants sleep in the same room as their
parents but in their own crib or bassinet that conforms to the
safety standards of the Consumer Product Safety Commission.
Placing the crib or bassinet near the parents’ bed facilitates feeding and contact. If parents bring the infant into the adult bed for
feeding or comforting, the infant should be returned to a separate
sleep surface when the parents are ready for sleep. Couches and
armchairs are associated with an extremely high increased risk of
SIDS, accidental suffocation, and entrapment and should never
be used for infant sleep.
• There should be no soft materials and loose bedding in the infant’s sleep environment (over, under, or near the infant). These
include pillows, including nursing pillows, comforters, quilts,
sheepskins, bumper pads, positioners, and stuffed toys. Sleep
clothing, such as a wearable blanket, can be used in place of blankets. Weighted blankets, weighted sleepers, weighted swaddles,
or other weighted objects should not be placed on or near the
sleeping infant.
• Offering a pacifier at bedtime and naptime is recommended. The
pacifier should be used when placing the infant down for sleep
and need not be reinserted once it falls out. For breastfed infants,
delay introduction of the pacifier until breastfeeding is firmly established. This is defined as having sufficient milk supply, con-

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 423 u Sudden Infant Death Syndrome
sistent, comfortable, and effective latch for milk transfer, and appropriate infant weight gain as defined by established normative
growth curves. The time required to establish breastfeeding is
variable.
• Parents should not smoke during pregnancy or after birth, and infants should not be exposed to secondhand smoke.
• Parents should avoid alcohol, marijuana, opioids, and illicit drug use
during pregnancy and after birth.
• Avoid overheating and overbundling. The infant should be lightly
clothed for sleep and the thermostat set at a comfortable temperature. The use of hats or other infant head coverings indoors is not
recommended.
• Pregnant persons should obtain regular prenatal care, following
guidelines for prenatal visits.
• Infants should be immunized in accordance with recommendations of the AAP and the CDC. There is no evidence that immunizations increase the risk of SIDS. Indeed, recent evidence
suggests that immunizations may have a protective effect against
SIDS.
• Avoid the use of commercial devices that are inconsistent with safe
sleep recommendations. Devices advertised to maintain sleep position, “protect” a bed-­sharing infant, or reduce the risk of rebreathing
are not recommended because there is no evidence to support their
safety or efficacy.
• Home cardiorespiratory and/or O2 saturation monitoring
may be of value for selected infants who have extreme instability,
but there is no evidence that monitoring decreases the incidence
of SIDS, and it is therefore not recommended for this purpose.
• Infants should have some time in the prone position (tummy
time) while awake and observed. Alternating the placement of
the infant’s head and orientation in the crib can also minimize
the risk of head flattening from supine sleeping (positional plagiocephaly).
• Swaddling cannot be recommended as a strategy to reduce SIDS,
as there is insufficient evidence. If infants are placed in a swaddle,
it should be using a light blanket that is snug around the shoulders but looser around the hips to avoid hip dysplasia. Swaddled
infants should always be placed supine, and once infants can roll
to the prone or side position, all swaddling should be discontinued.
• Healthcare professionals, staff in newborn nurseries and NICUs, and
childcare providers should adopt the SIDS reduction recommendations beginning at birth, or as soon as clinically able, to model safe
sleep for caregivers.
• Media and manufacturers should follow safe sleep guidelines in their
messaging, advertising, and social media.
• The national Safe to Sleep campaign should be continued with
additional emphasis placed on strategies to increase breastfeeding while decreasing bed sharing and tobacco smoke exposure.
The campaign should continue to have a special focus on the
groups with higher rates of SIDS, including educational strategies tailored to individual racial-­ethnic groups. Secondary care
providers need to be targeted to receive these educational messages, including daycare providers, grandparents, foster parents,
and babysitters. Efforts should also be made to introduce sleep
recommendations before pregnancy and ideally in early education settings and school curricula to educate older siblings and
teenage and adult babysitters and establish these practices as normative behavior. Research and surveillance should be continued
on the risk factors, causes, and pathophysiologic mechanisms of
SIDS and other sleep-­related SUID, with the ultimate goal of preventing these deaths entirely. Federal and private funding agencies need to remain committed to this research.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

2539

423.1 Sudden Unexpected Postnatal
Collapse/Sudden Unexpected Early
Neonatal Death
Sarah Vepraskas
Sudden unexplained postnatal collapse (SUPC) is a rare but potentially fatal event that occurs when a spontaneously breathing, previously healthy newborn suddenly becomes limp, pale, or cyanotic,
bradycardic, unresponsive, apneic, and/or has cardiac and/or respiratory failure and requires cardiopulmonary resuscitation. SUPC
results in death in about half of the infants and significant impairment in many survivors.
There is not a consensual definition for SUPC in the medical
literature, although there is increasing awareness of SUPC as a
clinical entity, with over 400 cases described. The most common
definition of SUPC used is by the British Association of Perinatal Medicine and includes any term or near-­term (defined as >35
weeks’ gestation) infant who meets the following criteria: (1) is well
at birth (normal 5-­minute Apgar and deemed well enough for routine care),(2) collapses unexpectedly in a state of cardiorespiratory
extremis such that resuscitation with intermittent positive-­pressure
ventilation is required, (3) collapses within the first 7 days of life,
and (4) either dies, goes on to require intensive care, or develops
encephalopathy. A majority of reported events occur within 2 hours
after birth, often at the time of the first breastfeeding attempt. Other
potential medical conditions that place infants at higher risk, such
as prematurity (<35 weeks’ gestation), perinatal asphyxia, sepsis, or
congenital malformations, should be excluded before a diagnosis of
SUPC is made.
Population-­based studies estimate the incidence of SUPC to be 2.6-­
38 cases per 100,000 live births. The incidence varies widely because of
the lack of both a definition consensus and standardized reporting system as well as differing inclusion and exclusion criteria. Furthermore, a
consensus for coding SUPC has not been established, which likely also
contributes to it being underreported.
The published estimations of SUPC are lower than what occur
in the hospital and reflect only the critical events. When a defined
time for the SUPC event is described, approximately one third of
reported events occur during the first 2 hours, another one third
between 2 and 24 hours, and another one third between 1 and 7
days after birth.

PATHOGENESIS

In most SUPC cases an underlying condition is never identified,
although the literature suggests there is a variety of etiologies. Many
of the events may be related to suffocation or entrapment, but it
seems to have a complex pathophysiology that is poorly understood. One hypothesis is that the transition from fetal to extrauterine life could make the newborn more vulnerable during the first
hour of life. During birth there is an initial surge of adenosine and
prostaglandins, followed by a postnatal surge of catecholamines. A
healthy newborn baby is aroused and awake after birth and starts
continuous breathing movements. Shortly after birth, there is a
rapid decrease in the inhibitory neuromodulator adenosine as the
partial pressure of oxygen in the arterial blood rapidly increases and
contributes to the increased activity in the newborn infant compared with the fetus. After the hormone surges, there is a period of
diminished responsiveness to external stimuli and increased vagal
tone; it is possible that autonomic instability could make infants
vulnerable during this transitioning period.
It is also possible that impaired cardiorespiratory control resulting
from hypoxic ischemic injury occurring days before birth could contribute to fatal cases of SUPC. Mild gliosis in brainstem areas involved
in cardiorespiratory control was found at autopsy of seven infants with

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2540 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
SUPC. However, there are insufficient data to support an association
between in utero hypoxic events and SUPC. Monogenic etiologies have
not been explored to the same degree reported for SIDS in infants ≥2
months (see Table 423.4).

RISK FACTORS

Many reported SUPC cases occur while the infant is in the prone position, during skin-­to-­skin contact (SSC) with their mothers. SSC is traditionally defined as beginning at birth and lasting continually until the
end of the first breastfeeding.
Additional risk factors for SUPC include the first breastfeeding
attempt, cosleeping, a mother in the episiotomy position, a primiparous mother, and parents left alone with baby during the first hour after
birth.
SSC and rooming-­in have become common practice for healthy
newborns and align with the Baby-­
Friendly Hospital Initiative
(BFHI), a global program launched by the World Health Organization (WHO) and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) to
encourage and recognize hospitals and birthing centers that promote the optimal level of care for infant feeding and mother/baby
bonding. The BFHI recognizes and awards birthing facilities that
successfully implement the “Ten Steps to Successful Breastfeeding,”
with step 4 being to initiate breastfeeding within 1 hour of birth and
step 7 recommending the practice of rooming-­in. The AAP clinical
report on safe sleep and SSC in the newborn period both reviews
the evidence supporting SSC and rooming-­in during the newborn
period and addresses the safety concerns and provides suggestions
to improve safety after delivery. The literature supporting SSC also
emphasizes the importance that mother and baby should not be left
unattended during this early period.

DIAGNOSIS AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of SUPC should be made only after other pathologic
causes are excluded. One study consisting of 45 cases of unexpected collapse in newborns found that one third of infants had an
underlying pathologic or clinical condition, such as sepsis, ductal-­
dependent congenital heart disease, congenital diaphragmatic hernia, intracranial hemorrhage, or a metabolic disorder. Additional
etiologies to consider include airway obstruction, pneumonia,
respiratory distress syndrome, hypoglycemia, vascular thrombosis or embolism, and pulmonary hypertension of the newborn.
The differential diagnosis of SUPC is broad, and many conditions
overlap with the differential diagnoses for BRUE (see Chapter 424),
SUID, and SIDS.
For those infants who survive the event, testing to screen for
an underlying pathology should be performed and tailored to
the specific details of each case. A thorough history and physical
exam should be performed before initiating the diagnostic workup
to assist one in focusing the evaluation. Laboratory tests to consider include electrolytes; metabolic evaluation including glucose,
ammonia, and lactate; an infectious evaluation including blood
cultures, urinalysis, and urine cultures; and CSF analysis with CSF
culture. Chest radiography, neuroimaging, echocardiogram, electrocardiogram, and comprehensive metabolic screening (included
as part of the newborn screen in most states) could also be useful
diagnostic tools. Postmortem examination in the case of death from
presumed SUPC should be performed because underlying etiology
of the event may be discovered during autopsy. In the event that no

identifiable etiology is discovered, next-­generation gene testing for
at-­risk pathogenic variants should be performed (see Table 423.4).

OUTCOME

Approximately half of SUPC cases are thought to result in death, and
there is remaining disability in most reported cases. A review of 17 and
45 SUPC cases in Germany and the United Kingdom showed a mortality rate of 42% and 27%, respectively. In the German study, almost two
thirds of the surviving cases had neurologic deficits, and in the United
Kingdom study, one third of infants either died or had residual neurologic deficits. Rates of death and neurologic abnormalities reported in
the two aforementioned studies are comparable with other available
case reports.

TREATMENT

Although there is no definitive treatment for infants who have suffered from SUPC, therapeutic hypothermia (TH) has been studied as
a plausible therapy because 75% of newborns with no known cause
for collapse develop a typical postasphyxia encephalopathy, evoking
hypoxic-­ischemic encephalopathy (HIE) (see Chapter 122.4). Given
the low incidence, diversity of etiologies, uncertain pathophysiology,
and underreporting, it would be difficult to perform an outcomes trial
using TH for infants with SUPC. Case reports on outcomes using TH
for SUPC infants report variable short-­term outcomes; long-­term data
are lacking. In a sample of 22 infants who suffered SUPC and were
treated in Portuguese hypothermia centers, a significant proportion
had poor outcomes. In contrast, another case report of four patients
with HIE and TH treatment after SUPC described three children as
developmentally normal at 24-­month follow-­up and one child as having mild cerebral palsy.

PREVENTION

The known risk factors for SUPC can be used to aid in preventive
efforts. Specifically, safety during SSC and rooming-­in should be
emphasized. Initiatives developed to standardize the procedure
for immediate postnatal SSC have not proven to reduce the risk of
SUPC. Frequent assessments of newborns should be performed,
including observation of breathing, activity, color, tone, and position, to ensure they are in a position to avoid obstructive breathing
or events leading to SUPC. It has also been suggested that continuous monitoring by trained staff members be done during SSC. However, that may be obtrusive to mother-­infant bonding. Some have
suggested continuous pulse oximetry during this period, but there
is no evidence to support this practice, and this overmonitoring
could lead to unnecessary parental concern. Because many cases
of SUPC occur within the first few hours of life, the delivery unit
should be staffed to permit frequent newborn assessments while
preserving the developing mother-­child bond.
Many of the same safety concerns that occur during SSC immediately
after birth continue to be a concern during rooming-­in if the mother
is not given guidance on the safe rooming-­in practices. Cosleeping
should not be permitted on the postpartum unit. Mothers and families
need to be informed of the risks of cosleeping. Staffing ratios should be
determined to meet the needs of both mother and infant to allow for
frequent assessments, rapid response time to call lights, and time for
maternal education.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 424 u Brief Resolved Unexplained Events and Other Acute Events in Infants 2541

Chapter 424

Brief Resolved Unexplained
Events and Other Acute
Events in Infants
Amy M. DeLaroche and Joel S. Tieder
Infants may experience acute, self-­
resolving changes in their
breathing, tone, mental status, and skin color. Usually these events
are normal manifestations of developmental immaturity. Nonetheless, caregivers may worry that the acute event could have been life-­
threatening or is a sign of an undiagnosed medical problem and
seek medical attention. In most cases, after a comprehensive history
and physical examination, a clinician will determine the event to
have been a benign or normal process, such as gastroesophageal
reflux (GER) or periodic breathing of the newborn. At times, however, the event defies a simple explanation and drives uncertainty
about risk from a serious underlying cause or a future event. This
situation poses a diagnostic and management challenge for both the
family and the clinician.
Historically, these events were feared as precursors to sudden infant
death syndrome (SIDS) and were referred to as near-­miss SIDS, aborted
crib deaths, or apparent life-­threatening events (ALTEs). These terms
have been replaced because we now know that these events are not
associated with SIDS and are rarely life-­threatening. These terms were
additionally problematic because they relied on the subjective interpretation of the caregiver, included a nonspecific constellation of symptoms, and did not distinguish well-­appearing patients from those with
symptoms.
Most of these acute events in infants are best described as brief
resolved unexplained events (BRUEs). A BRUE is a diagnosis of
exclusion and should be used only when the event is transient and
remains unexplained after an appropriate medical evaluation.

DEFINITION

A BRUE (pronounced brew) is an event that occurs in an infant
younger than 1 year that is described by the observer as a sudden, brief,
and resolved episode that involved at least one of the following:
• Cyanosis or pallor
• Absent, decreased, or irregular breathing
• Marked change in tone, either hypertonia or hypotonia
• Altered level of responsiveness
The diagnosis of BRUE applies only to infants who were asymptomatic before the event and during the initial medical evaluation and
when no explanation for the event is found through appropriate history and physical examination (Fig. 424.1).
Infants who experience a BRUE are categorized as either lower or
higher risk for a subsequent event or a serious underlying disorder
based on patient factors, characterization of the event, additional historical factors, and the physical examination.
A lower-­risk infant is defined as:
• Age >60 days
• Gestational age ≥32 weeks and postconceptional age ≥45 weeks
• Occurrence of only 1 BRUE (no prior BRUE ever and not occurring
in a cluster)
• Duration of event <1 minute
• No cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) by trained medical provider required
• No concerning historical features
• No concerning physical examination finding

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The exact incidence of BRUEs is unknown, but BRUEs may account for
up to 0.02% of pediatric emergency department visits. In a multicenter
study of hospitals, 87% of patients met higher-­risk criteria and 63%
were hospitalized. Since the American Academy of Pediatrics published the Clinical Practice Guideline and introduced the term BRUE,
hospitalizations have been decreasing, especially for lower-­risk infants.
BRUEs are not precursors to SIDS. The incidence of mortality after a
BRUE from an underlying cause is extremely low, as only 1 patient in
a cohort of 2,036 patients died during a readmission after being evaluated for a BRUE. Overall, the risk of death among patients with a BRUE
is estimated to approximate the baseline risk of death among infants in
the first year of life.
For patients presenting with a BRUE, numerous risks must still be
considered. First is the risk of an underlying diagnosis that could lead
to serious morbidity or mortality if not diagnosed in a timely fashion.
This is estimated to be 4% for patients presenting to the emergency
department with a BRUE and includes a wide variety of illnesses, such
as cardiac arrhythmias, infections, and brain injury. In one study of
infants with a serious underlying diagnosis identified after evaluation
for a BRUE, seizures were the most commonly identified diagnosis followed by airway abnormalities, abusive head trauma, bacterial or viral
infections, and intussusception. Less common etiologies were arrhythmias, central apnea, and ingestions. These diagnoses may become evident in the emergency department, the inpatient service, outpatient
follow-­up, or on readmission to the hospital.
In contrast, it is more common for a benign explanation to be identified, with choking, reflux, breath-­holding spells, acrocyanosis, colic,
viral infections, dysphagia, and overfeeding noted in over half of
patients diagnosed with a less serious explanation for the event (Table
424.1). Second is the risk of a recurrent event, which occurred in 2.7%
of patients during their emergency department visit for a BRUE and in
18.2% of patients hospitalized for a BRUE. These events can be stressful for caregivers, particularly when the cause is unknown. Third is the
risk that the caregivers become unnecessarily concerned about their
healthy child. Clinicians should be aware of the challenges caregivers
face when perceiving a threat of losing their child, there is medical
uncertainty, or when their child is hospitalized. Recurrent events that
occur during a period of observation can lead to better characterization and explanation of the event and, in some cases, may reassure
caregivers. Fourth are the risks associated with medical care, such as
nosocomial infections and inaccurate testing.

INITIAL HISTORY

An appropriate history and physical examination are key to evaluating
an infant who has experienced an acute event (Table 424.2). Attention
should be given to characterizing the event and interpreting the subjective experience of the caregiver to provide an objective description. The
following questions can guide this process:
What was the infant doing before, during, and after the event? An
event occurring during or after feeding will likely have a different explanation than one occurring during sleep or after crying. The sequence
of events can also be diagnostic. A breath-­holding spell begins with
crying, followed by a period of apnea, perioral cyanosis, change of consciousness, and return to baseline.
Did the infant change color? It is often normal for infants to have blue discoloration (perioral cyanosis or acrocyanosis) around the lips or hands
because of circulatory immaturity. Turning red or purple is also common
when infants cry or become upset. The clinician’s goal is to distinguish less
concerning color change from central cyanosis, which is blue discoloration of the face, trunk, gums, or tongue that can indicate hypoxemia.
Did the infant experience central or obstructive apnea, or just choking or gagging? It is normal for infants to exhibit respiratory pauses of
up to 20 seconds while awake and asleep. These can reflect periodic
breathing of the newborn or normal REM sleep. Much more concerning are periods of no air movement that last longer than 20 seconds.
Obstructive apnea results in paradoxical movement of the diaphragm
and upper airway. In infants, this is most commonly caused by upper

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2542 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Infant (<1 year old) with a brief, resolved,
unexplained event (BRUE)
Cyanosis or pallor
Absent, decreased, or irregular breathing
Marked change in tone (hyper- or hypotonia)
Altered level of responsiveness

History and physical

Risk stratification

Age >60 days
Born 32 weeks’ gestation and
postconception age 45 weeks
No CPR by trained medical provider
Event lasted <1 min
First event
No concerning history or exam features

Not a BRUE if:
Additional symptoms
Abnormal vital signs
Explanation for event identified
Exclusion criteria: CHD, epilepsy,
metabolic disease, neurologic
abnormality

Individualized management

Yes

No

Lower-risk patient

Higher-risk patient

Fig. 424.1 Algorithm for diagnosis, risk stratification,

and management of a brief resolved unexplained event
(BRUE). CHD, Congenital heart disease; ECG, electrocardiogram; ED, emergency department. From The
Harriet Lane House Staff at The Charlotte R. Bloomberg Children’s Center of The Johns Hopkins Hospital.
The Harriet Lane Handbook. 23rd ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier, 2024. Fig 25.11; with data from Tieder JS,
Bonkowsky JL, Etzel RA, et al. Brief Resolved Unexplained Events (Formerly Apparent Life-Threatening
Events) and Evaluation of Lower-Risk Infants [published
correction appears in Pediatrics. 2016 Aug;138(2):].
Pediatrics. 2016;137(5):e20160590.

Management recommendation
Provide reassurance and educate family
Offer CPR training resources
Consider brief observation of infant in ED
on continuous pulse oximetry
Consider ECG and pertussis testing
Further testing is generally not indicated

and lower respiratory tract infections (e.g., bronchiolitis) and may
precede the recognition of symptoms typically seen in viral respiratory infections. Infants also commonly gag or choke briefly during or
shortly after feeds or with GER or vomiting. The resulting reflexive
pause in respiration to protect the airway is sometimes referred to as
laryngospasm. Central apnea is always concerning and occurs when
the brainstem does not properly control the respiratory muscles. This
may be seen in brain trauma from nonaccidental trauma and in rare
disorders such as congenital central hypoventilation syndrome.
Was there a concerning change in muscle tone? Seizures in infants are
concerning and difficult to diagnose, and they rarely present as typical seizure activity. They can present as staring spells, periods of episodic increased or decreased tone, or infantile spasms. It is normal for
infants to have rapid jerking movements because of neurologic immaturity and infant reflexes (e.g., Moro, startle, and fencing reflex), and
sometimes these can appear similar to seizures. One of the most serious
and time-­sensitive causes of seizures or central apnea is undiagnosed
brain trauma from nonaccidental trauma, which may result in no other
symptoms or physical examination findings upon presentation.
Was there an altered level of responsiveness? Episodic changes in consciousness and mental status can be difficult to assess in infants because
of neurologic immaturity and variability in sleep-­wake cycles. However, abrupt changes where the infant appears to lose consciousness
after episodes of apnea or color change can be concerning for hypoxemia, hypoglycemia, or seizures.
Did the event self-­resolve, or was an intervention required? Infants with
choking from GER, vomit, or feeding difficulties generally improve
spontaneously or with help clearing the airway. A serious underlying
cause is more likely if CPR was indicated and then provided, though
this may be difficult to assess if no medically trained individuals witnessed the event.

Individualized management

Additional History

A careful, detailed history can lead to an explanation; the key elements
are summarized in Tables 424.1 and 424.2. A clinician should inquire
about other symptoms (e.g., fever, upper respiratory infection [URI]
symptoms, spitting up). A history of breathing problems, prenatal or
perinatal concerns, prematurity, and growth and developmental problems is important. Premature infants, particularly those still under 43
weeks corrected gestational age, are at higher risk for underlying causes,
such as apnea of prematurity. A careful feeding history can detect oropharyngeal dysphagia or GER-­related problems (i.e., laryngospasm).
A targeted family history can reveal risk for sudden death, cardiac
arrhythmias, and metabolic, genetic, and neurologic disease. A social
history, particularly by someone trained to detect nonaccidental
trauma, can reveal recent trauma, prior child welfare involvement, substance abuse, poisoning or misuse of medications, and environmental
exposures (e.g., secondhand tobacco smoke and mold). It is important
to understand who observed the event, who normally takes care of the
infant, and if there are any discrepancies in the explanation of the event.
Consider infectious exposures. Infants exposed to underimmunized family members are at risk for pertussis. Respiratory syncytial
virus (RSV) and other respiratory viruses, as well as pertussis, can present with apnea before the onset of URI symptoms.

Physical Examination

A careful physical examination may reveal a causative or underlying
diagnosis. Abnormal growth and head circumference may reflect feeding, developmental, and neurologic problems. Abnormal vital signs
and pulse oximetry can suggest infectious, cardiac, and neurologic
abnormalities. A careful skin and mouth examination can reveal subtle
signs. For example, child abuse should be suspected in infants with
bruises, petechiae, or a torn frenulum. Signs of airway abnormalities,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 424 u Brief Resolved Unexplained Events and Other Acute Events in Infants 2543
Table 424.1  Symptom-­Based Approach to BRUEs: Other Conditions that Might Be Confused with a BRUE
DIAGNOSTIC
CATEGORIES

EXPLANATORY CAUSES
TO CONSIDER

SUGGESTIVE HISTORICAL
FINDINGS

SUGGESTIVE PHYSICAL
EXAMINATION FINDINGS

Gastrointestinal

GER
Intussusception
Volvulus
Oropharyngeal dysphagia

Coughing, vomiting, choking,
gasping temporally related
to feeds or regurgitation of
gastric contents
Feeding difficulties
Recent preceding feed
Irritability after feeds
Milk in mouth/nose
Bilious emesis
Pulling legs to chest
Bloody/mucousy stool
Lethargy after event

Gastric contents in the nose
and mouth
Choking, gagging, or oxygen
desaturation temporally
related to feeding or
regurgitation of gastric
contents

Upper GI to assess for
anatomic anomalies
Clinical swallow evaluation
Abdominal ultrasound
pH probe

Infectious

Upper and lower respiratory
tract infection (RSV,
pertussis, pneumonia)
Bacteremia
Meningitis
Urinary tract infection

Preceding URI symptoms
Multiple events on the day of
presentation
Sick exposures
Foul-­smelling urine

Fever/hypothermia
Lethargy
Ill appearance
Coryza
Cough
Wheeze
Tachypnea

NP swab for RSV, pertussis
Chest radiograph
CBC and blood culture
Cerebrospinal fluid analysis
and culture
Urinalysis and culture

Neurologic

Seizures
Breath-­holding spells
Congenital central
hypoventilation syndrome
Neuromuscular disorders
Congenital malformations of
the brain and brainstem
Malignancy
Intracranial hemorrhage

Multiple events
Loss of consciousness
Change in tone
Abnormal muscular
movements
Eye deviation
Preceding triggers

Papilledema
Abnormal muscular movements
Hypertonicity or flaccidity
Abnormal reflexes
Microcephaly or macrocephaly
Dysmorphic features
Signs of trauma or poisoning
(see “Child maltreatment”
below)

EEG
Neuroimaging

Respiratory/
ENT

Apnea of prematurity
Apnea of infancy
Periodic breathing
Airway anomaly
Aspiration
Foreign body
Obstructive sleep apnea

Prematurity
Foreign body
Aspiration
Noisy breathing

Wheezing
Stridor
Crackles
Rhonchi
Tachypnea

Chest radiograph
Neck radiograph
Laryngoscopy
Bronchoscopy
Esophagoscopy
Polysomnography

Child
maltreatment

Nonaccidental head trauma
Smothering
Poisoning
Factitious syndrome imposed
on another (formerly
Munchausen syndrome by
proxy)

Multiple events
Unexplained vomiting or
irritability
Recurrent BRUEs
Historical discrepancies
Family history of unexplained
death, SIDS, or BRUEs
Single witness of event
Delay in seeking care

Bruising (especially in a
nonmobile child)
Ear trauma, hemotympanum
Acute abdomen
Painful extremities
Oral bleeding/trauma
Frenulum tears
Unexplained irritability
Retinal hemorrhages
Depressed mental status

Skeletal survey
CT/MRI of the head
Dilated funduscopic
examination if head
imaging concerning for
trauma
Toxicology screen
Social work evaluation

Cardiac

Dysrhythmia (prolonged QT
syndrome, Wolff-­Parkinson-­
White syndrome)
Cardiomyopathy
Congenital heart disease
Myocarditis

Feeding difficulties
Growth difficulties
Diaphoresis
Prematurity

Abnormal heart rate/rhythm
Murmur
Decreased femoral pulses

Four-­extremity blood
pressure
Preductal and postductal
oxygen saturation
measurements
ECG
Echocardiogram
Serum electrolytes, calcium,
magnesium

Metabolic/
genetic

Hypoglycemia
Inborn errors of metabolism
Electrolyte abnormalities
Genetic syndromes including
those with craniofacial
malformations

Severe initial event
Multiple events
Event associated with period
of stress or fasting
Developmental delay
Associated anomalies
Growth difficulties
Severe/frequent illnesses
Family history of BRUE,
consanguinity, seizure
disorder, or SIDS

Dysmorphic features
Microcephaly
Hepatomegaly

Serum electrolytes; glucose,
calcium, and magnesium
levels
Lactate
Ammonia
Pyruvate
Urine organic and serum
amino acids
Newborn screen

TESTING TO CONSIDER

BRUE, Brief resolved unexplained event; ECG, electrocardiogram; EEG, electroencephalogram; ENT, ear, nose, and throat; GER, gastroesophageal reflux; GI, gastrointestinal; NP,
nasopharyngeal; RSV, respiratory syncytial virus; SIDS, sudden infant death syndrome; URI, upper respiratory infection.
From Kliegman RK, Lye PS, Bordini BJ, et al., eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based Diagnosis. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018: Table 5.3.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2544 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Table 424.2  Important Historical Features of a BRUE
PREEVENT
Condition of child

Awake vs asleep

Location of child

Prone vs supine, flat or upright, in crib/car
seat, with pillows, blankets

Activity

Feeding, crying, sleeping

EVENT
Respiratory effort

None, shallow, gasping, increased
Duration of respiratory pauses

Color

Pallor, red, cyanotic
Peripheral, whole body, circumoral,
lighting of room

Tone/movement

Rigid, tonic-­clonic, decreased, floppy
Focal vs diffuse
Ability to suppress movements

Level of consciousness

Alert, interactive, sleepy, nonresponsive

Duration

Time until normal breathing, normal tone,
normal behavior
Detailed history of caregiver actions
during event to aid in defining time
course

Associated symptoms

Vomiting, sputum production, blood in
mouth/nose, eye rolling

POSTEVENT
Condition

Back to baseline, sleepy, postictal, crying
If altered after event, duration of time
until back to baseline

INTERVENTIONS
What was performed

Gentle stimulation, blowing in face,
mouth-­to-­mouth, cardiopulmonary
resuscitation

Who performed
intervention

Medical professional vs caregiver

Response to
intervention

Resolution of event vs self-­resolving

Duration of intervention

How long was intervention performed

MEDICAL HISTORY
History of present illness

Preceding illnesses, fever, rash, irritability,
sick contacts

Medical history

Prematurity, prenatal exposures,
gestational age, birth trauma
Noisy breathing since birth
Any medical problems, prior medical
conditions, prior hospitalizations
Developmental delay
Medications

Feeding history

Gagging, coughing with feeds, poor
weight gain

Family history

Neurologic problems
Cardiac arrhythmias
Sudden death, childhood deaths, BRUEs
Neonatal problems
Consanguinity

Social history

Home situation
Caregivers
Smoke exposure
Medications in the home

BRUE, Brief resolved unexplained event.
From Kliegman RK, Lye PS, Bordini BJ, et al., eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based
Diagnosis. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018: Table 5.4.

such as inspiratory or expiratory stridor or stertor, can lead to a diagnosis of respiratory infections, vascular rings, hemangioma, laryngomalacia, tracheomalacia, or facial dysmorphism.

Testing

In the past, it was common for clinicians to routinely test infants presenting with such events using complete blood counts (CBCs), appropriate
cultures, and GER testing. However, it is known that these tests are unlikely
to reveal a cause and even more likely to lead to a false-­positive result. False
positives can, in turn, contribute to missed diagnoses, additional unnecessary testing, patient harm, greater parental concern, and increased costs.
In lower-­risk infants, routine laboratory testing and diagnostic imaging (CBC, bacterial cultures, blood gas and glucose, metabolic panels,
urinalysis, GER testing, chest radiograph, neuroimaging, electroencephalogram [EEG], sleep study) is not recommended. The few situations where testing may be considered in the lower-­risk population include:
• Pertussis testing in underimmunized or exposed individuals.
• ECG may reveal a prolonged QtC syndrome if there is a concerning
family history, but routine testing is not indicated.
• Rapid viral testing can help diagnose subclinical viral causes, but
these tests can be positive from recent past infections that may not
be the cause of the concerning event.
• A brief period of continuous pulse oximetry and serial observations
to detect hypoxemia and apnea.
In higher-­risk infants, routine screening tests may not be needed.
Testing should be done because of concerns from the history and physical or to further characterize repeat BRUEs.
• Continuous pulse oximetry or cardiorespiratory monitoring under a
period of observation may help characterize repeat events.
• A swallow evaluation by a trained feeding expert might reveal oropharyngeal dysphagia in premature or young infants.
• Head imaging with CT or MRI is indicated when there is suspicion
of nonaccidental trauma because of bruising in nonambulatory infants, concerning bruising patterns, history of unexplained death in
a sibling, or inconsistent history of the event.
• Neurology consult or EEG or head imaging may lead to a diagnosis
of epilepsy if there is a concern for seizure. However, it is reasonable
to perform this consultation and testing as an outpatient in well-­
appearing infants.
• Otolaryngology consultation to detect anatomic disorders of the airway
(e.g., laryngomalacia, tracheomalacia, and tracheoesophageal fistula).
• Pulmonary/sleep medicine consultation to detect disordered breathing (e.g., central apnea and obstructive sleep apnea).

Management

Although the value of hospital admission is debatable, lower-­
risk
infants are much less likely to benefit from admission compared to
higher-­risk infants. Nationally, there is a trend away from routine
admission for all BRUE patients, particularly those meeting lower-­risk
BRUE criteria. For all BRUEs, it is uncommon for a hospital admission to lead to a diagnosis of a serious underlying disorder. Sometimes,
however, a longer period of observation than is practical in a clinic
or emergency department can help characterize repeat events, should
they recur, and reduce the uncertainty of a recurrent event for caregivers. Additional benefits of hospitalization include serial assessments of
feeding, breathing, sleep, and social patterns. The decision for hospital
admission should incorporate the needs and preferences of the family and
patient and the ability to follow up closely with a primary care physician.
In weighing the risks and benefits of this decision, it is important to
recognize that hospitalization can unnecessarily increase stress for the
family and patient through false alarms and iatrogenic complications.
CPR education should be considered for all families. Home apnea
monitoring should not be done. Close outpatient follow-­up with a primary care physician is important, as almost half of serious underlying
diagnoses are not identified during the first visit for a BRUE.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 425 u Congenital Disorders of the Nose

Section 2

Disorders of the
Respiratory Tract
Chapter 425

Congenital Disorders of
the Nose
Joseph Haddad Jr.
NORMAL NEWBORN NOSE

In contrast to children and adults, who preferentially breathe through
their nose unless nasal obstruction interferes, most newborn infants
are obligate nasal breathers. Significant nasal obstruction presenting
at birth, such as choanal atresia, may be a life-­threatening situation
for the infant unless an alternative to the nasal airway is established.
Acquired nasal congestion with obstruction is common in the first
year of life and can affect the quality of breathing during sleep; it may
be associated with a narrow nasal airway, viral or bacterial infection,
enlarged adenoids, or maternal estrogenic stimuli similar to rhinitis
of pregnancy. The internal nasal airway doubles in size in the first 6
months of life, leading to resolution of symptoms in many infants.
Supportive care with a bulb syringe and saline nose drops, topical
nasal decongestants, and antibiotics, when indicated, improve symptoms in affected infants.

PHYSIOLOGY

The nose is responsible for the initial warming and humidification
of inspired air and olfaction. In the anterior nasal cavity, turbulent
airflow and coarse hairs enhance the deposition of large particulate matter; the remaining nasal airways filter out particles as small
as 6 μm in diameter. In the turbinate region, the airflow becomes
laminar and the airstream is narrowed and directed superiorly,
enhancing particle deposition, warming, and humidification. Nasal
passages contribute as much as 50% of the total resistance of normal
breathing. Nasal flaring, a sign of respiratory distress, reduces the
resistance to inspiratory airflow through the nose and can improve
ventilation (see Chapter 421).
Although the nasal mucosa is more vascular (especially in the turbinate region) than in the lower airways, the surface epithelium is similar, with ciliated cells, goblet cells, submucosal glands, and a covering
blanket of mucus. The nasal secretions contain lysozyme and secretory
immunoglobulin A (IgA), both of which have antimicrobial activity,
and IgG, IgE, albumin, histamine, bacteria, lactoferrin, and cellular
debris, as well as mucous glycoproteins, which provide viscoelastic
properties. Aided by the ciliated cells, mucus flows toward the nasopharynx, where the airstream widens, the epithelium becomes squamous, and secretions are wiped away by swallowing. Replacement of
the mucous layers occurs about every 10-­20 minutes. Estimates of daily
mucus production vary from 0.1 to 0.3 mg/kg/24 hr, with most of the
mucus being produced by the submucosal glands.

CONGENITAL DISORDERS

Congenital structural nasal malformations are uncommon compared
with acquired abnormalities. The nasal bones can be congenitally
absent so that the bridge of the nose fails to develop, resulting in nasal
hypoplasia. Congenital absence of the nose (arrhinia), complete or
partial duplication, or a single centrally placed nostril can occur in

2545

isolation but is usually part of a malformation syndrome. Rarely, supernumerary teeth are found in the nose, or teeth grow into it from the
maxilla.
Nasal bones can be sufficiently malformed to produce severe narrowing of the nasal passages. Often, such narrowing is associated with a
high and narrow hard palate. Children with these defects can have significant obstruction to airflow during infections of the upper airways
and are more susceptible to the development of chronic or recurrent
hypoventilation (see Chapter 31). Rarely, the alae nasi are sufficiently
thin and poorly supported, resulting in inspiratory obstruction, or
there may be congenital nasolacrimal duct obstruction with cystic
extension into the nasopharynx, causing respiratory distress.

CHOANAL ATRESIA

This is the most common congenital anomaly of the nose and has a
frequency of approximately 1 in 7,000 live births. It consists of a unilateral or bilateral bony (90%) or membranous (10%) septum between the
nose and the pharynx; most cases are a combination of bony and membranous atresia. The pathogenesis is unknown, but theories include
persistence of the buccopharyngeal membranes or failure of the oronasal membrane to rupture. The unilateral defect is more common, and
the female:male ratio is approximately 2:1. Approximately 50–70% of
affected infants have other congenital anomalies (CHARGE syndrome
[see later], Treacher-­Collins, Kallmann syndrome, VATER [vertebral
defects, imperforate anus, tracheoesophageal fistula, and renal defects]
association, Pfeiffer syndrome), with the anomalies occurring more
often in bilateral cases.
CHARGE syndrome (coloboma, heart disease, atresia or stenosis
of the choanae, retarded growth and development or central nervous
system [CNS] anomalies or both, genital anomalies or hypogonadism
or both, and ear [external, middle, inner ear] anomalies or deafness or
both) is one of the more common anomalies associated with choanal
atresia—approximately 10–20% of patients with choanal atresia have
it. The CNS involvement (∼90%) includes reduced function of cranial
nerves I, V, VII, VIII, IX, and X, as well as vision and hearing deficits.
Most (∼90%) patients with CHARGE syndrome have autosomal dominant de novo pathogenic variants in the CHD7 gene, which is involved
in chromatin organization. Immunologic deficiencies may be noted
that overlap with the 22q11.2 deletion syndrome.

Clinical Manifestations

Newborn infants have a variable ability to breathe through their
mouths, so nasal obstruction does not produce the same symptoms
in every infant. When the obstruction is unilateral, the infant may be
asymptomatic for a prolonged period, often until the first respiratory
infection, when unilateral nasal discharge or persistent nasal obstruction can suggest the diagnosis. Infants with bilateral choanal atresia
who have difficulty with mouth breathing make vigorous attempts to
inspire, often suck in their lips, and develop cyanosis. Distressed children then cry (which relieves the cyanosis) and become calmer, with
normal skin color, only to repeat the cycle after closing their mouths.
Those who can breathe through their mouths at once have trouble
when sucking and swallowing, becoming cyanotic when they attempt
to feed.

Diagnosis

The diagnosis is established by the inability to pass a firm catheter
through each nostril 3-­4 cm into the nasopharynx. The atretic plate
may be seen directly with fiberoptic rhinoscopy. The anatomy is best
evaluated by using high-­resolution CT (Fig. 425.1).

Treatment

Initial treatment consists of prompt placement of an oral airway,
maintaining the mouth in an open position, or intubation. A standard
oral airway (such as that used in anesthesia) can be used, or a feeding
nipple can be fashioned with large holes at the tip to facilitate air passage. Once an oral airway is established, the infant can be fed by gavage
until breathing and eating without the assisted airway is possible. In

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2546 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
bilateral cases, intubation or, less often, tracheotomy may be indicated.
If the child is free of other serious medical problems, operative intervention is considered in the neonate; transnasal repair is the treatment of choice, with the introduction of small magnifying endoscopes
and smaller surgical instruments and drills. Stents are usually left in
place for weeks after the repair to prevent closure or stenosis, although
a large meta-­analysis demonstrated that there is no benefit to stenting. Another option is a transpalatal repair, and this is done when a
transnasal endoscope cannot be placed through the nose because of

thick bony atresia or stenosis. Tracheotomy should be considered in
cases of bilateral atresia in which the child has other potentially life-­
threatening problems and in whom early surgical repair of the choanal
atresia may not be appropriate or feasible. Operative correction of unilateral obstruction may be deferred for several years. In both unilateral and bilateral cases, restenosis necessitating dilation or reoperation,
or both, is common. Mitomycin C has been used to help prevent the
development of granulation tissue and stenosis, although its efficacy is
questionable.

CONGENITAL DEFECTS OF THE NASAL SEPTUM

Perforation of the septum is most commonly acquired after birth secondary to infection, such as syphilis or tuberculosis, or trauma; rarely,
it is developmental. Continuous positive airway pressure cannulas are a
cause of iatrogenic perforation. Trauma from delivery is the most common cause of septal deviation noted at birth. When recognized early,
it can be corrected with immediate realignment using blunt probes,
cotton applicators, and topical anesthesia. Formal surgical correction,
when required, is usually postponed to avoid disturbance of midface
growth.
Mild septal deviations are common and usually asymptomatic;
abnormal formation of the septum is uncommon unless other malformations are present, such as cleft lip or palate.
Congenital isolated absence of a membranous nasal septum has also
been reported.

A

PYRIFORM APERTURE STENOSIS

Infants with this bony abnormality of the anterior nasal aperture
present at birth or shortly thereafter with severe nasal obstruction
leading to noisy breathing and respiratory distress that worsen with
feeding and improve with crying. It can occur in isolation or in
association with other malformations including holoprosencephaly,
hypopituitarism, and cardiac and urogenital malformations. Diagnosis is made by CT of the nose (Fig. 425.2) with a pyriform aperture
width less than ∼11 mm. Medical management (nasal decongestants, humidification, nasopharyngeal airway insertion, management of reflux) is typically attempted for about 2 weeks; if the child
still cannot feed or breathe without difficulty, then surgical repair
by means of an anterior, sublabial approach may be needed. A drill
is used to enlarge the stenotic anterior bone apertures.

B
Fig. 425.1 Choanal atresia. A, Axial CT image in a 1-­day-­old neonate

with severe respiratory distress shows bilateral bony choanal atresia
with retained fluid in the right nasal cavity, medial bowing of the lateral nasal wall, and a thickened vomer (arrows). B, Axial CT image in a
12-­yr-­old child with chronic nasal obstruction and purulent rhinorrhea
shows unilateral (right) bony atresia with fluid in the nasal cavity (arrow).
(From Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 12th ed.
Philadelphia: Saunders; 2013: Fig. 8.13.)

A

B

CONGENITAL MIDLINE NASAL MASSES

Dermoids, gliomas, and encephaloceles (in descending order of frequency) occur intranasally or extranasally and can have intracranial
connections or extend intracranially with communication to the
subarachnoid space. The theory for the embryologic development
of congenital midline nasal masses is faulty retraction of the dural
diverticulum. Dermoids and epidermoids are the most common

C

Fig. 425.2 Congenital nasal pyriform aperture stenosis in a 1½-­mo-­old infant with episodes of respiratory distress during breastfeeding. A, Axial

CT image shows a triangular hard palate and solitary central maxillary mega-­incisor (arrow). B, An axial CT image shows narrowing of the anterior
and inferior nasal passages (arrows). C, Normal infant maxilla for comparison. (From Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 12th ed.
Philadelphia: Saunders; 2013: Fig. 8.14.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 425 u Congenital Disorders of the Nose

Fig. 425.3 Nasal dermoid manifesting as a midline sinus opening.

(From Elluru RG. Congenital and acquired malformations of the nose
and nasopharynx. In: Lesperance MM, ed. Cummings Pediatric Otolaryngology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Fig. 5.5, p. 67.)

A

B

2547

Fig. 425.4 Coronal CT scan of nasal dermoid with intracranial extension (arrow). (From Manning SC, Bloom DC, Perkins JA, et al. Diagnostic and surgical challenges in the pediatric skull base. Otolaryngol Clin
North Am. 2005;38:773–794, Fig. 2.)

C

Fig. 425.5 Congenital nasolacrimal duct mucoceles in a 1-­day-­old neonate. A, Axial CT image shows a left nasal round soft tissue mass with
enlargement of the ipsilateral nasolacrimal duct and canal (arrows). B and C, Coronal and axial fast spin echo inversion recovery MR images show
bilateral cystic enlargement of the nasolacrimal sacs and ducts (arrows). (From Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 12th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2013: Fig. 8.15, p. 78.)

type of congenital midline nasal mass and have been reported to
represent up to 61% of lesions. Nasal dermoids are firm, noncompressible, and painless and often have a dimple or pit on the nasal
dorsum (sometimes with hair being present) (Fig. 425.3). They can
predispose to intracranial infections if an intracranial fistula or
sinus is present, although recurrent infection of the dermoid itself
is more common; given the risk for serious infection, surgical excision is always indicated for nasal dermoids. Gliomas or heterotopic
brain tissue are firm, whereas encephaloceles are soft and enlarge
with crying or the Valsalva maneuver. Diagnosis is based on physical examination findings and results from imaging studies. CT provides the best bony detail, but magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
is also helpful because of its superior ability to define intracranial
extension (Fig. 425.4). Surgical excision of these masses is generally
required, with the extent and surgical approach based on the type
and size of the mass.
Encephaloceles may be sincipital (nasofrontal, nasoethmoidal,
naso-­orbital) or basal (transethmoidal, sphenoethmoidal, transsphenoidal, spheno-­orbital); presentations include a glabellar or nasal mass,
nasal obstruction, hypertelorism, and orbital/visual changes.

Other nasal masses include hemangiomas, congenital nasolacrimal
duct obstruction (which can occur as an intranasal mass) (Fig. 425.5),
nasal polyps, and tumors such as rhabdomyosarcoma (see Chapter
549). Nasal polyps are rarely present at birth, but the other masses often
present at birth or in early infancy (see Chapter 427).
Poor development of the paranasal sinuses and a narrow nasal airway are associated with recurrent or chronic upper airway infection in
Down syndrome (see Chapter 57).

DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT

In children with congenital nasal disorders, supportive care of the
airway is given until the diagnosis is established. Diagnosis is made
through a combination of flexible scoping and imaging studies, primarily CT scan. In the case of surgically correctable congenital problems such as choanal atresia, surgery is performed after the child is
deemed healthy and free of life-­threatening problems such as congenital heart disease.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2548 Part XVII u The Respiratory System

Chapter 426

Acquired Disorders of the
Nose
Joseph Haddad Jr. and Sonam N. Dodhia
Tumors, septal perforations, and other acquired abnormalities of
the nose and paranasal sinuses can manifest with epistaxis. Midface
trauma with a nasal or facial fracture may also be accompanied by epistaxis. Trauma to the nose can cause a septal hematoma; if treatment is
delayed, this can lead to necrosis of septal cartilage and a resultant saddle nose deformity. Other abnormalities that can cause a change in the
shape of the nose and paranasal bones, with obstruction but few other
symptoms, include fibroosseous lesions (ossifying fibroma, fibrous dysplasia, cementifying fibroma) and mucoceles of the paranasal sinuses.
These conditions may be suspected on physical examination and confirmed by CT scan and biopsy. Although these are considered benign
lesions, they can all greatly change the anatomy of surrounding bony
structures and often require surgical intervention for management.

426.1 Nasal Foreign Bodies
Joseph Haddad Jr. and Sonam N. Dodhia

ETIOLOGY

Foreign bodies (food, beads, crayons, small toys, erasers, paper wads,
buttons, batteries, beans, stones, pieces of sponge or capsule sponge
toys, and other small objects) are often placed in the nose by young
or developmentally delayed children and constitute ≤1% of pediatric
emergency department visits. Nasal foreign bodies can go unrecognized for long periods because they initially produce few symptoms
and are difficult to visualize. First symptoms include unilateral obstruction, sneezing, relatively mild discomfort, and, rarely, pain. Presenting
clinical symptoms include history of insertion of foreign bodies (86%),
mucopurulent nasal discharge (24%), foul nasal odor (9%), epistaxis
(6%), nasal obstruction (3%), and mouth breathing (2%). Irrigation
results in mucosal swelling because some foreign bodies are hygroscopic and increase in size as water is absorbed; signs of local obstruction and discomfort can increase with time. The patient might also
present with a generalized body odor known as bromhidrosis.

DIAGNOSIS

Unilateral nasal discharge and obstruction should suggest the presence
of a foreign body, which can often be seen on examination with a nasal
speculum or wide otoscope placed in the nose. Purulent secretions
may have to be cleared so that the foreign object can be visualized;
a headlight, suction, and topical decongestants are often needed. The
object is usually situated anteriorly, but unskilled attempts at removal
can force the object deeper into the nose. A long-­standing foreign body
can become embedded in granulation tissue or mucosa and appear as
a nasal mass. A lateral skull radiograph assists in diagnosis if the foreign body is metallic or radiopaque or if foreign body is suspected but
physical exam with sinus endoscopy or anterior rhinoscopy is negative.

TREATMENT

An initial examination of the nose is made to determine if a foreign
body is present and whether it needs to be removed emergently. Planning is then made for office or operating room extrication of the foreign body. Prompt removal minimizes the danger of aspiration and
local tissue necrosis, and this can usually be performed with the aid of
topical anesthesia, with forceps or nasal suction. Common noninvasive

techniques include simple nose blowing and the “mother’s kiss” technique. The “mother’s kiss” approach has been successful in acute situations where a person occludes the unaffected nostril and then, with a
complete seal over the child’s mouth, attempts to dislodge the foreign
body by blowing into the mouth. A similar approach uses an Ambu
bag over the mouth with the unaffected nostril occluded. Other noninvasive options include blowing air into a drinking straw in a child’s
mouth and applying high-­flow oxygen (10-­15 L/min) to the unaffected
nostril. Alternatively, a Katz catheter (made specifically for the removal
of foreign bodies from the nose and ear) can be inserted above and distal to the object, inflated, and drawn back with gentle traction. If there
is marked swelling, bleeding, or tissue overgrowth, general anesthesia
may be needed to remove the object. Infection usually clears promptly
after the removal of the object, and generally no further therapy is
necessary. Magnets can be used to extract metal foreign bodies, 2%
lidocaine can be used to kill live insects before removal, and irrigation
should be avoided with vegetable matter or sponges because of the risk
of foreign body swelling. Age (>5) and disk-­shaped foreign body are
predictors for operating room removal of foreign body.

COMPLICATIONS

Serious complications include posterior dislodgement and aspiration,
trauma caused by the object itself or removal attempts, infection, and
choanal stenosis. Infection is common and gives rise to a purulent,
malodorous, or bloody discharge. Local tissue damage from long-­
standing foreign body or alkaline injury from a disk battery can lead to
local tissue loss and cartilage destruction. A synechia or scar band can
then form, causing nasal obstruction. Loss of septal mucosa and cartilage can cause a septal perforation or saddle nose. Disk batteries are
especially dangerous when placed in the nose; they leach base, which
causes pain and local tissue destruction in a matter of hours. Magnets
also carry a risk of septal perforation and necrosis.
Tetanus is a rare complication of long-­standing nasal foreign bodies
in nonimmunized children (see Chapter 257). Toxic shock syndrome is
also rare and most commonly occurs from nasal surgical packing (see
Chapter 227.2); oral antibiotics should be administered when nasal
surgical packing is placed.

PREVENTION

Tempting objects, such as round, shiny beads, should be used only
under adult supervision. Disk batteries should be stored away from the
reach of small children.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

426.2 Epistaxis
Joseph Haddad Jr. and Sonam N. Dodhia
Although rare in infancy, nosebleeds are common in children between
the ages of 3 and 8, then decline in incidence after puberty. They are
also more common during winter months. Diagnosis and treatment
depend on the location and cause of the bleeding.

ANATOMY

The most common site of bleeding is the Kiesselbach plexus, an area in
the anterior septum where vessels from both the internal carotid (anterior and posterior ethmoid arteries) and external carotid (sphenopalatine and terminal branches of the internal maxillary arteries) converge.
The thin mucosa in this area and the anterior location make it prone to
exposure to dry air and trauma.

ETIOLOGY

Epistaxis can be classified as primary (idiopathic; majority of cases)
or secondary based on cause, and this has implications for diagnosis and management. Common causes of secondary nosebleeds
from the anterior septum include digital trauma, foreign bodies, dry air, and inflammation, including upper respiratory tract

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 426 u Acquired Disorders of the Nose
infections, sinusitis, and allergic rhinitis (Table 426.1). There is
often a family history of childhood epistaxis. Nasal steroid sprays
are commonly used in children, and their chronic use may be associated with nasal mucosal bleeding. Young infants with significant
gastroesophageal reflux into the nose rarely present with epistaxis
secondary to mucosal inflammation. Susceptibility is increased
during respiratory infections and in the winter when dry air irritates the nasal mucosa, resulting in formation of fissures and crusting. Severe bleeding may be encountered with congenital vascular
abnormalities, such as hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT)
(see Chapter 481.3), varicosities, hemangiomas, and in children
with thrombocytopenia, deficiency of clotting factors, particularly
von Willebrand disease (see Chapter 526), hypertension, renal failure, or venous congestion. Screening for HHT is recommended
for patients with obvious nasal/oral telangiectasias and those with
a personal or familial history of recurrent nosebleeds. Recurrent
epistaxis despite cauterization is associated with mild coagulation
disorders. The family history may be positive for abnormal bleeding
(epistaxis or other sites); specific testing for von Willebrand disease
is indicated because the prothrombin time or partial thromboplastin time may be normal despite having a bleeding disorder. Nasal
polyps or other intranasal growths may be associated with epistaxis.
Recurrent, and often severe, unilateral nosebleeds may be the initial
presenting symptom in juvenile nasal angiofibroma, which occurs
in adolescent males.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Epistaxis usually occurs without warning, with blood flowing slowly
but freely from one nostril or occasionally from both. In children with
nasal lesions, bleeding might follow physical exercise. When bleeding

Table 426.1  Possible Causes of Epistaxis
Epistaxis digitorum (nose picking)
Rhinitis (allergic or viral)
Chronic sinusitis
Foreign bodies
Intranasal neoplasm or polyps
Irritants (e.g., cigarette smoke)
Septal deviation
Septal perforation
Trauma, including child abuse
Vascular malformation or telangiectasia (hereditary hemorrhage
telangiectasia)
Hemophilia
von Willebrand disease
Platelet dysfunction
Thrombocytopenia
Hypertension
Leukemia
Liver disease (e.g., cirrhosis)
Medications (e.g., aspirin, anticoagulants, nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory drugs, topical corticosteroids)
Cocaine use
From Kucik CJ, Clenney T. Management of epistaxis. Am Fam Physician. 2005;71(2):305–
311.

2549

occurs at night, the blood may be swallowed and become apparent only
when the child vomits or passes blood in the stools. Posterior epistaxis
can manifest as anterior nasal bleeding, or, if bleeding is copious, the
patient might vomit blood as the initial symptom.

TREATMENT

Most nosebleeds stop spontaneously in a few minutes. The nares
(lower third of the nose) should be compressed for 5 minutes, and
the child kept as quiet as possible, in an upright position with the
head tilted forward to avoid blood trickling back into the throat.
Cold compresses applied to the nose can also help. If these measures do not stop the bleeding, local application of a solution of oxymetazoline (Afrin) or phenylephrine (Neo-­Synephrine) (0.25–1%)
may be useful. If bleeding persists, an anterior nasal pack may need
to be inserted; if bleeding originates in the posterior nasal cavity,
combined anterior and posterior packing is necessary. After bleeding is under control, and if a bleeding site is identified, its obliteration by cautery with silver nitrate may prevent further difficulties.
Because the septal cartilage derives its nutrition from the overlying
mucoperichondrium, only one side of the septum should be cauterized at a time to reduce the chance of a septal perforation. During
the winter, or in a dry environment, a room humidifier, saline drops,
and petrolatum (Vaseline) applied to the septum can help to prevent
epistaxis. Ointments prevent infection, increase moisture, decrease
bleeding, and are commonly used in clinical practice. Patients with
severe epistaxis despite conservative medical measures should be
considered for surgical ligation techniques or embolization. In
patients with severe or repeated epistaxis, blood transfusions may
be necessary. Otolaryngologic evaluation is indicated for these children and for those with bilateral bleeding or with hemorrhage that
does not arise from the Kiesselbach plexus. For those with recurrent
epistaxis, there may be short-­term benefits to using bipolar electrocautery over silver nitrate chemical cautery, although treatments
were equivocal after 2 years. Secondary epistaxis should be managed by identification of the cause, application of appropriate nasal
therapy, and correct systemic medical management. Hematologic
evaluation (for coagulopathy and anemia), along with nasal endoscopy and diagnostic imaging, may be needed to make a definitive
diagnosis in cases of severe recurrent epistaxis. Replacement of
deficient clotting factors may be required for patients who have an
underlying hematologic disorder (see Chapter 525). Profuse unilateral epistaxis associated with a nasal mass in an adolescent boy near
puberty might signal a juvenile nasopharyngeal angiofibroma.
This unusual tumor has also been reported in a 2-­year-­old and in
30-­to 40-­year-­olds, but the incidence peaks in adolescent and preadolescent boys. CT with contrast medium enhancement and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are part of the initial evaluation;
arteriography, embolization, and extensive surgery may be needed.
Surgical intervention may also be needed for bleeding from the
internal maxillary artery or other vessels that can cause bleeding in the
posterior nasal cavity.

PREVENTION

The discouragement of nose picking and attention to proper humidification of the bedroom during dry winter months help to prevent many
nosebleeds. Prompt attention to nasal infections and allergies is beneficial to nasal hygiene. Prompt cessation of nasal steroid sprays prevents
ongoing bleeding.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2550 Part XVII u The Respiratory System

Chapter 427

Nasal Polyps
Joseph Haddad Jr.
Nasal polyps are benign pedunculated tumors formed from edematous, usually chronically inflamed nasal mucosa. They commonly arise
from the ethmoidal sinus and occur in the middle meatus. Occasionally they appear within the maxillary antrum and can extend to the
nasopharynx (antrochoanal polyp).
It is estimated that between 1% and 4% of the population will develop
nasal polyps at some point; the incidence of nasal polyps increases with
age. Antrochoanal polyps represent only 4–6% of all nasal polyps in the
general population but account for approximately one third of polyps
in the pediatric population. Large or multiple polyps can completely
obstruct the nasal passage. The polyps originating from the ethmoidal
sinus are usually smaller and multiple as compared with the large and
usually single antrochoanal polyp.
Cystic fibrosis (CF; see Chapter 454) is the most common childhood cause of nasal polyposis, and up to 50% of CF patients experience
obstructing nasal polyposis, which is rare in non-­CF children. Therefore CF should be suspected in any child younger than 12 years old
with nasal polyps, even in the absence of typical respiratory and digestive symptoms. Nasal polyposis is also associated with chronic sinusitis
(see Chapter 429) and allergic rhinitis. Large population studies have
noted a significant familial risk in having chronic rhinosinusitis with
polyposis. In the Samter triad, nasal polyps are associated with aspirin
sensitivity and asthma; this condition is rare in children.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Obstruction of nasal passages is prominent, with associated hyponasal
speech and mouth breathing. Profuse unilateral mucoid or mucopurulent rhinorrhea may also be present. An examination of the nasal
passages shows glistening, gray, grapelike masses squeezed between the
nasal turbinates and the septum.

Fig. 427.1 Antrochoanal polyp viewed endoscopically (arrow). (From
Basak S, Karaman CZ, Akdilli A, et al. Surgical approaches to antrochoanal polyps in children. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 1998;46:197–205.)

DIAGNOSIS AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Examination of the external nose and rhinoscopy should be performed. Ethmoidal polyps can be readily distinguished from the well-­
vascularized turbinate tissue, which is pink or red; antrochoanal polyps
may have a fleshier appearance (Fig. 427.1). Antrochoanal polyps may
prolapse into the nasopharynx; flexible nasopharyngoscopy can assist
in making this diagnosis. Prolonged presence of ethmoidal polyps in
a child can widen the bridge of the nose and erode adjacent osseous
structures. Tumors of the nose cause more local destruction and distortion of the anatomy. CT scan of the midface is key to diagnosis and
planning for surgical treatment (Fig. 427.2).

TREATMENT

Local or systemic decongestants are not usually effective in shrinking the polyps, although they may provide symptomatic relief from
the associated mucosal edema. Intranasal steroid sprays, and sometimes systemic steroids, can provide some shrinkage of nasal polyps
with symptomatic relief and have proved useful in children with CF
and adults with nasal polyps. Topical nasal steroid therapy, fluticasone, mometasone, and budesonide appear to result in nasal symptom
improvement but were found to have no effect on those with CF. Dupilumab inhibits interleukin (IL)-­4 and IL-­13, proinflammatory cytokines
involved in polyp formation, and is approved in patients ≥18 years of
age for the treatment of chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps.
Polyps should be removed surgically if complete obstruction, uncontrolled rhinorrhea, or deformity of the nose appears. If the underlying
pathogenic mechanism cannot be eliminated (such as CF), the polyps
may soon return. Functional endoscopic sinus surgery provides more
complete polyp removal and treatment of other associated nasal disease; in some cases, this has reduced the need for frequent surgeries.
Nasal steroid sprays should also be started preventively, once postsurgical healing occurs.
Antrochoanal polyps do not respond to medical measures and must
be removed surgically, typically via endoscopic sinus surgery, or, alternatively, with a mini-­Caldwell procedure. Because these types of polyps
are not associated with any underlying disease process, the recurrence
rate is much less than for other types of polyps.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Fig. 427.2 A typical CT image of an isolated antrochoanal polyp
on the left side. (From Basak S, Karaman CZ, Akdilli A, et al. Surgical
approaches to antrochoanal polyps in children. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 1998;46:197–205.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 428 u The Common Cold 2551

Chapter 428

The Common Cold
Katherine M. Richardson and
Jennifer E. Schuster
The common cold is an acute viral infection of the upper respiratory
tract in which the symptoms of rhinorrhea and nasal obstruction are
prominent. Systemic symptoms and signs such as headache, myalgia,
and fever are absent or mild. The common cold is frequently referred
to as infectious rhinitis but may also include self-­limited involvement of
the sinus mucosa and is more correctly termed rhinosinusitis.

ETIOLOGY

The most common pathogens associated with the common cold are
the more than 200 types of human rhinoviruses (see Chapter 310), but
the syndrome can be caused by many different virus families (Table
428.1). Human rhinoviruses (HRVs) are associated with more than
50% of colds in adults and children. In young children, other viral etiologies of the common cold include respiratory syncytial virus (RSV;
see Chapter 307), human metapneumovirus (MPV; see Chapter 308),
parainfluenza viruses (PIVs; see Chapter 306), seasonal coronaviruses
(see Chapter 311), and adenoviruses (see Chapter 309). Common
cold symptoms may also be caused by influenza viruses and nonpolio
enteroviruses. Many viruses that cause rhinitis are also associated with
other symptoms and signs such as cough, wheezing, and fever.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Colds occur year-­round, but the incidence is greatest from the early
fall until the late spring, reflecting the seasonal prevalence of the viral
pathogens associated with cold symptoms. In the Northern Hemisphere, the highest incidence of HRV infection occurs in the early fall
(August-­October) and in the late spring (April-­May); however, HRVs
are typically detected year-­round. Historically, the seasonal incidence
for PIV usually peaks in the summer, fall, and late spring and is highest between December and April for RSV, influenza viruses, MPV, and
coronaviruses. Adenoviruses are detected at a low prevalence throughout the cold season, and enteroviruses may also be detected during
summer months or throughout the year.
Young children have an average of six to eight colds per year, but
10–15% of children have at least 12 infections per year. The incidence
of illness decreases with increasing age, with two to three illnesses per

year by adulthood. The incidence of infection is primarily a function of
exposure to the virus. Children in out-­of-­home daycare centers during
the first year of life have 50% more colds than children cared for only at
home. The difference in the incidence of illness between these groups
of children decreases as the length of time spent in daycare increases,
and in fact many children in daycare have asymptomatic viral infections. However, the incidence of illness remains higher in the daycare
group through at least the first 3 years of life. When they begin primary
school, children who attended daycare have less frequent colds than
those who did not. Mannose-­binding lectin deficiency with impaired
innate immunity may be associated with an increased incidence of
colds in children.

PATHOGENESIS

Viruses that cause the common cold are spread by three mechanisms:
direct hand contact (self-­inoculation of one’s own nasal mucosa or conjunctivae after touching a contaminated person or object), inhalation
of small-­particle aerosols that are airborne from coughing, or deposition of large-­particle aerosols that are expelled during a sneeze and land
on nasal or conjunctival mucosa. Although the different common cold
pathogens could be spread by any of these mechanisms, some routes
of transmission appear to be more efficient than others for particular viruses. Studies of HRV and RSV indicate that direct contact is an
efficient mechanism of transmission of these viruses, although transmission by large-­particle aerosols can also occur. By contrast, influenza viruses and coronaviruses appear to be most efficiently spread by
small-­particle aerosols.
The respiratory viruses have evolved different mechanisms to avoid
host defenses. Infections with HRV and adenoviruses result in the
development of serotype-­specific protective immunity. Repeated infections with these pathogens occur because there are a large number of
distinct serotypes of each virus. Influenza viruses change the antigens
presented on the surface of the virus because of genetic drift and thus
behave as though there were multiple viral serotypes. The interaction
of coronaviruses (see Chapter 311) with host immunity is not well
defined, but it appears that multiple distinct strains of coronaviruses
are capable of inducing at least short-­term protective immunity, with
possibility for some cross protection between different coronaviruses.
There are four types of PIV, two antigenic subgroups of RSV, and four
genotypes of MPV. In addition to antigenic diversity, many of these
viruses are able to reinfect the upper airway because mucosal immunoglobulin A (IgA) induced by previous infection is short lived, and
the brief incubation period of these viruses allows the establishment of
infection before immune memory is able to respond. Although reinfection is not completely prevented by the adaptive host response to these
viruses, the severity of illness is moderated by preexisting immunity.

Table 428.1  Pathogens* Associated with the Common Cold
ASSOCIATION

PATHOGEN

RELATIVE FREQUENCY**

OTHER COMMON SYMPTOMS AND SIGNS

Agents primarily associated
with the common cold

Rhinoviruses
Coronaviruses, including
SARS-CoV-2 variants

Frequent
Frequent

Wheezing/bronchiolitis

Agents primarily associated
with other clinical
syndromes that also cause
common cold symptoms

Respiratory syncytial virus
Human metapneumovirus
Bocavirus
Influenza viruses
Parainfluenza viruses
Adenoviruses

Occasional
Occasional
Occasional
Uncommon
Uncommon
Uncommon

Enteroviruses
Coxsackievirus A
Other nonpolio enteroviruses

Uncommon

Bronchiolitis in children <2 yr of age
Pneumonia and bronchiolitis
Uncertain role
Influenza-­like illness, pneumonia, croup
Croup, bronchiolitis
Pharyngoconjunctival fever (palpebral conjunctivitis,
watery eye discharge, pharyngeal erythema)
Herpangina (fever and ulcerated papules on
posterior oropharynx)
Aseptic meningitis

*It is not unusual to have one or more respiratory pathogens.
**Relative frequency of colds caused by the agent.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2552 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Viral infection of the nasal epithelium can be associated with
destruction of the epithelial lining, as with influenza viruses and
adenoviruses, or there can be no apparent histologic damage, as
with HRV, coronaviruses, and RSV. Regardless of the histopathologic findings, infection of the nasal epithelium is associated with
an acute inflammatory response characterized by release of a variety of inflammatory cytokines, such as interleukin-­8, that attract
polymorphonuclear cells into the nasal submucosa and epithelium
and infiltration of the mucosa by inflammatory cells. This acute
inflammatory response appears to be partially or largely responsible
for many of the symptoms associated with the common cold, rather
than direct damage to the respiratory tract by the virus. Viral shedding of most respiratory viruses peaks 3-­5 days after inoculation,
often coinciding with symptom onset; low levels of viral shedding
may persist for up to 3 weeks in the otherwise recovering healthy
host. Inflammation can obstruct the sinus ostia or eustachian tube,
predisposing to bacterial sinusitis or otitis media, respectively.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Symptoms of the common cold vary by age and virus. In infants,
fever and nasal discharge may predominate. Fever is uncommon in
older children and adults. The onset of common cold symptoms typically occurs 1-­3 days after viral infection. The first symptom noted
is often sore or scratchy throat, followed closely by nasal obstruction and rhinorrhea. The sore throat usually resolves quickly, and,
by the second and third day of illness, nasal symptoms predominate. Cough is associated with two thirds of colds in children and
usually begins after the onset of nasal symptoms. Cough may persist for an additional 1-­2 weeks after resolution of other symptoms.
Influenza viruses, RSV, MPV, and adenoviruses are more likely than
HRV or coronaviruses to be associated with fever and other constitutional symptoms, and HRV is more commonly associated with
wheezing, particularly in older children. Other symptoms of a cold
may include headache, hoarseness, irritability, difficulty sleeping,
or decreased appetite. Vomiting and diarrhea are uncommon. The
usual cold persists for approximately 1 week, although 10% last for
2 weeks.
The physical findings of the common cold are limited to the upper
respiratory tract. Increased nasal secretion is usually obvious; a change
in the color or consistency of the secretions is common during the
course of the illness and does not indicate sinusitis or bacterial superinfection, but may indicate accumulation of polymorphonuclear cells.
Examination of the nasal cavity might reveal swollen, erythematous
nasal turbinates, although this finding is nonspecific and of limited
diagnostic value. Abnormal middle ear pressure is common during
a cold. Anterior cervical lymphadenopathy or conjunctival injection
may also be noted on exam.

DIAGNOSIS

The most important task of the physician caring for a patient with a
cold is to exclude other conditions that are potentially more serious
or treatable. The differential diagnosis of the common cold includes
noninfectious disorders and other upper respiratory tract infections
(Table 428.2).

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Routine laboratory studies are not helpful for the diagnosis and
management of the common cold. A nasal smear for eosinophils
(Hansel stain) may be useful if allergic rhinitis is suspected (see
Chapter 184). A predominance of polymorphonuclear cells in the
nasal secretions is characteristic of uncomplicated colds and does
not indicate bacterial superinfection. Self-­
limited radiographic
abnormalities of the paranasal sinuses are common during an
uncomplicated cold; imaging is not indicated for most children
with simple rhinitis.
The viral pathogens associated with the common cold can be
detected by polymerase chain reaction (PCR), culture, antigen detection, or serologic methods. These studies are generally not indicated
in patients with colds, because a specific etiologic diagnosis is useful

Table 428.2  Conditions that Can Mimic the Common Cold
CONDITION

DIFFERENTIATING FEATURES

Allergic rhinitis

Prominent itching and sneezing, nasal
eosinophils; Hansel stain can aid diagnosis

Vasomotor rhinitis

May be triggered by irritants, weather
changes, spicy foods, etc.

Rhinitis medicamentosa

History of nasal decongestant use

Foreign body

Unilateral, foul-­smelling secretions
Bloody nasal secretions

Sinusitis

Presence of fever, headache or facial pain,
or periorbital edema or persistence of
rhinorrhea or cough for longer than
10-­14 days

Streptococcosis

Mucopurulent nasal discharge that
excoriates the nares, no cough

Pertussis

Onset of persistent or severe paroxysmal
cough

Congenital syphilis

Persistent rhinorrhea with onset in the first
3 mo of life

only when treatment with an antiviral agent is contemplated, such as
for influenza viruses. Bacterial cultures, PCR, or antigen detection are
useful only when group A streptococcus (see Chapter 229) or Bordetella pertussis (see Chapter 243) is suspected. The isolation of bacterial pathogens from nasopharyngeal specimens is not an indication of
bacterial nasal infection and is not a specific predictor of the etiologic
agent in sinusitis.

TREATMENT

The management of the common cold consists primarily of supportive
care and anticipatory guidance.

Antiviral Treatment

Specific antiviral therapy is not available for HRV infections. The neuraminidase inhibitors oseltamivir, zanamivir, and peramivir, as well as
polymerase acidic endonuclease inhibitor baloxavir marboxil, have a
modest effect on the duration of symptoms associated with influenza
viral infections in children. The difficulty of distinguishing influenza
from other common cold pathogens and the necessity that therapy
be started early in the illness (within 48 hours of onset of symptoms)
to be beneficial are practical limitations to the use of these agents for
mild upper respiratory tract infections. Antibacterial therapy is of no
benefit in the treatment of the common cold and should be avoided
to minimize possible adverse effects and the development of antibiotic
resistance.

Supportive Care and Symptomatic Treatment

Supportive interventions are frequently recommended by providers.
Maintaining adequate oral hydration may help to prevent dehydration
and to thin secretions and soothe respiratory mucosa. The common
home remedy of ingesting warm fluids may soothe mucosa, increase
nasal mucus flow, or loosen respiratory secretions. Topical nasal saline
may temporarily remove secretions, and saline nasal irrigation may
reduce symptoms. Cool, humidified air has not been well studied
but may loosen nasal secretions; however, cool-­mist humidifiers and
vaporizers must be cleaned after each use. The World Health Organization suggests that neither steam nor cool-­mist therapy be used in
treatment of a cold.
The use of oral nonprescription therapies (often containing antihistamines, antitussives, and decongestants) for cold symptoms
in children is controversial. Although some of these medications
are effective in adults, no study demonstrates a significant effect

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 428 u The Common Cold 2553
in children, and there may be serious side effects. Young children
cannot participate in the assessment of symptom severity, so studies
of these treatments in children have generally been based on observations by parents or other observers, a method that is likely to be
insensitive for detection of treatment effects. Because of the lack
of direct evidence for effectiveness and the potential for unwanted
side effects, it is recommended that nonprescription cough and
cold products not be used for infants and children younger than 4
years of age. A decision whether to use these medications in older
children must consider the likelihood of clinical benefit compared
with the potential adverse effects of these drugs. The prominent or
most bothersome symptoms of colds vary in the course of the illness. If symptomatic treatments are used, it is reasonable to target
therapy to specific bothersome symptoms, and care should be taken
to ensure that caregivers understand the intended effect and can
determine the proper dosage of the medications. It is also important
to instruct caregivers to read labels carefully in case multiple medications are present in one formula to avoid overdose.
Zinc, given as oral lozenges to previously healthy patients, reduces
the duration but not the severity of symptoms of a common cold if
begun within 24 hours of symptoms. The function of the HRV 3C protease, an essential enzyme for HRV replication, is inhibited by zinc, but
there has been no evidence of an antiviral effect of zinc in vivo. The
effect of zinc on symptoms has been inconsistent, with some studies
reporting dramatic treatment effects (in adults), whereas other studies
find no benefit. Side effects are common and include decreased taste,
bad taste, and nausea.

Fever

Fever is not usually associated with an uncomplicated common cold,
and antipyretic treatment is generally not indicated. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) may decrease discomfort from cold-­
related headache or myalgias.

Nasal Obstruction

Either topical or oral adrenergic agents may be used as nasal decongestants in older children and adults. Effective topical adrenergic
agents such as xylometazoline, oxymetazoline, or phenylephrine
are available as either intranasal drops or nasal sprays. Reduced-­
strength formulations of these medications are available for use
in younger children, although they are not recommended for use
in children younger than 6 years old. Systemic absorption of the
imidazolines (oxymetazoline, xylometazoline) has very rarely been
associated with bradycardia, hypotension, and coma. Prolonged
use of the topical adrenergic agents should be avoided to prevent
the development of rhinitis medicamentosa, an apparent rebound
effect that causes the sensation of nasal obstruction when the drug
is discontinued. The oral adrenergic agents are less effective than
the topical preparations and are occasionally associated with systemic effects such as central nervous system stimulation, hypertension, and palpitations. Pseudoephedrine may be more effective
than phenylephrine as an oral agent to treat nasal congestion—its
benefit seems to be greatest in the first day of treatment; after this
it does not show much benefit over placebo. Aromatic vapors (such
as menthol) for external rub may improve the perception of nasal
patency but do not affect spirometry.
Saline nose drops (wash, irrigation) can improve nasal symptoms
and may be used in all age-­groups.

Rhinorrhea

The first-­
generation antihistamines may reduce rhinorrhea by
25–30%. The effect of the antihistamines on rhinorrhea appears
to be related to the anticholinergic rather than the antihistaminic
properties of these drugs, and therefore the second-­generation or
nonsedating antihistamines have no effect on common cold symptoms. The major adverse effects associated with the use of the
antihistamines are sedation or paradoxical hyperactivity. Overdose may be associated with respiratory depression or hallucinations. Rhinorrhea may also be treated with ipratropium bromide, a

topical anticholinergic agent. This drug produces an effect comparable to the antihistamines but is not associated with sedation. The
most common side effects of ipratropium are nasal irritation and
bleeding.

Sore Throat

The sore throat associated with colds is generally not severe, but treatment with mild analgesics is occasionally indicated, particularly if there
is associated myalgia or headache. The use of acetaminophen during
HRV infection is associated with suppression of neutralizing antibody
responses, but this observation has no apparent clinical significance.
Aspirin should not be given to children with respiratory infections
because of the risk of Reye syndrome in children with influenza (see
Chapter 305). NSAIDs are somewhat effective in relieving discomfort
caused by a cold, but there is no clear evidence of an effect on respiratory symptoms.

Cough

Cough suppression is generally not necessary in patients with colds.
Cough in some patients appears to be from upper respiratory tract
irritation associated with postnasal drip. Cough in these patients is
most prominent during the time of greatest nasal symptoms, and
treatment with a first-­generation antihistamine may be helpful.
Cough lozenges or hard candy may be temporarily effective and are
unlikely to be harmful in children for whom they do not pose risk
of aspiration (older than age 6 years). Honey has a modest effect
on relieving nocturnal cough and is unlikely to be harmful in children older than 1 year of age. Honey should be avoided in children
younger than 1 year of age because of the risk for botulism (see
Chapter 237).
In some patients, cough may be a result of virus-­induced reactive airways disease. These patients can have cough that persists for
days to weeks after the acute illness and might benefit from bronchodilator or other therapy. Dextromethorphan hydrobromide has
no effect on cough from colds and has potential enhanced toxicity. Expectorants such as guaifenesin are not effective antitussive
agents.

Ineffective Treatments

Vitamin C, guaifenesin, and inhalation of warm, humidified air are no
more effective than placebo for the treatment of cold symptoms.
Echinacea is a popular herbal treatment for the common cold.
Although echinacea extracts have biologic effects, echinacea is not
effective as a common cold treatment. The lack of standardization
of commercial products containing echinacea also presents a formidable obstacle to the rational evaluation or use of this therapy.
There is no evidence that the common cold or persistent acute purulent rhinitis of less than 10 days in duration benefits from antibiotics. In
fact, there is evidence that antibiotics cause significant adverse effects
when given for acute purulent rhinitis.

COMPLICATIONS

The most common complication of a cold is acute otitis media (AOM;
see Chapter 680), which may be indicated by new-­onset fever and earache after the first few days of cold symptoms. AOM is reported in
5–30% of children who have a cold, with the higher incidence occurring in young infants and in children cared for in a group daycare setting. Symptomatic treatment of the common cold symptoms has no
effect on the subsequent development of AOM, which can be viral or
bacterial.
Sinusitis is another complication of the common cold (see Chapter
429). Self-­limited sinus inflammation is a part of the pathophysiology of the common cold, but 0.5–2% of viral upper respiratory tract
infections in adults and 5–9% in children are complicated by acute
bacterial sinusitis. The differentiation of common cold symptoms
from bacterial sinusitis may be difficult. The diagnosis of bacterial
sinusitis should be considered if rhinorrhea or daytime cough persists without improvement for at least 10-­14 days; if acute symptoms
worsen over time; or if acute signs of more severe sinus involvement

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2554 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
such as fever, facial pain, or facial swelling develop. There is no evidence that symptomatic treatment of the common cold alters the frequency of development of bacterial sinusitis. Bacterial pneumonia is
an uncommon complication of the common cold; however, both RSV
and HRV have been implicated in pneumonia, especially in developing and emerging countries.
Exacerbation of asthma is a potentially serious complication of
colds. The majority of asthma exacerbations in children are associated
with common cold viruses. There is no evidence that treatment of common cold symptoms prevents this complication; however, studies are
underway in patients with underlying asthma to determine effectiveness of preventive or acute treatment at the onset of upper respiratory
tract infection symptoms.

PREVENTION

Chemoprophylaxis or immunoprophylaxis is generally not available
for the common cold. Immunization or chemoprophylaxis against
influenza can prevent colds caused by this pathogen, but influenza
is responsible for only a small proportion of all colds. Palivizumab is
recommended to prevent severe RSV lower respiratory infection in
high-­risk infants but does not prevent upper respiratory infections
from this virus. Vitamin C, garlic, or echinacea do not prevent the
common cold. Zinc sulfate taken for a minimum of 5 months may
reduce the rate of cold development. However, because of duration
of use and adverse effects of bad taste and nausea, this is not a recommended prevention modality in children.
Hand-­to-­hand transmission of HRV followed by self-­inoculation
may be prevented by frequent handwashing and avoiding touching
one’s mouth, nose, and eyes. Some studies report the use of alcohol-­
based hand sanitizers and virucidal hand treatments were associated
with decreased transmission. In the experimental setting, virucidal disinfectants or virucidal-­impregnated tissues also reduce transmission of
cold viruses; under natural conditions none of these interventions prevents common colds.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 429

Sinusitis
Diane E. Pappas and Sarah R. Boggs
Sinusitis is a common illness of childhood and adolescence. There
are two common etiologies of acute sinusitis—viral and bacterial—
with significant acute and chronic morbidity as well as the potential
for serious complications. Fungal sinusitis is rare in immunocompetent patients but can also occur. The common cold produces a
viral, self-­limited rhinosinusitis (see Chapter 428). Approximately
6–7% of viral upper respiratory tract infections in children and
adolescents are complicated by acute symptomatic bacterial sinusitis. Some children with underlying predisposing conditions (cystic
fibrosis, primary ciliary dyskinesia, immunoglobulin deficiencies)
have chronic sinus disease that may or may not be infectious.
Typically, the ethmoidal and maxillary sinuses are present at birth,
but only the ethmoidal sinuses are pneumatized. The maxillary sinuses
are not pneumatized until 4 years of age. The sphenoidal sinuses are
present by 5 years of age, whereas the frontal sinuses begin development at age 7-­8 years and are not completely developed until adolescence. The ostia draining the sinuses are narrow (1-­3 mm) and drain

into the ostiomeatal complex in the middle meatus. The paranasal
sinuses are normally sterile and maintained by the mucociliary clearance system.
The bacterial pathogens causing acute bacterial sinusitis in
children and adolescents include Streptococcus pneumoniae (∼30%;
see Chapter 228), nontypeable Haemophilus influenzae (∼50%; see
Chapter 240), and Moraxella catarrhalis (∼10%; see Chapter 242).
Approximately 50% of H. influenzae and 100% of M. catarrhalis are
β-­lactamase positive. As a result of routine use of pneumococcal
conjugate vaccine (PCV) 13 in children, nontypeable H. influenzae
is the most common cause of acute bacterial sinusitis in children;
S. pneumoniae resistance has also decreased. Similarly, as a result of
routine use of the H. influenzae type b vaccination in children, almost
all H. influenzae infections are nontypeable H. influenzae. Approximately 25% of S. pneumoniae may be penicillin resistant. Staphylococcus aureus, other streptococci, and anaerobes are uncommon
causes of acute bacterial sinusitis in children. Although S. aureus
(see Chapter 227.1) is an uncommon pathogen for acute sinusitis
in children, the increasing prevalence of methicillin-­resistant S.
aureus is a significant concern. H. influenzae, α-­ and β-­hemolytic
streptococci, M. catarrhalis, S. pneumoniae, and coagulase-­negative
staphylococci are commonly recovered from children with chronic
sinus disease. Fusobacterium necrophorum and Streptococcus anginosus are emerging pathogens causing sinusitis with high potential
for intracranial extension.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Acute bacterial sinusitis can occur at any age, though it is more common in older children and adolescents as the sinus cavities become
pneumatized. Predisposing conditions may include viral upper
respiratory tract infections (associated with out-­of-­home daycare
or a school-­age sibling), allergic rhinitis, and tobacco smoke exposure. Children with immune deficiencies, particularly of antibody
production (immunoglobulin [Ig]G, IgG subclasses, IgA; see Chapter 166), cystic fibrosis (see Chapter 454), ciliary dysfunction (see
Chapter 455), abnormalities of phagocyte function, gastroesophageal reflux, anatomic defects (cleft palate), nasal polyps, cocaine
abuse, and nasal foreign bodies (including nasogastric tubes), can
develop chronic or recurrent sinus disease. Immunosuppression for
bone marrow transplantation or malignancy with profound neutropenia and lymphopenia predisposes to severe fungal (Aspergillus,
Mucor) sinusitis, often with intracranial extension. Patients with
nasotracheal intubation or nasogastric tubes may have obstruction
of the sinus ostia and develop sinusitis with the multiple-­drug-­
resistant organisms of the intensive care unit.
Acute sinusitis is defined by a duration of <30 days, subacute by
a duration of 1-­3 months, and chronic by a duration of longer than
3 months.

PATHOGENESIS

Acute bacterial sinusitis typically follows a viral upper respiratory tract infection (including COVID-­19 infection). Initially, the
viral infection produces a viral rhinosinusitis; magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) evaluation of the paranasal sinuses demonstrates
abnormalities (mucosal thickening, edema, inflammation) of the
paranasal sinuses in 68% of healthy children in the normal course of
the common cold. Nose blowing has been demonstrated to generate sufficient force to propel nasal secretions into the sinus cavities.
Bacteria from the nasopharynx that enter the sinuses are normally
cleared readily, but during viral rhinosinusitis, inflammation and
edema can block sinus drainage and impair mucociliary clearance
of bacteria. The growth conditions are favorable, and high titers of
bacteria are produced.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Children and adolescents with sinusitis can present with nonspecific
complaints, including nasal congestion, purulent nasal discharge

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 429 u Sinusitis
Table 429.1  Symptoms of Acute Bacterial Sinusitis
MAJOR SYMPTOMS

MINOR SYMPTOMS

Purulent anterior nasal discharge
Purulent or discolored posterior nasal
discharge
Nasal congestion or obstruction
Facial congestion or fullness
Facial pain or pressure alone or
exacerbated by bending forward
Hyposmia or anosmia
Fever (for acute sinusitis only)

Headache
Ear pain, pressure, or
fullness
Halitosis
Dental pain
Cough
Fever (for subacute or
chronic sinusitis)
Fatigue

Modified from Chow AW, Benninger MS, Brook I, et al. IDSA clinical practice guideline
for acute bacterial rhinosinusitis in children and adults. CID. 2012;54:e72–e112, Table 2.

Mean symptom score

10

URI
Sinusitis

8
6
4
2
0

Day 3

Day 7

Day 10

Day 15

Fig. 429.1 Sinusitis vs URI biphasic symptoms. Mean symptom score
by day of illness. (Modified from DeMuri GP, Eickhoff JC, Gern JC, Wald
ER. Clinical and virological characteristics of acute sinusitis in children.
Clin Infect Dis. 2019;69:1764–1770, Fig. 1.)

(unilateral or bilateral), fever, and cough. Less common symptoms
include bad breath (halitosis), a decreased sense of smell (hyposmia), and periorbital edema (Table 429.1). Complaints of headache
and facial pain are rare in children. Additional symptoms include
maxillary tooth discomfort and facial pain or pressure exacerbated
by bending forward. Physical examination might reveal erythema
and swelling of the nasal mucosa with purulent nasal discharge.
Sinus tenderness may be detectable in adolescents and adults.

DIAGNOSIS

The clinical diagnosis of acute bacterial sinusitis is based on history,
which unfortunately overlaps significantly with that of the common
cold. In order to differentiate between the two, current pediatric guidelines define acute bacterial sinusitis as either (1) persistent symptoms
of upper respiratory tract infection (rhinitis, common cold), including
nasal discharge and/or daytime cough for longer than 10 days without
improvement, (2) sudden worsening or new symptoms, known as two-­
phase illness, or “double sickening,” including nasal discharge, daytime
cough, or fever after initial improvement (Fig. 429.1), or (3) severe
onset with temperature of at least 39°C (102°F) and purulent nasal
discharge for 3-­4 consecutive days. Bacteria are recovered from maxillary sinus aspirates in 70% of children with such persistent or severe
symptoms. Children with chronic sinusitis have a history of persistent
respiratory symptoms, including cough, nasal discharge, or nasal congestion, lasting longer than 90 days.
Sinus aspirate culture is the only accurate method of diagnosis but
is not practical for routine use for immunocompetent patients. It may
be a necessary procedure for immunosuppressed patients with suspected fungal sinusitis. In adults, rigid nasal endoscopy is a less invasive method for obtaining culture material from the sinus but detects
a great excess of positive cultures compared with aspirates. Findings
on radiographic studies (sinus plain films, computed tomography [CT]

2555

scans), including opacification, mucosal thickening, or presence of an
air-­fluid level, are not diagnostic and are not recommended in otherwise healthy children. Such findings can confirm the presence of sinus
inflammation but cannot be used to differentiate among viral, bacterial, or allergic causes of inflammation.
Given the nonspecific clinical picture, differential diagnostic considerations include viral upper respiratory tract infection (including
COVID-­19), allergic rhinitis, nonallergic rhinitis, and nasal foreign
body. Viral upper respiratory tract infections are characterized by
clear and usually nonpurulent nasal discharge, cough, and initial
fever; symptoms do not usually persist beyond 10-­14 days, although
a few children (10%) have persistent symptoms even at 14 days. In
a study using nasal sampling, new viruses were present in 29% of
sinusitis episodes in children, suggesting sequential upper respiratory infections (URIs) as the cause of persistent symptoms in many
cases. Allergic rhinitis can be seasonal; evaluation of nasal secretions
should reveal significant eosinophilia.

TREATMENT

It is unclear whether antimicrobial treatment of clinically diagnosed acute bacterial sinusitis offers any substantial benefit. Two
randomly controlled trials in children with acute bacterial sinusitis
showed improvement after antibiotic therapy, whereas a third found
that antimicrobial therapy did not affect resolution of symptoms,
duration of symptoms, or days missed from school. A similar study
in adults demonstrated improved symptoms at day 7 but not day
10 of treatment. Approximately 50% of children with acute bacterial sinusitis recover without antimicrobial treatment. Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) guidelines offer that either
(1) antibiotic treatment is initiated at the time of diagnosis or (2)
the clinician/family may choose continued observation for an additional 3 days, with the caveat that antibiotic therapy will be initiated if symptoms worsen or do not improve. Continued observation
is generally not recommended for children with persistent symptoms treated with antibiotics in the preceding 30 days or those with
underlying conditions.
Due to the high prevalence of antibiotic-resistant S. pneumoniae
in some communities, amoxicillin-clavulanate is recommended
by some authorities as the preferred initial therapy for acute bacterial sinusitis; high-dose amoxicillin alone may also be considered. In a large cohort of pediatric and adolescent patients from
a nationwide healthcare utilization database, both antibiotics were
equally effective (equivalent treatment failure rates), but those
who received amoxicillin-clavulanate had a higher rate of adverse
events. Alternative treatments for the penicillin-­allergic patient
include cefpodoxime, cefdinir, or levofloxacin. Azithromycin and
trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole are no longer indicated because of a
high prevalence of antibiotic resistance. Ceftriaxone (50 mg/kg, IV or
IM) may be given to children who are vomiting or who are at risk
for poor compliance; it should be followed by a course of oral antibiotics. For those with worsening symptoms or failure to improve
after 3 days of antibiotic therapy, antibiotic therapy may be changed
or the child may be referred to an otolaryngologist for further
evaluation (maxillary sinus aspiration for culture and susceptibility
testing may be necessary) (Table 429.3). The appropriate duration
of therapy for sinusitis has yet to be determined; individualization
of therapy is a reasonable approach, with treatment recommended
in children for a minimum of 10 days or 7 days after resolution of
symptoms. Frontal sinusitis can rapidly progress to serious intracranial complications and may necessitate initiation of parenteral
ampicillin-sulbactam, ceftriaxone, or levofloxacin until substantial
clinical improvement is achieved (Figs. 429.2 and 429.3). Treatment
is then completed with oral antibiotic therapy.
The use of decongestants, antihistamines, mucolytics, and intranasal corticosteroids has not been adequately studied in children and is
not recommended for the treatment of acute uncomplicated bacterial
sinusitis. Likewise, saline nasal washes or nasal sprays can help liquefy
secretions and act as a mild vasoconstrictor, but the effects have not
been systematically evaluated in children.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2556 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Table 429.2  Antimicrobial Regimens for Acute Bacterial
Rhinosinusitis in Children
INDICATION

TREATMENT

Initial empirical therapy for mild
to moderate disease*

Amoxicillin-clavulanate (45 mg
amoxicillin/kg/day PO divided
bid, max 4 g amoxicillin/day) ×
10 days*

Initial therapy for acute
worsening (“double sickening”)
of symptoms OR severe
disease†

Amoxicillin-­clavulanate (90 mg
amoxicillin/kg/day PO divided
bid, max 4 g amoxicillin/day) ×
10 days

β-­Lactam allergy
Type I hypersensitivity

Levofloxacin (10-­20 mg/kg/day
PO divided every 12-­24 hr, max
500 mg/day) × 10 days

Non–type I hypersensitivity

Cefpodoxime‡ (10 mg/kg/day
PO divided bid) × 10 days

Severe infection requiring
hospitalization

Ampicillin/sulbactam
(200-­400 mg ampicillin/kg/day
IV divided every 6 hr, max 8g
ampicillin/day)
Ceftriaxone (50 mg/kg/day IV
divided every 12 hr, max
4 g/day)
Levofloxacin (10-­20 mg/kg/day IV
divided every 12-­24 hr, max 500
mg/day)

*Amoxicillin 90 mg/kg/day, divided bid, max 4g/day, can also be considered.
†Acute worsening (“double sickening”) OR severe disease: worsening nasal discharge,
daytime cough, or fever starting after a period of initial improvement OR severe
onset with temperature of at least 39°C (102°F) and purulent nasal discharge for 3-­4
consecutive days.
‡Cefdinir (14 mg/kg/day in one or two divided doses, max 600 mg/day) is an alternative
that is more palatable in liquid form than cefpodoxime but has less coverage of
bacterial sinusitis pathogens.

Table 429.3  Indications for Referral to a Specialist
Severe infection (high persistent fever with temperature >39°C
[>102°F], orbital edema, severe headache, visual disturbance,
altered mental status, meningeal signs)
Recalcitrant infection with failure to respond to extended courses of
antimicrobial therapy
Immunocompromised host
Multiple medical problems that might compromise response to
treatment (e.g., hepatic or renal impairment, hypersensitivity to
antimicrobial agents, organ transplant)
Unusual or resistant pathogens
Fungal sinusitis or granulomatous disease
Nosocomial infection
Anatomic defects causing obstruction and requiring surgical
intervention
Multiple recurrent episodes of acute bacterial rhinosinusitis (three to
four episodes per year) suggesting chronic sinusitis
Chronic rhinosinusitis (with or without polyps or asthma) with
recurrent acute bacterial rhinosinusitis exacerbations
Evaluation of immunotherapy for allergic rhinitis
From Chow AW, Benninger MS, Brook I, et al. IDSA clinical practice guideline for acute
bacterial rhinosinusitis in children and adults. CID. 2021;54:e72–e112, Table 14.

COMPLICATIONS

Because of the close proximity of the paranasal sinuses to the brain
and eyes, serious orbital and/or intracranial complications can

result from acute bacterial sinusitis and progress rapidly. Organisms causing orbital and/or intracranial complications of bacterial
sinusitis in children include members of the Streptococcus anginosus group, S. aureus, S. pneumoniae, methicillin-­resistant S. aureus
(MRSA), and methicillin-­sensitive S. aureus (MSSA); ∼30% of infections were polymicrobial.
Orbital complications, including periorbital cellulitis and more
often orbital cellulitis (see Chapter 674), are most often secondary to
acute bacterial ethmoiditis. Periorbital cellulitis produces erythema
and swelling of the tissues surrounding the globe, whereas orbital cellulitis involves the intraorbital structures and produces proptosis, chemosis, decreased visual acuity, double vision and impaired extraocular
movements, and eye pain (Fig. 429.4). In addition to IV antibiotics,
orbital cellulitis may require surgical drainage of the ethmoid sinuses
or orbit.
Intracranial complications can include epidural abscess, meningitis, cavernous sinus thrombosis, subdural empyema, and brain
abscess (see Chapter 644). Children with altered mental status,
nuchal rigidity, severe headache, focal neurologic findings, or signs of
increased intracranial pressure (headache, vomiting) require immediate CT scan with contrast of the brain, orbits, and sinuses to evaluate for the presence of intracranial complications of acute bacterial
sinusitis. Diagnosis of intracranial complications may be challenging,
as many patients present with nonspecific symptoms present for the
preceding 7-­10 days (most commonly headache, fever, congestion,
nausea, and vomiting); typically, patients will have been seen by a
healthcare provider one or more times before diagnosis. About 50%
of patients will present with an abnormal neurologic exam, although
only ∼30% of patients will present with neurologic symptoms (altered
mental status, seizures).
Treatment with broad-­spectrum IV antibiotics (usually cefotaxime or ceftriaxone combined with vancomycin and metronidazole)
should be initiated immediately, pending culture and susceptibility
results. Abscesses can require surgical drainage; endoscopic sinus
surgery (ESS) without powered instruments and proper personal
protective equipment (PPE) are recommended to minimize risks
of aerosolization. Other complications include osteomyelitis of the
frontal bone (Pott puffy tumor), which is characterized by edema
and swelling of the forehead (see Fig. 429.2), and mucoceles, which
are chronic inflammatory lesions commonly located in the frontal
sinuses that can expand, causing displacement of the eye with resultant diplopia. Surgical drainage is usually required.

PREVENTION

Prevention is best accomplished by frequent handwashing and
avoiding persons with colds. This was confirmed most recently
in New Zealand: when strict nonpharmaceutical infection control
measures were implemented during the COVID-­
19 pandemic,
infections caused by common cold viruses (influenza, respiratory
syncytial virus [RSV], human metapneumovirus, enterovirus, adenovirus, parainfluenza virus, and rhinovirus) were greatly reduced.
Once restrictions were eased, only rhinovirus infections quickly
increased, whereas the prevalence of other respiratory viral infections remained reduced. This may be because of the fact that most
rhinovirus infections are transmitted in the home where public
restrictions are not in place. Commercially available alcohol-­based
hand sanitizers have been shown in vitro to be effective against
COVID-­19 and the common cold viruses.
Because acute bacterial sinusitis can be a complication of influenza
infection, prevention of influenza infection by yearly influenza vaccine
will prevent some cases of complicating sinusitis. Chemoprophylaxis
against influenza with oseltamivir or zanamivir may be useful for prevention of influenza-­associated sinusitis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 429 u Sinusitis

A

B

2557

C

Fig. 429.2 Acute complicated sinusitis. A, Frontal sinusitis and epidural abscess. Axial computed tomography image shows a frontal sinus air-­fluid

level (long arrow). There is also an intracranial air-­fluid level associated with an epidural abscess (short arrow). B, Frontal sinusitis, epidural abscess,
and orbital abscess. Sagittal fat-­suppressed (FS) T2-­weighted magnetic resonance (MR) image demonstrates a biconvex epidural abscess (arrow)
containing a sediment level. There is also a small superior extraconal subperiosteal abscess (arrowhead). Periorbital STS is present, and there are secretions within the maxillary antrum. C, Pott puffy tumor, frontal osteomyelitis, and subdural empyema. Axial gadolinium-­enhanced FS T1-­weighted
MR image shows frontal scalp swelling ventral to an elliptical low signal intensity, peripherally enhancing, frontal subperiosteal abscess (long white
arrow). There is enhancement of the subjacent frontal bone, consistent with osteomyelitis (black arrowhead). There is also dural enhancement (black
arrow) and a small left frontal interhemispheric subdural empyema (short white arrow) with subtle enhancement of the adjacent frontal leptomeninges and cortex caused by meningitis and cerebritis (white arrowhead). (From Walters MM, Robertson RL, eds. Pediatric Radiology: The Requisites,
4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017: Fig. 10.40.)

A
Fig. 429.3 Axial plane contrast-­enhanced CT scan of an 11-­yr-­old obtunded female with a subfrontal lobe abscess secondary to frontal sinusitis. The CT scan demonstrates an eliptiform ring-­enhancing fluid-­filled
cavity adjacent to the frontal lobe with contralateral shift of the midline.
(From Parikh SR, Brown SM. Image-­guided frontal sinus surgery in children. Operative Tech Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2004;15:37–41.)

B

Fig. 429.4 Orbital complications of acute sinusitis. A, An 11-­mo-­old

infant with a swollen left eye and limited ocular movement. B, Axial
CT shows opacification of sinuses and an inflammatory mass with an
air-­fluid level displacing the medial rectus laterally. (From Cooper ML,
Slovis T. The sinuses. In Slovis T, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2008: Fig. 43-­7, p. 573.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2558 Part XVII u The Respiratory System

Chapter 430

Acute Pharyngitis
Joseph Gigante
Pharyngitis refers to inflammation of the pharynx, including erythema,
edema, exudates, or an enanthem (ulcers, vesicles). Pharyngeal inflammation can be related to environmental exposures, such as tobacco
smoke, air pollutants, and allergens; from contact with caustic substances, hot food, and liquids; and from infectious agents. The pharynx
and mouth can be involved in various inflammatory conditions such
as periodic fever, aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis, adenitis (PFAPA)
syndrome, Kawasaki disease, multisystem inflammatory syndrome in
children (MIS-­C), inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), Stevens-­Johnson
syndrome, and systemic lupus erythematous (SLE). Noninfectious etiologies are typically evident from history and physical exam, but it can
be more challenging to distinguish from among the numerous infectious causes of acute pharyngitis.
Acute infections of the upper respiratory tract account for a substantial number of visits to pediatricians, and many feature sore throat as
a symptom or evidence of pharyngitis on physical examination. The
usual clinical task is to distinguish important, potentially serious, and
treatable causes of acute pharyngitis from those that are self-­limited
and require no specific treatment or follow-­up. Specifically, identifying
patients who have group A streptococcus (GAS; Streptococcus pyogenes; see Chapter 229) pharyngitis and treating them with antibiotics
forms the core of the management paradigm.

INFECTIOUS ETIOLOGIES
Viruses

In North America and most industrialized countries, GAS is the most
important bacterial cause of acute pharyngitis, but viruses predominate as acute infectious causes of pharyngitis. Viral upper respiratory
tract infections are typically spread by contact with oral or respiratory
secretions and occur most commonly in fall, winter, and spring—that
is, the respiratory season. Important viruses that cause pharyngitis
include influenza, parainfluenza, adenoviruses, coronaviruses, enteroviruses, rhinoviruses, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), cytomegalovirus, Epstein-­Barr virus (EBV), herpes simplex virus (HSV), and
human metapneumovirus (HMPV) (Table 430.1). Most viral pharyngitis, except mononucleosis, is mild. Common nonspecific symptoms
such as rhinorrhea and cough develop gradually before they become
prominent. However, specific findings are sometimes helpful in identifying the infectious viral agent (Table 430.2). Sore throat is also seen in
COVID-­19 infection and MIS-­C; it is rare to be the only symptom and
is part of the multisystem involvement in both disorders.
Table 430.1  Infectious Agents that Cause Pharyngitis
VIRUSES

BACTERIA

Adenovirus
Coronavirus including COVID-­19
Cytomegalovirus
Epstein-­Barr virus
Enteroviruses
Herpes simplex virus (1 and 2)
Human immunodeficiency virus
Human metapneumovirus
Influenza viruses (A and B)
Measles virus
Parainfluenza viruses
Respiratory syncytial virus
Rhinoviruses

Streptococcus pyogenes (group
A streptococcus)
Arcanobacterium haemolyticum
Fusobacterium necrophorum
Corynebacterium diphtheriae
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Group C streptococci
Group G streptococci
Francisella tularensis
Yersinia pestis
Chlamydophila pneumoniae
Chlamydia trachomatis
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
Mixed anaerobes (Vincent
angina)

Gingivostomatitis and ulcerating vesicles throughout the anterior
pharynx and on the lips and perioral skin are seen in primary oral HSV
infection. High fever and difficulty taking oral fluids are common. This
infection can last for 14 days.
Discrete papulovesicular lesions or ulcerations in the posterior
oropharynx, severe throat pain, and fever are characteristic of herpangina, caused by various enteroviruses. In hand-­foot-­mouth disease,
there are vesicles or ulcers throughout the oropharynx, on the palms
and soles, and sometimes on the trunk and extremities. Coxsackie A16
is the most common agent, but enterovirus 71 and Coxsackie A6 can
also cause this syndrome. Enteroviral infections are most common in
the summer.
Various adenoviruses cause pharyngitis. When there is concurrent
conjunctivitis, the syndrome is called pharyngoconjunctival fever. The
pharyngitis tends to resolve within 7 days, but conjunctivitis may persist for up to 14 days. Pharyngoconjunctival fever can be epidemic or
sporadic; outbreaks have been associated with exposure in swimming
pools.
Intense, diffuse pharyngeal erythema and Koplik spots, the pathognomonic enanthem, occur in advance of the characteristic rash of measles. Splenomegaly, lymphadenopathy, or hepatomegaly may be the
clue to EBV infectious mononucleosis in an adolescent with exudative
tonsillitis. Primary infection with HIV can manifest as acute retroviral
syndrome, with nonexudative pharyngitis, fever, arthralgia, myalgia,
adenopathy, and often a maculopapular rash.

Bacteria Other than Group A Streptococcus

In addition to GAS, bacteria that cause pharyngitis include group C
and group G streptococcus, Arcanobacterium haemolyticum, Francisella tularensis, Neisseria gonorrhoeae, Mycoplasma pneumoniae,
Chlamydophila (formerly Chlamydia) pneumoniae, Chlamydia trachomatis, Fusobacterium necrophorum, and Corynebacterium diphtheriae.
Haemophilus influenzae and Streptococcus pneumoniae may be cultured from the throats of children with pharyngitis, but their role in
causing pharyngitis has not been established.
Group C and group G streptococcus and A. haemolyticum pharyngitis have been diagnosed most commonly in adolescents and adults.

Table 430.2  Epidemiologic and Clinical Features
Suggestive of Group A Streptococcal and
Viral Pharyngitis
FEATURE, BY SUSPECTED ETIOLOGIC AGENT
Group A Streptococcal
• Sudden onset of sore throat
• Age 5-­15 yr
• Fever
• Headache
• Nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain
• Tonsillopharyngeal inflammation
• Patchy tonsillopharyngeal exudates
• Palatal petechiae
• Anterior cervical adenitis (tender nodes)
• Winter and early spring presentation
• History of exposure to strep pharyngitis
• Scarlatiniform rash
• No cough or coryza
Viral
• Conjunctivitis
• Coryza
• Cough
• Diarrhea
• Hoarseness
• Discrete ulcerative stomatitis
• Viral exanthema
• As part of the spectrum of COVID-­19 and MIS-­C
From Shulman ST, Bisno AL, Clegg HW, et al. Clinical practice guideline for the
diagnosis and management of group A streptococcal pharyngitis: 2012 update by the
Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis. 2012;55(10):e86–e102, Table 4.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 430 u Acute Pharyngitis 2559
They resemble group A β-­hemolytic streptococcus (GABHS) pharyngitis. A scarlet fever–like rash may be present with A. haemolyticum
infections.
F. necrophorum is an important etiology of pharyngitis in older adolescents and adults (15-­30 years old). Prevalence in studies has varied
from 10% to 48% of patients with non-­GABHS pharyngitis, but large
surveillance studies have not been performed. F. necrophorum was
detected by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) in 20.5% of patients with
pharyngitis in a study based in a university health clinic and in 9.4%
of an asymptomatic convenience sample; some patients had more than
one bacterial species detected by PCR. Pharyngitis patients with F. necrophorum had signs and symptoms similar to GAS pharyngitis: ∼30%
had fever, ∼30% had tonsillar exudates, ∼65% had anterior cervical
adenopathy, and most did not have cough. This organism is difficult to
culture from the throat, and diagnostic testing with PCR is not generally available. F. necrophorum pharyngitis is associated with the development of Lemierre syndrome (see Chapter 432): internal jugular
vein septic thrombophlebitis. Approximately 80% of cases of Lemierre
syndrome are caused by this bacterium. Patients present initially with
fever, sore throat, exudative pharyngitis, and/or peritonsillar abscess.
The symptoms may persist, neck pain and swelling develop, and the
patient appears toxic. Septic shock may ensue, along with metastatic
complications from septic emboli that can involve the lungs, bones and
joints, central nervous system, abdominal organs, and soft tissues. The
case fatality rate is 4–9%.
Gonococcal pharyngeal infections are usually asymptomatic but can
cause acute ulcerative or exudative pharyngitis with fever and cervical
lymphadenitis. Young children with proven gonococcal disease should
be evaluated for sexual abuse.
Diphtheria is extremely rare in most developed countries because of
extensive immunization with diphtheria toxoid. However, it remains
endemic in many areas of the world, including the former Soviet bloc
countries, Africa, Asia, the Middle East, and Latin America. It can be
considered in patients with recent travel to or from these areas and in
unimmunized patients. Key physical findings are bull neck (extreme
neck swelling) and a gray pharyngeal pseudomembrane that can cause
respiratory obstruction.
Ingestion of water, milk, or undercooked meat contaminated by F.
tularensis can lead to oropharyngeal tularemia. Severe throat pain, tonsillitis, cervical adenitis, oral ulcerations, and a pseudomembrane (as in
diphtheria) may be present. M. pneumoniae and C. pneumoniae cause
pharyngitis, but other upper and lower respiratory infections are more
important and more readily recognized. Development of a severe or
persistent cough subsequent to pharyngitis may be the clue to infection
with one of these organisms.

Group A Streptococcus

Streptococcal pharyngitis is relatively uncommon before 2-­3 years of
age, is quite common among children 5-­15 years old, and declines in
frequency in late adolescence and adulthood. Illness occurs throughout the year but is most prevalent in winter and spring. It is readily
spread among siblings and schoolmates. GAS causes 15–30% of pharyngitis in school-­age children.
Colonization of the pharynx by GAS can result in either asymptomatic carriage or acute infection. After an incubation period of 2-­5 days,
pharyngeal infection with GAS classically presents as rapid onset of
significant sore throat and fever (see Table 430.2). The pharynx is red,
and the tonsils are enlarged and often covered with a white, grayish,
or yellow exudate that may be blood-­tinged. There may be petechiae
or doughnut lesions on the soft palate and posterior pharynx, and the
uvula may be red and swollen. The surface of the tongue can resemble a
strawberry when the papillae are inflamed and prominent (strawberry
tongue). Initially, the tongue is often coated white, and with the swollen
papillae, it is called a white strawberry tongue. When the white coating is gone after a few days, the tongue is often quite red and is called
a red strawberry tongue. Enlarged and tender anterior cervical lymph
nodes are frequently present. Headache, abdominal pain, and vomiting are frequently associated with the infection, but in the absence of
clinical pharyngitis, gastrointestinal signs and symptoms should not be

attributed to GAS. Ear pain is a frequent complaint, but the tympanic
membranes are usually normal. Diarrhea, cough, coryza, ulcerations,
croup/laryngitis/hoarseness, and conjunctivitis are not associated with
GAS pharyngitis and increase the likelihood of a viral etiology (see
Table 430.2).
Patients infected with GAS that produce streptococcal pyrogenic
exotoxin A, B, or C may demonstrate the fine, red, papular (sandpaper)
rash of scarlet fever. It begins on the face and then becomes generalized. The cheeks are red, and the area around the mouth is less intensely
red (more pale), giving the appearance of circumoral pallor. The rash
blanches with pressure, and it may be more intense in skin creases,
especially in the antecubital fossae, axillae, and inguinal creases (Pastia
lines or sign). Pastia lines are sometimes petechial or slightly hemorrhagic. Capillary fragility can cause petechiae distal to a tourniquet
or constriction from clothing, a positive tourniquet test or Rumpel-­
Leeds phenomenon. Erythema fades in a few days, and when the
rash resolves, it typically peels like a mild sunburn. Sometimes there
is sheetlike desquamation around the free margins of the fingernails.
Streptococcal pyrogenic exotoxin A, encoded by the gene spe A, is the
exotoxin most commonly associated with scarlet fever.
The M protein is an important GAS virulence factor that facilitates
resistance to phagocytosis. The M protein is encoded by the emm gene
and determines the M type (or emm type). Molecular methods have
identified more than 240 emm genes (emm types, M types). The M protein is immunogenic and protects against reinfection with the homologous M type; an individual can experience multiple episodes of GAS
pharyngitis in a lifetime because natural immunity is M type–specific
and does not prevent infection with a new M type. Numerous GAS M
types can circulate in a community simultaneously, and they enter and
leave communities unpredictably and for unknown reasons.

DIAGNOSIS

The clinical presentations of streptococcal and viral pharyngitis often
overlap. In particular, the pharyngitis of mononucleosis can be difficult to distinguish from GAS pharyngitis. Physicians relying solely on
clinical judgment often overestimate the likelihood of a streptococcal
etiology. Various clinical scoring systems have been described to assist
in identifying patients who are likely to have GAS pharyngitis. Criteria
developed for adults by Centor and modified for children by McIsaac
give one point for each of the following criteria: history of temperature
>38°C (100.4°F), absence of cough, tender anterior cervical adenopathy, tonsillar swelling or exudates, and age 3-­14 years. It subtracts a
point for age ≥45 years. At best, a McIsaac score ≥4 is associated with a
positive laboratory test for GAS in less than 70% of children with pharyngitis (Table 430.3), so it, too, overestimates the likelihood of GAS.
Consequently, laboratory testing is essential for an accurate diagnosis.
Clinical findings and/or scoring systems can best be used to assist the
clinician in identifying patients in need of testing. Evaluating patients
indiscriminately can lead to overdiagnosis and overtreatment. Streptococcal antibody tests are not useful in assessing patients with acute
pharyngitis.
Throat culture, rapid antigen-­detection tests (RADTs), or PCR tests
are the diagnostic tests for GAS most available in routine clinical care.
Throat culture plated on blood agar remains the gold standard for
diagnosing streptococcal pharyngitis. There are both false-­negative
cultures as a consequence of sampling errors or prior antibiotic treatment and false-­positive cultures as a consequence of misidentification
of other bacteria as GAS. Streptococcal RADTs detect the group A carbohydrate of GAS. They are used by the vast majority of office-­based
pediatricians. All RADTs have very high specificity, generally ≥95%, so
when a RADT is positive, it is assumed to be accurate and throat culture is unnecessary. Because RADTs are generally much less sensitive
than culture, confirming a negative rapid test with a throat culture is
recommended. RADTs and throat culture exhibit spectrum bias: they
are more sensitive when the pretest probability of GAS is high (signs
and symptoms are typical of GAS infection, higher McIsaac scores)
and less sensitive when the pretest probability is low. Avoidance of testing when patients have signs and symptoms more suggestive of a viral
infection is recommended by expert guidelines.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2560 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Table 430.3  Positive Predictive Value of McIsaac Score in Children in Clinical Studies*
McISAAC, 2004
(n = 454) (%)

EDMONSON, 2005
(n = 1184) (%)

TANZ, 2009
(n = 1848) (%)

FINE, 2012
(n = 64,789) (%)

0

−

−

7

17

1

−

0.5

19

23

2

20.5

8.9

20

34

3

27.5

42.4

29

50

≥4

67.8

48.2

49

68

GAS prevalence

34

38

30

37

SCORE

*One point is given for each of the following criteria: history of temperature >38°C (100.4°F), absence of cough, tender anterior cervical adenopathy, tonsillar swelling or exudates,
and age 3-­14 yr.
Note that the Centor score lacks only the age criterion. Positive predictive value refers to the proportion of patients with documented GAS by rapid antigen-­detection test and/or
throat culture.

Many laboratories have replaced throat culture with one of the
highly sensitive and specific GAS molecular tests. A variety of methods are available to amplify the DNA of a specific GAS gene from a
throat swab in less than 1 hour. In studies both sensitivity and specificity are reported to be ≥98% when compared with standard throat
culture. PCR usually matches the molecular test when used to adjudicate discrepancies between the culture and molecular test results. Some
of these nucleic acid amplification tests are approved by the FDA for
use in physician office laboratories and can be used as the initial test
for GAS or as a confirmatory test when the RADT is negative. Unlike
throat culture and RADTs, molecular tests may not exhibit spectrum
bias—that is, although test sensitivity is extremely high, it is independent of the pretest probability that GAS is the cause of illness (using
signs and symptoms, McIsaac score), thus increasing the potential to
identify a chronic GAS carrier who actually has an intercurrent illness not caused by GAS (discussed later). However, the ability of these
stand-­alone tests to deliver a definitive result in less than 1 hour makes
them attractive (there is one test that takes 15 minutes)—the potential
to swab symptomatic children, have them wait or send them home, and
electronically prescribe an antibiotic when the test is positive can speed
initiation of therapy and subsequent return to school and activities.
Concerns about molecular tests include the following: (1) they are so
sensitive they may cause unnecessary treatment of more patients who
are carriers than would ordinarily occur with RADT and/or culture; (2)
unless rigorous technique is followed, they may be prone to contamination with exogenous GAS DNA from other swabs, a particular concern in physician offices when performed by staff who are not trained
laboratory technologists; and (3) they are much more expensive than
throat culture.
Testing for bacteria other than GAS is performed infrequently and
should be reserved for patients with persistent symptoms and symptoms
suggestive of a specific non-­GAS bacterial pharyngitis—for example,
when there is concern for gonococcal infection or sexual abuse. Special culture media and a prolonged incubation are required to detect
A. haemolyticum. A complete blood cell count showing many atypical
lymphocytes and a positive mononucleosis slide agglutination test can
help confirm a clinical suspicion of EBV infectious mononucleosis. Viral
cultures are often unavailable and are generally too expensive and slow
to be clinically useful. PCR is more rapid, and multiplex PCR (respiratory viral panel) testing for respiratory pathogens can identify a variety of
viral and bacterial agents within a few hours. This may be useful in determining the isolation needs of hospitalized patients, assisting in patient
prognosis, and epidemiology, but in the absence of specific treatment for
most viral infections, such testing is usually not necessary or useful. In
fact, interpreting such tests can be difficult unless the patient has signs or
symptoms characteristic of a specific pathogen.

TREATMENT

Specific therapy is unavailable for most viral pharyngitis. However,
nonspecific, symptomatic therapy can be an important part of the

overall treatment plan. An oral antipyretic/analgesic agent (acetaminophen or ibuprofen) can relieve fever and sore throat pain. Anesthetic
sprays and lozenges (often containing benzocaine, phenol, or menthol)
can provide local relief in children who are developmentally appropriate to use them. Systemic corticosteroids are sometimes used in
children who have evidence of upper airway compromise caused by
mononucleosis. Although corticosteroids are used commonly in adults
with pharyngitis, large-­scale studies capable of providing safety and
efficacy data are lacking in children. Corticosteroids cannot be recommended for treatment of most cases of pediatric pharyngitis.
Antibiotic therapy of bacterial pharyngitis depends on the organism
identified. On the basis of in vitro susceptibility data, oral penicillin is
often suggested for patients with group C streptococcal isolates, and
oral erythromycin is recommended for patients with A. haemolyticum,
but the clinical benefit of such treatment is uncertain.
Most untreated episodes of GAS pharyngitis resolve uneventfully
within a few days, but early antibiotic therapy hastens clinical recovery by 12-­24 hours and also reduces suppurative complications of GAS
pharyngitis such as peritonsillar abscess and cervical adenitis. The
primary benefit and intent of antibiotic treatment is the prevention of
acute rheumatic fever (ARF); it is highly effective when started within
10 days of onset of illness. Antibiotic therapy does not prevent acute
poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis (APSGN). Antibiotic treatment
should not be delayed for children with symptomatic pharyngitis and a
positive test for GAS. Presumptive antibiotic treatment can be started
when there is a clinical diagnosis of scarlet fever, a symptomatic child
has a household contact with documented streptococcal pharyngitis,
or there is a history of ARF in the patient or a family member, but a
diagnostic test should be performed to confirm the presence of GAS,
and antibiotics should be discontinued if GAS is not identified.
A variety of antimicrobial agents are effective for GAS pharyngitis
(Table 430.4). Group A streptococci are universally susceptible to penicillin and all other β-­lactam antibiotics. Penicillin is inexpensive, has a
narrow spectrum of activity, and has few adverse effects. Amoxicillin
is often preferred for children because of its taste, availability as chewable tablets and liquid, and the convenience of once-­daily dosing. The
duration of oral penicillin and amoxicillin therapy is 10 days. A single
intramuscular dose of benzathine penicillin or a benzathine–procaine
penicillin G combination is effective and ensures compliance. Follow­up testing for GAS is unnecessary after completion of therapy and is
not recommended unless symptoms recur.
Patients allergic to the penicillins can be treated with a 10-­day course
of a narrow-­spectrum, first-­generation cephalosporin (cephalexin or
cefadroxil) if the previous reaction to penicillin was not an immediate, type I hypersensitivity reaction. Frequently, penicillin-­
allergic
patients are treated for 10 days with erythromycin, clarithromycin, or
clindamycin, or for 5 days with azithromycin.
The increased use of macrolides and related antibiotics for a variety of infections, especially the azalide azithromycin, is associated
with increased rates of resistance to these drugs among GAS in many

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 430 u Acute Pharyngitis 2561
Table 430.4  Recommended Treatment for Acute Streptococcal Pharyngitis
MOST PATIENTS
WEIGHT <27 KG

WEIGHT ≥27 KG

ROUTE

DURATION

Oral

10 days

Amoxicillin

50 mg/kg once daily (maximum 1,000 mg)

Penicillin V

250 mg bid

500 mg bid

Oral

10 days

Benzathine penicillin G

600,000 units

1.2 million units

IM

Once

Benzathine penicillin G +
procaine penicillin G

900,000 units + 300,000 units

900,000 units + 300,000 units

IM

Once

FREQUENCY

DURATION

PENICILLIN-­ALLERGIC PATIENTS
ORAL DOSE
Cephalosporins*

Varies with agent chosen

10 days

Erythromycins
Ethylsuccinate

40 mg/kg/day up to 1,000 mg/day

bid

10 days

Estolate

20-­40 mg/kg/day up to 1,000 mg/day

bid

10 days

Clarithromycin

15 mg/kg/day up to 500 mg/day

bid

10 days

Azithromycin†

12 mg/kg day 1; 6 mg/kg days 2-­5

qd

5 days

Clindamycin

20 mg/kg/day up to 1.8 g/day

tid

10 days

*First-­generation cephalosporins are preferred; dosage and frequency vary among agents. Do not use in patients with a history of immediate (anaphylactic) hypersensitivity to
penicillin or other β-­lactam antibiotics.

†Maximum dose is 500 mg the first day and 250 mg subsequent days.

countries. Approximately 5% of GAS in the United States and more
than 10% in Canada are macrolide-­resistant (macrolide resistance
includes azalide resistance), but there is considerable local variation in
both countries. Rates are much higher in many European and Asian
countries. Some macrolide-­resistant GAS isolates are also resistant to
clindamycin. Although not a major hindrance for treatment of pharyngitis, clindamycin resistance may be important in management of
invasive GAS infections. The use of macrolides and related antibiotics
should be restricted to patients who cannot safely receive a β-­lactam
drug for GAS pharyngitis. Tetracyclines, fluoroquinolones, or sulfonamides should not be used to treat GAS pharyngitis.

CHRONIC GROUP A STREPTOCOCCUS CARRIERS

Streptococcal carriers are patients who continue to harbor GAS in
the pharynx despite appropriate antibiotic therapy or when they are
well. They have little or no evidence of an inflammatory response to
the organism. The pathogenesis of chronic carriage is not known; it
is assuredly not related to penicillin resistance or nonadherence to
therapy, and there is little direct evidence to support the concept of
co-­pathogenicity (presence of β-­lactamase–producing organisms in
the pharynx). Carriage generally poses little risk to patients and their
contacts, but it can confound testing in subsequent episodes of sore
throat. A child who is chronically colonized with GAS (streptococcal
carrier) can have a positive test for GAS if it is obtained when the child
is evaluated for pharyngitis that is actually caused by a viral infection.
Patients with repeated test-­positive pharyngitis create anxiety among
their families and physicians. It is usually unnecessary to attempt to
eliminate chronic carriage. Instead, evaluation and treatment of clinical pharyngitis should be undertaken without regard for chronic carriage, using clinical criteria to determine the need for testing, treating
test-­positive patients in routine fashion, and avoiding antibiotics in
patients who have negative tests. This approach often requires considerable effort to reassure the patient and family that chronic carriage is
not a significant health risk. Expert opinion suggests that eradication
might be attempted in select circumstances: a community outbreak
of ARF or APSGN; personal or family history of ARF; an outbreak
of GAS pharyngitis in a closed or semiclosed community, nursing
home, or healthcare facility; repeated episodes of symptomatic GAS

pharyngitis in a family with ping pong spread among family members despite adequate therapy; when tonsillectomy is being considered
because of chronic carriage or recurrent streptococcal pharyngitis; and
extreme, unmanageable anxiety related to GAS carriage (“streptophobia”) among family members. Clindamycin given by mouth for 10 days
is effective therapy (20 mg/kg/day divided in three doses; adult dose
150-­450 mg tid). Amoxicillin-­clavulanate (40 mg amoxicillin/kg/day
up to 2,000 mg amoxicillin/day divided tid for 10 days) and 4 days of
oral rifampin (20 mg/kg/day up to 600 mg divided in two doses) plus
either intramuscular benzathine penicillin given once or oral penicillin
given for 10 days have also been used (rifampin is started on the first
day of penicillin therapy).

RECURRENT PHARYNGITIS

True recurrent GAS pharyngitis can occur for several reasons: reinfection with the same M type if type-­specific antibody has not developed,
poor compliance with oral antibiotic therapy, macrolide resistance if
a macrolide was used for treatment, and infection with a new M type.
Unfortunately, determining the GAS M type in an acute infection is
not available to the clinician. Treatment with intramuscular benzathine
penicillin eliminates nonadherence to therapy. Apparent recurrences
can represent pharyngitis of another cause in the presence of streptococcal carriage. Chronic GAS carriage is particularly likely if the illnesses are mild and otherwise atypical for GAS pharyngitis.
Tonsillectomy may lower the incidence of pharyngitis for 1-­2 years
among children with frequent episodes of documented pharyngitis (≥7
episodes in the previous year or ≥5 in each of the preceding 2 years, or ≥3
in each of the previous 3 years). However, the frequency of pharyngitis
(GAS and non-­GAS) generally declines over time without tonsillectomy.
By 2 years posttonsillectomy, the incidence of pharyngitis in severely
affected children is similar among those who have tonsillectomy and
those who do not. Few children are so severely affected, and the limited
clinical benefit of tonsillectomy for most must be balanced against the
risks of anesthesia and surgery. Undocumented history of recurrent pharyngitis is an inadequate basis for recommending tonsillectomy.
Recurrent GAS pharyngitis is rarely, if ever, a sign of an immune disorder. However, recurrent pharyngitis can be part of a recurrent fever
or autoinflammatory syndrome such as PFAPA syndrome. Prolonged

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2562 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
pharyngitis (>1 week) can occur in infectious mononucleosis and
Lemierre syndrome, but it also suggests the possibility of another disorder such as neutropenia, a recurrent fever syndrome, or an autoimmune disease such as SLE or IBD. In such instances, pharyngitis would
be one of a number of clinical findings that together should suggest the
underlying diagnosis.

COMPLICATIONS AND PROGNOSIS

Viral respiratory tract infections can predispose to bacterial middle
ear infections and bacterial sinusitis. The complications of GAS pharyngitis include local suppurative complications, such as parapharyngeal abscess, and subsequent nonsuppurative illnesses, such as ARF,
APSGN, poststreptococcal reactive arthritis, and possibly pediatric
autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorders associated with streptococci
(PANDAS, sometimes referred to as CANS [childhood acute neuropsychiatric symptoms] or PANS [pediatric acute-­onset neuropsychiatric syndrome], recognizing that many infections other than GAS may
predispose to these syndromes).

PREVENTION

Vaccines intended to prevent infection with various viruses (e.g.,
RSV) and GAS are being developed. A recombinant multivalent GAS
M-­type vaccine uses the terminal portions of various M proteins to
take advantage of their immunogenicity. Other GAS vaccines are
based on more conserved epitopes in order to avoid the necessity
of matching the vaccine with the M types prevalent in a community
or target population. None of the investigational GAS vaccines are
near licensing for use. A recent comprehensive study of the immune
response to childhood GAS pharyngeal acquisition raises questions
about how to best design effective vaccines. This is complicated by the
variety of clinical scenarios and clinical syndromes associated with
GAS and the need to determine the intended clinical benefit(s) of
vaccination. Antimicrobial prophylaxis with daily oral penicillin prevents recurrent GAS infections but is recommended only to prevent
recurrences of ARF.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 431

Tonsils and Adenoids
Karen B. Zur

NORMAL FUNCTION

Located at the opening of the pharynx to the external environment,
the tonsils and adenoid are well situated to provide primary defense
against foreign matter. The immunologic role of the tonsils and adenoids is to induce secretory immunity and to regulate the production
of the secretory immunoglobulins. Deep crevices within tonsillar tissue form tonsillar crypts that are lined with squamous epithelium and
host a concentration of lymphocytes at their bases. The lymphoid tissue
of the Waldeyer ring is most immunologically active between 4 and 10
years of age, with a decrease after puberty. Adenotonsillar hypertrophy
is greatest between ages 3 and 6 years; in most children tonsils begin to
involute after age 8 years. No major immunologic deficiency has been
demonstrated after removal of either or both of the tonsils and adenoid.

PATHOLOGY
Acute Infection

Most episodes of acute pharyngotonsillitis are caused by viruses
(see Chapter 430). Group A β-­
hemolytic streptococcus (GABHS)
is the most common cause of bacterial infection in the pharynx
(see Chapter 229).

Chronic Infection

The tonsils and adenoids can be chronically infected by multiple
microbes, which can include a high incidence of β-­lactamase–producing organisms. Both aerobic species, such as streptococci and Haemophilus influenzae, and anaerobic species, such as Peptostreptococcus,
Prevotella, and Fusobacterium, contribute. The tonsillar crypts can
accumulate desquamated epithelial cells, lymphocytes, bacteria, and
other debris, causing cryptic tonsillitis. With time, these cryptic plugs
can calcify into tonsillar concretions or tonsilloliths. Biofilms appear to
play a role in chronic inflammation of the tonsils.

Upper Airway Obstruction

Enlargement of the tonsils and/or adenoids is a major cause of upper
airway obstruction in children. Airway obstruction in children is typically manifested in sleep-­disordered breathing, including obstructive
sleep apnea, obstructive sleep hypopnea, and upper airway resistance
syndrome (see Chapter 31). Sleep-­disordered breathing secondary to
adenotonsillar hypertrophy is a cause of growth failure. Solid dysphagia can also be seen in this group of patients, with symptoms such as
prolonged chewing, pocketing of solids in the mouth, choking or gagging when swallowing solids, and weight loss.

Tonsillar Neoplasm

Rapid enlargement of one tonsil is highly suggestive of a tonsillar
malignancy, typically lymphoma, in children.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Acute Infection

The Waldeyer ring (the lymphoid tissue surrounding the opening of
the oral and nasal cavities into the pharynx) comprises the palatine
tonsils, the pharyngeal tonsil or adenoid, lymphoid tissue surrounding
the eustachian tube orifice in the lateral walls of the nasopharynx, the
lingual tonsil at the base of the tongue, and scattered lymphoid tissue
throughout the remainder of the pharynx, particularly behind the posterior pharyngeal pillars and along the posterior pharyngeal wall. The
palatine tonsil consists of lymphoid tissue located between the palatoglossal fold (anterior tonsillar pillar) and the palatopharyngeal fold
(posterior tonsillar pillar). This lymphoid tissue is separated from the
surrounding pharyngeal musculature by a thick fibrous capsule. The
adenoid is a single aggregation of lymphoid tissue that occupies the
space between the nasal septum and the posterior pharyngeal wall. A
thin fibrous capsule separates it from the underlying structures; the
adenoid does not contain the complex crypts that are found in the
palatine tonsils, but rather more simple crypts. Lymphoid tissue at the
base of the tongue forms the lingual tonsil that also contains simple
tonsillar crypts.

Symptoms of GABHS infection include odynophagia, dry throat, malaise, fever and chills, dysphagia, referred otalgia, headache, muscular
aches, and enlarged cervical nodes. Signs include dry tongue, erythematous enlarged tonsils, tonsillar or pharyngeal exudate, palatine petechiae, and enlargement and tenderness of the jugulodigastric lymph
nodes (Fig. 431.1; see Chapter 229).

Chronic Infection

Children with chronic or cryptic tonsillitis often present with halitosis, chronic sore throats, foreign-­body sensation, or a history of expelling foul-­tasting and foul-­smelling cheesy lumps. Examination reveals
tonsils of a range of sizes, often containing copious debris within the
crypts. The offending organism is not usually GABHS.

Airway Obstruction

The diagnosis of airway obstruction (see Chapter 31) can frequently be
made by history and physical examination. Daytime symptoms of airway
obstruction secondary to adenotonsillar hypertrophy include chronic
mouth breathing, nasal obstruction, hyponasal speech, hyposmia,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 431 u Tonsils and Adenoids

A

B

2563

C

Fig. 431.1 Pharyngotonsillitis. This common condition has a number of causative pathogens and a wide spectrum of severity. A, The diffuse tonsil-

lar and pharyngeal erythema seen here is a nonspecific finding that can be produced by a variety of pathogens. B, This intense erythema, seen in association with acute tonsillar enlargement and palatal petechiae, is highly suggestive of group A β-­streptococcal infection, though other pathogens
can produce these findings. C, This picture of exudative tonsillitis is most commonly seen with either group A streptococcal or Epstein-­Barr virus
infection. (B courtesy Michael Sherlock, MD, Lutherville, MD. From Yellon RF, McBride TP, Davis HW. Otolaryngology. In Zitelli BJ, Davis HW, eds.
Atlas of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2002:852.)

decreased appetite, poor school performance, hyperactivity, and, rarely,
symptoms of right-­sided heart failure. Nighttime symptoms consist of loud
snoring, choking, gasping, frank apnea, restless sleep, abnormal sleep positions, sleep walking, night terrors, diaphoresis, enuresis, and sleep talking.
Large tonsils are typically seen on examination, although the absolute size
might not indicate the degree of obstruction. The size of the adenoid tissue
can be demonstrated on a lateral neck radiograph or with flexible endoscopy. Other signs that can contribute to airway obstruction include the
presence of a craniofacial syndrome or hypotonia.
These daytime and nocturnal comorbidities should be explored in
patients with enlarged tonsils and/or adenoids. Sleep studies (polysomnograms, PSG) are not routinely recommended unless significant
co-morbidities exist.

Table 431.1  Paradise Criteria for Tonsillectomy
CRITERION

DEFINITION

Minimum
frequency of
sore throat
episodes

At least seven episodes in the previous year OR
at least five episodes in each of the previous
2 years OR at least three episodes in each of
the previous 3 years

Clinical features

Sore throat plus at least one of the following
features qualifies as a counting episode:
• Temperature of greater than 38.3°C (101°F) OR
• Cervical adenopathy (tender lymph nodes
or lymph node size >2 cm) OR
• Tonsillar exudate OR
• Culture positive for group A β-­hemolytic
streptococcus

Treatment

Antibiotics had been administered in the
conventional dosage for proven or suspected
streptococcal episodes

Documentation

Each episode of throat infection and its qualifying
features substantiated by contemporaneous
notation in a medical record
OR

Tonsillar Neoplasm

The rapid unilateral enlargement of a tonsil, especially if accompanied by
systemic signs of night sweats, fever, weight loss, and lymphadenopathy,
is highly suggestive of a tonsillar malignancy. The diagnosis of a tonsillar malignancy should also be entertained if the tonsil appears grossly
abnormal. Among 54,901 patients undergoing tonsillectomy, 54 malignancies were identified (0.087% prevalence); all but 6 malignancies had
been suspected based on suspicious anatomic features preoperatively.

TREATMENT
Medical Management

The treatment of acute pharyngotonsillitis is discussed in Chapter
430 and antibiotic treatment of GABHS in Chapters 229 and 430.
Because copathogens such as staphylococci or anaerobes can produce
β-­lactamase that can inactivate penicillin, the use of cephalosporins or
clindamycin may be more efficacious in the treatment of chronic throat
infections. A tonsillolith or debris may be expressed manually with
either a cotton-­tipped applicator, gargling after meals, or the use of a
water jet.

If the episodes are not fully documented in the
patient record, subsequent observation by a
physician of two episodes of throat infection
with patterns of frequency and clinical features
consistent with the initial history*
*Allows for tonsillectomy recommendation in patients who meet all but the
documentation criterion. A 12-­mo observation period is usually recommended before
consideration of tonsillectomy because of the tendency to improve with time.
Adapted from Mitchell RB, Archer SM, Ishman SL, et al. Clinical practice guideline:
tonsillectomy in children (update). Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2019;160(1S):S1–S42,
Table 5.

Tonsillectomy

The American Academy of Otolaryngology (AAO)–Head and Neck
Surgery Taskforce on Clinical Practice Guidelines: Tonsillectomy in Children most recently issued evidence-­based guidelines in 2019 (Table
431.1, Fig. 431.2).
Tonsillectomy alone is most often performed for recurrent or chronic
pharyngotonsillitis, and in young children is often accompanied by an
adenoidectomy (see next section). Tonsillectomy has been shown to
be effective in reducing the number of infections and the symptoms of
chronic tonsillitis such as halitosis, persistent or recurrent sore throats,
and recurrent cervical adenitis in severely affected patients. In resistant cases of cryptic tonsillitis, tonsillectomy may be curative. The 2019
guidelines recommend watchful waiting for recurrent throat infections

if there have been <7 episodes in the past year, <5 episodes/yr in the
past 2 years, or <3 episodes/yr in the past 3 years (see Table 431.1 and
Fig. 431.2).
Rarely in children, tonsillectomy is indicated for biopsy of a unilaterally enlarged tonsil to exclude a neoplasm or to treat recurrent hemorrhage from superficial tonsillar blood vessels.
Tonsillectomy has not been shown to offer clinical benefit over conservative treatment in children with mild infectious symptoms 2 years
after surgery unless other factors or comorbidities exist. However, the
2019 Clinical Practice Guidelines did recommend assessing for additional modifying factors that may favor the need for a tonsillectomy,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2564 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Tonsillectomy candidate

Primary reason for considering tonsillectomy

No

Recurrent throat
infection

Obstructive sleep
disordered breathing (oSDB)

At least 7 in past year; 5/year for 2
years; or 3/year for 3 years?

Age under 2 years, Down
syndrome, obesity, craniofacial abnormality,
neuromuscular disorder, sickle cell disease, or
mucopolysaccharidosis?

Yes

Other reason not discussed
in guideline

Dysphonia, Dysphagia,
Suspected malignancy, Chronic
tonsillitis, Halitosis, Tonsilloliths

Yes

PSG

Each episode documented in the
medical record?

Yes

No
PFAPA, history of
peritonsillar abscess, or multiple
antibiotic allergy/intolerance?

Need for surgery is uncertain, or there is
discordance between tonsillar size on physical exam
and reported severity of oSDB?

Yes

Individual decisions

Refer for overnight
polysomnography

No

Yes

No
No
Watchful waiting with documentation of any
future infections or change in condition

No

Does child have growth retardation,
poor school performance, enuresis, or behavioral
problems?

No

OSA diagnosed
on PSG?

Yes

Yes

Option of tonsillectomy

Decision against surgery

Recommend tonsillectomy

Shared decision-making regarding decision to proceed with surgery

Decision to proceed with tonsillectomy

Perioperative pain counseling

Yes

Meets criteria for inpatient surgery, age under 3 years,
or severe OSA?

Tonsillectomy

DO NOT give peri-operative
antibiotics

DO give intra-operative steroid

DO NOT give post-operative
codeine

DO give acetaminophen,
ibuprofen, or both

Preoperative counseling about
possible OSA persistence after
surgery if OSA is present

No
Ambulatory setting

In-patient setting

Follow-up to document
primary or secondary
hemorrhage

Determine personal
rates of hemorrhage
at least annually

Fig. 431.2 Tonsillectomy in children: clinical practice algorithm. OSA, Obstructive sleep apnea; PFAPA, periodic fever, aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis, and adenitis; PSG, polysomnography. (Modified from Mitchell RB, Archer SM, Ishman SL, et al. Clinical practice guideline: tonsillectomy in
children, update. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2019;160:S1–S42, Fig. 2.)

including intolerance or allergies to antibiotics, PFAPA (periodic fever,
aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis, adenitis), or a history of more than
one peritonsillar abscess (PTA).

breathing. Adenoidectomy may also be indicated for children in whom
upper airway obstruction is suspected of causing craniofacial or occlusive developmental abnormalities.

Adenoidectomy

Tonsillectomy and Adenoidectomy

Adenoidectomy alone may be indicated for the treatment of chronic
nasal infection (chronic adenoiditis), chronic sinus infections that have
failed medical management, and recurrent bouts of acute otitis media,
including those in children with tympanostomy tubes who suffer from
recurrent otorrhea. Adenoidectomy may be helpful in children with
chronic or recurrent otitis media with effusion. Adenoidectomy alone
may be curative in the management of patients with nasal obstruction,
chronic mouth breathing, and loud snoring suggesting sleep-­disordered

The criteria for a tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy (T&A) for recurrent infections are the same as those for tonsillectomy alone. The other
major indication for performing both procedures together is upper airway obstruction secondary to adenotonsillar hypertrophy that results
in sleep-­disordered breathing, failure to thrive, craniofacial or occlusive developmental abnormalities, speech abnormalities, or, rarely, cor
pulmonale. A high proportion of children with failure to thrive in the
context of adenotonsillar hypertrophy resulting in sleep-­disordered

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 431 u Tonsils and Adenoids

2565

Table 431.2  Role of PSG in Assessing High-­Risk
Populations Before Tonsillectomy for oSDB

Table 431.3  Risks of Tonsillectomy or Adenoidectomy or
Both

ROLE OF PSG

RATIONALE

Avoid unnecessary or ineffective
surgery in children with
primarily nonobstructive events

Identify primarily nonobstructive
events or central apnea that
may not have been suspected
before the study and may not
benefit from surgery

Confirm the presence of
obstructive events that would
benefit from surgery

The increased morbidity of
surgery in high-­risk children
requires diagnostic certainty
before proceeding

Define the severity of oSDB to
assist in preoperative planning

Children with severe OSA may
require preoperative cardiac
assessment, pulmonary
consultation, anesthesia
evaluation, or postoperative
inpatient monitoring in an
intensive care setting

Provide a baseline PSG for
comparison after surgery

Persistent OSA despite surgery
is more common in high-­risk
patients than in otherwise
healthy children

Cost
Risk of anesthetic events
• Malignant hyperthermia
• Cardiac arrhythmia
• Vocal cord trauma
• Aspiration with resulting bronchopulmonary obstruction or
infection
• Postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV)
Risk of miscellaneous surgical or postoperative complications
• Pain
• Dysphagia
• Hemorrhage
• Airway obstruction from edema of tongue, palate, or
nasopharynx, or retropharyngeal hematoma
• Prolonged muscular paralysis
• Dehydration
• Palatopharyngeal insufficiency
• Facial edema
• Trauma: dental, larynx, vessels, pharyngeal wall, soft palate
• Laryngospasm
• Mediastinitis
• Cardiac arrest

Document the baseline severity
of oSDB

High-­risk patients are more
prone to complications of
surgery or anesthesia

OSA, Obstructive sleep apnea; oSDB, obstructive sleep-­disordered breathing; PSG,
polysomnography.
From Mitchell RB, Archer SM, Ishman SL, et al. Clinical practice guideline: tonsillectomy
in children (update). Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2019;160(IS):S1–S42, Table 6.

breathing experience significant growth acceleration after a T&A.
Most children do not require a sleep study before surgery; however, in
a high-risk population, polysomnography may help in the decision for
or against surgery (Table 431.2). High risk factors include age under 2
years, Down syndrome, obesity, craniofacial abnormality, neuromuscular disorder, sickle cell disease, and mucopolysaccharidosis.

COMPLICATIONS
Poststreptococcal Glomerulonephritis and Acute
Rheumatic Fever

The two major complications of untreated GABHS infection are
poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis and acute rheumatic fever (see
Chapters 559.4 and 229).

Peritonsillar Infection

Peritonsillar infection can occur as either cellulitis or a frank abscess
in the region superior and lateral to the tonsillar capsule (see Chapter
432). These infections usually occur in children with a history of recurrent tonsillar infection and are polymicrobial, including both aerobes
and anaerobes. Unilateral throat pain, referred otalgia, drooling, and
trismus are presenting symptoms. The affected tonsil is displaced down
and medially with swelling of the anterior tonsillar pillar and palate.
The diagnosis of an abscess can be confirmed by CT or by needle aspiration, the contents of which should be sent for culture.

Retropharyngeal Space Infection

Infections in the retropharyngeal space develop in the lymph nodes
that drain the oropharynx, nose, and nasopharynx (see Chapter 432).

Parapharyngeal Space Infection

Tonsillar infection can extend into the parapharyngeal space, causing symptoms of fever, neck pain and stiffness, and signs of swelling of the lateral pharyngeal wall and neck on the affected side.
The diagnosis is confirmed by contrast medium–enhanced CT, and
treatment includes intravenous antibiotics and external incision and

Modified from Bluestone CD, ed. Pediatric Otolaryngology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders; 2003:1213.

drainage if an abscess is demonstrated on CT (see Chapter 432).
Septic thrombophlebitis of the jugular vein, Lemierre syndrome,
manifests with fever, toxicity, neck pain and stiffness, and respiratory distress caused by multiple septic pulmonary emboli and is a
complication of a parapharyngeal space or odontogenic infection
from Fusobacterium necrophorum. Concurrent Epstein-­Barr virus
mononucleosis (see Chapter 301) can be a predisposing event before
the sudden onset of fever, chills, and respiratory distress in an adolescent patient. Treatment includes high-­dose intravenous antibiotics
(ampicillin-­sulbactam, clindamycin, penicillin, or ciprofloxacin) and
anticoagulation.

Recurrent or Chronic Pharyngotonsillitis
See Chapter 430.

CHRONIC AIRWAY OBSTRUCTION

Although rare, children with chronic airway obstruction from enlarged
tonsils and adenoids can present with cor pulmonale.
The effects of chronic airway obstruction and mouth breathing on
facial growth remain a subject of controversy. Studies of chronic mouth
breathing, both in humans and animals, have shown changes in facial
development, including prolongation of the total anterior facial height
and a tendency toward a retrognathic mandible, the so-­called adenoid
facies. Adenotonsillectomy can reverse some of these abnormalities.
Other studies have disputed these findings.

Tonsillectomy and Adenoidectomy

The risks and potential benefits of surgery must be considered (Table 431.3).
The mortality is low (~0.007%); most often associated with other complex
medical conditions. Dehydration caused by odynophagia (painful swallowing) is not uncommon in the first postoperative week. The child is
encouraged to drink liquids; however, early resumption of a solid diet is also
recommended to help with the pain and return of oral function.
Postoperative pain needs to be managed, and opioid-­free tonsillectomies are now recommended. Clinicians are encouraged to
counsel the caregivers about the importance of hydration and managing postoperative pain with nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs) and acetaminophen and to reinforce this information on
the day of surgery. The child is encouraged to hydrate, chew, and rest.
Codeine is associated with excessive sedation and fatalities and is not
recommended.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2566 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Bleeding can occur in the immediate postoperative period or be
delayed after separation of the eschar. The risk of bleeding is variable
among institutions, ranging in the literature from 0.1 to 7.5% and averaging around 4.2% in the first 10 days after surgery. Although recurrent
bleeding is unlikely, a bleeding diathesis should be ruled out if it occurs.
The updated Clinical Guidelines for Tonsillectomy include a recommendation for a single intravenous dose of intraoperative dexamethasone (0.5 mg/kg), which decreases postoperative nausea and vomiting
and reduces swelling. There is no evidence that use of dexamethasone
in postoperative tonsillectomy patients results in an increased risk of
postoperative bleeding, and it could be used as a supplement to the
pain management regimen.
Routine use of antibiotics in the postoperative period is ineffective,
and thus the AAO Clinical Practice Guidelines advise against its use.
Swelling of the tongue and uvula can lead to acute airway obstruction and globus sensation in the first few hours after surgery. Children
with underlying hypotonia (trisomy 21) or craniofacial anomalies are
at greater risk for suffering this complication.
Rare complications include anesthesia-­
related issues (malignant
hyperthermia, arrhythmias, intubation trauma, aspiration), velopharyngeal insufficiency, nasopharyngeal or oropharyngeal stenosis, torticollis, and, very rarely, death from uncontrolled bleeds.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 432

Retropharyngeal Abscess,
Lateral Pharyngeal
(Parapharyngeal) Abscess,
and Peritonsillar Cellulitis/
Abscess
Diane E. Pappas and Sarah R. Boggs
The retropharyngeal and the lateral pharyngeal lymph nodes that drain
the mucosal surfaces of the upper airway and digestive tracts are
located in the neck within the retropharyngeal space (located between
the pharynx and the cervical vertebrae and extending down into the
superior mediastinum) and the lateral pharyngeal space (bounded by
the pharynx medially, the carotid sheath posteriorly, and the muscles
of the styloid process laterally). The lymph nodes in these deep neck
spaces communicate with each other, allowing bacteria from either cellulitis or node abscess to spread to other nodes. Infection of the nodes
usually occurs as a result of extension from a localized infection of the
oropharynx. A retropharyngeal abscess can also result from penetrating trauma to the oropharynx, dental infection, and vertebral osteomyelitis. Once infected, the nodes may progress through three stages:
cellulitis, phlegmon, and abscess. Infection in the retropharyngeal and
lateral pharyngeal spaces can result in airway compromise or posterior
mediastinitis, making timely diagnosis important.

RETROPHARYNGEAL AND LATERAL PHARYNGEAL
ABSCESS

Retropharyngeal abscess occurs most commonly in children younger
than 3-­4 years of age; as the retropharyngeal nodes involute after 5

years of age, infection in older children and adults is much less common. In the United States, abscess formation occurs most commonly
in winter and early spring. Males are affected more often than females,
and approximately two thirds of patients have a history of recent ear,
nose, or throat infection.
Clinical manifestations of retropharyngeal abscess are nonspecific
and include fever, irritability, decreased oral intake, and drooling. Neck
stiffness, torticollis, and refusal to move the neck may also be present. The verbal child might complain of sore throat and neck pain.
Other signs can include muffled voice, stridor, respiratory distress, or
even obstructive sleep apnea. Physical examination can reveal bulging of the posterior pharyngeal wall, although this is present in <50%
of infants with retropharyngeal abscess. Cervical lymphadenopathy
may also be present. Lateral pharyngeal abscess commonly presents
as fever, dysphagia, and a prominent bulge of the lateral pharyngeal
wall, sometimes with medial displacement of the tonsil. The differential diagnosis includes acute epiglottitis and foreign body aspiration.
In the young child with limited neck mobility, meningitis must also
be considered. Other possibilities include lymphoma, hematoma, and
vertebral osteomyelitis.
Incision and drainage and culture of an abscessed node provides the
definitive diagnosis, but CT can be useful in identifying the presence of
a retropharyngeal, lateral pharyngeal, or parapharyngeal abscess (Figs.
432.1 and 432.2). Deep neck infections can be accurately identified and
localized with CT scans, but CT accurately identifies abscess formation
in only 63% of patients. Soft tissue neck films taken during inspiration with the neck extended might show increased width or an air-­fluid
level in the retropharyngeal space. CT with contrast medium enhancement can reveal central lucency, ring enhancement, or scalloping of the
walls of a lymph node. Scalloping of the lymph node wall is thought to
be a late finding and predicts abscess formation.
Retropharyngeal and lateral pharyngeal infections are most often
polymicrobial; the usual pathogens include group A streptococcus (see
Chapter 229), oropharyngeal anaerobic bacteria (see Chapter 259), and
Staphylococcus aureus (see Chapter 227.1). In children younger than
age 2 years, there has been an increase in the incidence of retropharyngeal abscess, particularly with S. aureus, including methicillin-­resistant
strains. Other pathogens can include Haemophilus influenzae, Klebsiella, and Mycobacterium avium-­intracellulare. When a retropharyngeal
abscess is associated with cervical osteomyelitis, it may be secondary to
retropharyngeal extension to the vertebral body (often polymicrobial)
or a primary osteomyelitis with extension to the retropharyngeal space.
In endemic areas and among patients at risk for tuberculosis, Pott disease should be considered (Fig. 432.3).
Treatment options include intravenous antibiotics with or without
surgical drainage. Empiric antibiotic coverage should be guided by
local susceptibility patterns for S. aureus. Initial therapy should include
either ampicillin-­sulbactam (50 mg ampicillin/kg every 6 hours, max
2000 mg ampicillin/dose) or clindamycin (15 mg/kg every 8 hours,
max 600 mg/dose). For patients who are ill-­appearing at presentation or who do not improve after 24-­48 hours of antibiotic therapy,
consideration should be given to the addition of either vancomycin or
linezolid for coverage of methicillin-­resistant S. aureus (MRSA). When
narrowing antibiotic selection based on culture results, it is important
to remember that these infections are typically polymicrobial and some
pathogens, particularly oral anaerobes, may not be easily cultured.
Studies show that >50% of children with retropharyngeal or lateral
pharyngeal abscess as identified by CT can be successfully treated
without surgical drainage; the older the child, the more likely it is that
antimicrobial treatment alone will be successful. Drainage is necessary in the patient with respiratory distress or failure to improve with
intravenous antibiotic treatment. The typical treatment course is intravenous antibiotic therapy for several days until the patient has begun
to improve, followed by a course of oral antibiotics for an additional
14 days. Amoxicillin-­clavulanate (90 mg amoxicillin/kg/day, divided
every 12 hours, max 2000 mg amoxicillin/dose) or clindamycin (13
mg/kg every 8 hours, max 450 mg/dose) are recommended oral regimens. Complications of retropharyngeal or lateral pharyngeal abscess
include significant upper airway obstruction, rupture leading to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2566 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Bleeding can occur in the immediate postoperative period or be
delayed after separation of the eschar. The risk of bleeding is variable
among institutions, ranging in the literature from 0.1 to 7.5% and averaging around 4.2% in the first 10 days after surgery. Although recurrent
bleeding is unlikely, a bleeding diathesis should be ruled out if it occurs.
The updated Clinical Guidelines for Tonsillectomy include a recommendation for a single intravenous dose of intraoperative dexamethasone (0.5 mg/kg), which decreases postoperative nausea and vomiting
and reduces swelling. There is no evidence that use of dexamethasone
in postoperative tonsillectomy patients results in an increased risk of
postoperative bleeding, and it could be used as a supplement to the
pain management regimen.
Routine use of antibiotics in the postoperative period is ineffective,
and thus the AAO Clinical Practice Guidelines advise against its use.
Swelling of the tongue and uvula can lead to acute airway obstruction and globus sensation in the first few hours after surgery. Children
with underlying hypotonia (trisomy 21) or craniofacial anomalies are
at greater risk for suffering this complication.
Rare complications include anesthesia-­
related issues (malignant
hyperthermia, arrhythmias, intubation trauma, aspiration), velopharyngeal insufficiency, nasopharyngeal or oropharyngeal stenosis, torticollis, and, very rarely, death from uncontrolled bleeds.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 432

Retropharyngeal Abscess,
Lateral Pharyngeal
(Parapharyngeal) Abscess,
and Peritonsillar Cellulitis/
Abscess
Diane E. Pappas and Sarah R. Boggs
The retropharyngeal and the lateral pharyngeal lymph nodes that drain
the mucosal surfaces of the upper airway and digestive tracts are
located in the neck within the retropharyngeal space (located between
the pharynx and the cervical vertebrae and extending down into the
superior mediastinum) and the lateral pharyngeal space (bounded by
the pharynx medially, the carotid sheath posteriorly, and the muscles
of the styloid process laterally). The lymph nodes in these deep neck
spaces communicate with each other, allowing bacteria from either cellulitis or node abscess to spread to other nodes. Infection of the nodes
usually occurs as a result of extension from a localized infection of the
oropharynx. A retropharyngeal abscess can also result from penetrating trauma to the oropharynx, dental infection, and vertebral osteomyelitis. Once infected, the nodes may progress through three stages:
cellulitis, phlegmon, and abscess. Infection in the retropharyngeal and
lateral pharyngeal spaces can result in airway compromise or posterior
mediastinitis, making timely diagnosis important.

RETROPHARYNGEAL AND LATERAL PHARYNGEAL
ABSCESS

Retropharyngeal abscess occurs most commonly in children younger
than 3-­4 years of age; as the retropharyngeal nodes involute after 5

years of age, infection in older children and adults is much less common. In the United States, abscess formation occurs most commonly
in winter and early spring. Males are affected more often than females,
and approximately two thirds of patients have a history of recent ear,
nose, or throat infection.
Clinical manifestations of retropharyngeal abscess are nonspecific
and include fever, irritability, decreased oral intake, and drooling. Neck
stiffness, torticollis, and refusal to move the neck may also be present. The verbal child might complain of sore throat and neck pain.
Other signs can include muffled voice, stridor, respiratory distress, or
even obstructive sleep apnea. Physical examination can reveal bulging of the posterior pharyngeal wall, although this is present in <50%
of infants with retropharyngeal abscess. Cervical lymphadenopathy
may also be present. Lateral pharyngeal abscess commonly presents
as fever, dysphagia, and a prominent bulge of the lateral pharyngeal
wall, sometimes with medial displacement of the tonsil. The differential diagnosis includes acute epiglottitis and foreign body aspiration.
In the young child with limited neck mobility, meningitis must also
be considered. Other possibilities include lymphoma, hematoma, and
vertebral osteomyelitis.
Incision and drainage and culture of an abscessed node provides the
definitive diagnosis, but CT can be useful in identifying the presence of
a retropharyngeal, lateral pharyngeal, or parapharyngeal abscess (Figs.
432.1 and 432.2). Deep neck infections can be accurately identified and
localized with CT scans, but CT accurately identifies abscess formation
in only 63% of patients. Soft tissue neck films taken during inspiration with the neck extended might show increased width or an air-­fluid
level in the retropharyngeal space. CT with contrast medium enhancement can reveal central lucency, ring enhancement, or scalloping of the
walls of a lymph node. Scalloping of the lymph node wall is thought to
be a late finding and predicts abscess formation.
Retropharyngeal and lateral pharyngeal infections are most often
polymicrobial; the usual pathogens include group A streptococcus (see
Chapter 229), oropharyngeal anaerobic bacteria (see Chapter 259), and
Staphylococcus aureus (see Chapter 227.1). In children younger than
age 2 years, there has been an increase in the incidence of retropharyngeal abscess, particularly with S. aureus, including methicillin-­resistant
strains. Other pathogens can include Haemophilus influenzae, Klebsiella, and Mycobacterium avium-­intracellulare. When a retropharyngeal
abscess is associated with cervical osteomyelitis, it may be secondary to
retropharyngeal extension to the vertebral body (often polymicrobial)
or a primary osteomyelitis with extension to the retropharyngeal space.
In endemic areas and among patients at risk for tuberculosis, Pott disease should be considered (Fig. 432.3).
Treatment options include intravenous antibiotics with or without
surgical drainage. Empiric antibiotic coverage should be guided by
local susceptibility patterns for S. aureus. Initial therapy should include
either ampicillin-­sulbactam (50 mg ampicillin/kg every 6 hours, max
2000 mg ampicillin/dose) or clindamycin (15 mg/kg every 8 hours,
max 600 mg/dose). For patients who are ill-­appearing at presentation or who do not improve after 24-­48 hours of antibiotic therapy,
consideration should be given to the addition of either vancomycin or
linezolid for coverage of methicillin-­resistant S. aureus (MRSA). When
narrowing antibiotic selection based on culture results, it is important
to remember that these infections are typically polymicrobial and some
pathogens, particularly oral anaerobes, may not be easily cultured.
Studies show that >50% of children with retropharyngeal or lateral
pharyngeal abscess as identified by CT can be successfully treated
without surgical drainage; the older the child, the more likely it is that
antimicrobial treatment alone will be successful. Drainage is necessary in the patient with respiratory distress or failure to improve with
intravenous antibiotic treatment. The typical treatment course is intravenous antibiotic therapy for several days until the patient has begun
to improve, followed by a course of oral antibiotics for an additional
14 days. Amoxicillin-­clavulanate (90 mg amoxicillin/kg/day, divided
every 12 hours, max 2000 mg amoxicillin/dose) or clindamycin (13
mg/kg every 8 hours, max 450 mg/dose) are recommended oral regimens. Complications of retropharyngeal or lateral pharyngeal abscess
include significant upper airway obstruction, rupture leading to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 432 u Retropharyngeal Abscess, Lateral Pharyngeal (Parapharyngeal) Abscess

2567

Retropharyngeal
Abscess

A

B

C

Fig. 432.1 CT of retropharyngeal abscess. A, CT image at level of epiglottis. B, Sequential CT slice exhibiting ring-­enhancing lesion. C, Further

sequential CT slice demonstrating inferior extent of lesion. (From Philpott CM, Selvadurai D, Banerjee AR. Paediatric retropharyngeal abscess. J
Laryngol Otol. 2004;118:925.)

M

A

A

A

B

Fig. 432.2 CT of parapharyngeal abscess in a 3-­yr-­old child. A, Sag-

ittal section demonstrating parapharyngeal abscess (A) and mucosal
swelling (M) in the maxillary sinus. B, Coronal section of parapharyngeal
abscess (A).

aspiration pneumonia, and extension to the mediastinum with resultant mediastinitis. Thrombophlebitis of the internal jugular vein and
erosion of the carotid artery sheath can also occur.
An uncommon but characteristic infection of the parapharyngeal
space is Lemierre disease, in which infection from the oropharynx
extends to cause septic thrombophlebitis of the internal jugular vein
and embolic abscesses in the lungs (Fig. 432.4). The causative pathogen
is Fusobacterium necrophorum, an anaerobic bacterial constituent of
the oropharyngeal flora. The typical presentation is that of a previously
healthy adolescent or young adult with a history of recent pharyngitis who becomes acutely ill with fever and septic pulmonary emboli
producing hypoxia, tachypnea, and respiratory distress. Other upper
respiratory infections (parotitis, otitis media, mastoiditis, sinusitis, and
dental infections) are much less likely to precipitate Lemierre disease.
There is a known association with recent Epstein-­Barr infection.
Chest x-­ray or CT demonstrates multiple cavitary nodules, often
bilateral and often accompanied by pleural effusion. Blood culture may
be positive. Treatment involves prolonged intravenous antibiotic therapy with either piperacillin-­tazobactam, imipenem or meropenem, or
ceftriaxone plus metronidazole; vancomycin should be added in areas
with a high prevalence of MRSA. Surgical drainage of extrapulmonary
metastatic abscesses may occasionally be necessary (see Chapters 430
and 431).

Fig. 432.3 Pott disease. Cervical spine radiography, lateral view,

showed prevertebral soft tissue anterior to the C1-­C7 level (white arrow), focal destruction of the C3 vertebra (black arrow), and straightening of the cervical spine. (Modified from Hsu HE, Chen CY. Tuberculous
retropharyngeal abscess with Pott disease and tuberculous abscess of
the chest wall – a case report. Medicine. 2019;98:e16280, Fig. 1A.)

PERITONSILLAR CELLULITIS AND/OR ABSCESS

Peritonsillar cellulitis and/or abscess, which is relatively common compared to the deep neck infections, is caused by bacterial invasion through
the capsule of the tonsil, leading to cellulitis and/or abscess formation in
the surrounding tissues. The typical patient with a peritonsillar abscess
is an adolescent with a recent history of acute pharyngotonsillitis. Clinical manifestations include sore throat, fever, trismus, muffled or garbled
voice, and dysphagia. Physical examination reveals an asymmetric tonsillar bulge with displacement of the uvula. An asymmetric tonsillar
bulge is diagnostic, but it may be poorly visualized because of trismus.
CT is helpful for revealing the abscess, but small studies in adults and
children have demonstrated that ultrasound may be used to differentiate

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2568 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
abscess. Intraoral ultrasound can be used to diagnose and guide needle
aspiration of a peritonsillar abscess. General anesthesia may be required for
the uncooperative patient. Approximately 95% of peritonsillar abscesses
resolve after needle aspiration and antibiotic therapy. A small percentage
of these patients require a repeat needle aspiration. The 5% with infections
that fail to resolve after needle aspiration require incision and drainage.
Tonsillectomy should be considered if there is failure to improve within
24 hours of antibiotic therapy and needle aspiration, history of recurrent
peritonsillar abscess or recurrent tonsillitis, or complications from peritonsillar abscess. The feared, albeit rare, complication is rupture of the abscess,
with resultant aspiration pneumonitis. There is a 10% recurrence risk for
peritonsillar abscess.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

A

Chapter 433

B
Fig. 432.4 CT of Lemierre disease. A, CT demonstrating the nodular

appearance of pulmonary infiltrates (arrow). B, CT of the neck demonstrating thrombosis of the right internal jugular vein (arrow). (From Plymyer MR, Zoccola DC, Tallarita G. An 18 year old man presenting with
sepsis following a recent pharyngeal infection. Arch Pathol Lab Med.
2004;128:813. Copyright 2004. College of American Pathologists.)

peritonsillar abscess from peritonsillar cellulitis and avoids radiation
exposure, as well as the need for sedation that CT often necessitates in
children. Group A streptococci and mixed oropharyngeal anaerobes are
the most common pathogens, with more than four bacterial isolates per
abscess typically recovered by needle aspiration.
A study in Britain evaluating the impact of outpatient management recommendations (increased outpatient or short-­stay management, drainage
under local anesthetic, prompt discharge) found that admissions were
reduced by over 50% and aspiration under local anesthetic increased with
no change in readmission or mortality rates. Similarly, a U.S. study found
that initial outpatient management is associated with greater use of antibiotics alone and less frequent use of incision and drainage; the recurrence
rate was the same regardless of inpatient or outpatient management. These
studies suggest that initial outpatient management of peritonsillar abscess
in pediatric patients should be considered, especially for older patients
who have mild to moderate symptoms; inpatient therapy is indicated for
younger patients and those presenting with more severe illness, including
trismus and odynophagia. Either amoxicillin-­clavulanate or clindamycin
would be an acceptable oral regimen.
Inpatient therapy is indicated for younger patients and for those
presenting with more severe illness, including significant trismus
and odynophagia. If outpatient management with antibiotics alone is
unsuccessful or if inpatient management is indicated initially, treatment consists of surgical drainage or needle aspiration along with
intravenous antibiotic therapy. As with retropharyngeal abscesses,
empiric antibiotic therapy should include either ampicillin-­sulbactam
or clindamycin, with the addition of vancomycin in patients who are
not improving or in areas with high rates of MRSA.
Surgical drainage may be accomplished through needle aspiration, incision and drainage, or tonsillectomy. Needle aspiration can involve aspiration of the superior, middle, and inferior aspects of the tonsil to locate the

Acute Inflammatory Upper
Airway Obstruction
(Croup, Epiglottitis,
Laryngitis, and Bacterial
Tracheitis)
Kristine Knuti Rodrigues and
Genie E. Roosevelt
Airway resistance is inversely proportional to the fourth power of the
radius (see Chapter 421). Because the lumen of an infant’s or child’s airway is narrow, minor reductions in cross-­sectional area resulting from
mucosal edema or other inflammatory processes cause an exponential
increase in airway resistance and a significant increase in the work of
breathing. The larynx is composed of four major cartilages (epiglottic, arytenoid, thyroid, and cricoid cartilages, ordered from superior to
inferior) and the soft tissues that surround them. The cricoid cartilage
encircles the airway just below the vocal cords and defines the narrowest
portion of the upper airway in children younger than 10 years of age.
Inflammation involving the vocal cords and structures inferior to
the cords is called laryngitis, laryngotracheitis, or laryngotracheobronchitis, and inflammation of the structures superior to the cords
(i.e., arytenoids, aryepiglottic folds [“false cords”], epiglottis) is called
supraglottitis. The term croup refers to a heterogeneous group of
mainly acute and infectious processes that are characterized by a barklike or metallic/brassy cough and may be associated with hoarseness,
inspiratory stridor, and respiratory distress. Stridor is a harsh, high-­
pitched respiratory sound that is usually inspiratory but can be biphasic and is produced by turbulent airflow; it is not a diagnosis, but a sign
of upper airway obstruction (see Chapter 421). Croup typically affects
the larynx, trachea, and bronchi. When the involvement of the larynx is
sufficient to produce symptoms, these symptoms dominate the clinical
picture more so than the tracheal and bronchial signs. A distinction has
been made between spasmodic or recurrent croup and laryngotracheobronchitis. Some clinicians believe that spasmodic croup might have an
allergic component and improves rapidly without treatment, whereas
laryngotracheobronchitis is always associated with a viral infection of
the respiratory tract. Others believe that the signs and symptoms are
similar enough to consider them within the spectrum of a single disease because studies have documented viral etiologies in both acute
and recurrent croup.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 433 u Acute Inflammatory Upper Airway Obstruction

2569

433.1 Infectious Upper Airway Obstruction
Kristine Knuti Rodrigues and Genie E. Roosevelt
With the exceptions of diphtheria (see Chapter 233), bacterial tracheitis, and epiglottitis, most other acute infections of the upper airway
are caused by viruses. The parainfluenza viruses (types 1, 2, and 3; see
Chapter 306) account for approximately 75% of cases; other viruses
associated with croup include influenza A and B, adenovirus, respiratory syncytial virus, COVID-­19, and measles. Influenza A is associated
with severe laryngotracheobronchitis. Mycoplasma pneumoniae has
rarely been isolated from children with croup and causes mild disease
(see Chapter 269). Most patients with croup are between the ages of 3
months and 5 years, with the peak in the second year of life. The incidence of croup is higher in males. It occurs most commonly in the late
fall and winter but can occur throughout the year. Approximately 15%
of patients have a strong family history of croup. Recurrences are frequent from 3 to 6 years of age and decrease with growth of the airway.
Recurrent croup is defined as two or more crouplike episodes. Patients
with recurrent croup have a higher incidence of asthma, allergies, and
gastroesophageal reflux; less than 9% of patients with recurrent croup
demonstrate clinically significant findings on bronchoscopy (e.g., subglottic stenosis, reflux changes, bronchomalacia/tracheomalacia).
In the past, Haemophilus influenzae type b was the most commonly
identified etiology of acute epiglottitis. Since the widespread use of the
H. influenzae type b vaccine, invasive disease caused by H. influenzae
type b in pediatric patients has been reduced by 99% (see Chapter 240).
Therefore other agents, such as Streptococcus pyogenes, Streptococcus
pneumoniae, nontypable H. influenzae, and Staphylococcus aureus, represent a larger portion of pediatric cases of epiglottitis in vaccinated
children. In the prevaccine era, the typical patient with epiglottitis
caused by H. influenzae type b was 2-­4 years of age, although cases were
seen in the first year of life and in patients as old as 7 years of age. Currently, the most common presentation of epiglottitis is an adult with a
sore throat, although cases still do occur in underimmunized children
or with other less common bacteria; vaccine failures have rarely been
reported.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Croup (Laryngotracheobronchitis)

Viruses typically cause croup, the most common form of acute upper
respiratory obstruction. The term laryngotracheobronchitis refers to
viral infection of the glottic and subglottic regions. Some clinicians use
the term laryngotracheitis for the most common and most typical form
of croup and reserve the term laryngotracheobronchitis for the more
severe form that is considered an extension of laryngotracheitis associated with bacterial superinfection that occurs 5-­7 days into the clinical
course.
Most patients have an upper respiratory tract infection with some
combination of rhinorrhea, pharyngitis, mild cough, and low-­grade
fever for 1-­3 days before the signs and symptoms of upper airway
obstruction become apparent. The child then develops the characteristic barking cough, hoarseness, and inspiratory stridor. The low-­
grade fever can persist, although temperatures may occasionally reach
39–40°C (102.2–104°F); some children are afebrile. Symptoms are
characteristically worse at night and often recur with decreasing intensity for several days and resolve completely within a week. Agitation
and crying greatly aggravate the symptoms and signs. The child may
prefer to sit up in bed or be held upright. Other family members might
have mild respiratory illnesses with laryngitis. Most young patients
with croup progress only as far as stridor and slight dyspnea before
they start to recover.
Physical examination can reveal a hoarse voice, coryza, normal to
moderately inflamed pharynx, and a slightly increased respiratory
rate. Patients vary substantially in their degrees of respiratory distress.
Rarely, the upper airway obstruction progresses and is accompanied
by an increasing respiratory rate; nasal flaring; suprasternal, infrasternal, and intercostal retractions; and continuous stridor. Croup is a disease of the upper airway, and alveolar gas exchange is usually normal.

*

A

B

Fig. 433.1 Croup. A, Frontal soft tissue neck radiograph demon-

strates a “steeple” appearance of the subglottic trachea (arrows). B,
Lateral soft tissue neck radiograph in another patient shows a dilated
hypopharynx (asterisk), along with haziness and narrowing of the subglottic region (arrows). (From Laya BF, Lee EY. Upper airway disease. In
Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019: Fig. 51.8, p. 481.)

Hypoxia and low oxygen saturation are seen only when complete airway obstruction is imminent. The child who is hypoxic, cyanotic, pale,
or obtunded needs immediate airway management. Occasionally, the
pattern of severe laryngotracheobronchitis is difficult to differentiate
from epiglottitis, despite the usually more acute onset and rapid course
of the latter.
Croup is a clinical diagnosis and does not require a radiograph
of the neck. Radiographs of the neck can show the typical subglottic narrowing, or steeple sign, of croup on the posteroanterior view
(Fig. 433.1). However, the steeple sign may be absent in patients
with croup, may be present in patients without croup as a normal
variant, and may rarely be present in patients with epiglottitis. The
radiographs do not correlate well with disease severity. Radiographs
should be considered only after airway stabilization in children who
have an atypical presentation or clinical course. Radiographs may
be helpful in distinguishing between severe laryngotracheobronchitis and epiglottitis, but airway management should always take
priority.

Acute Epiglottitis (Supraglottitis)

This now rare, but still dramatic and potentially lethal, condition
is characterized by an acute rapidly progressive and potentially
fulminating course of high fever, sore throat, dyspnea, and rapidly progressing respiratory obstruction. The degree of respiratory
distress at presentation is variable. The initial lack of respiratory
distress can deceive the unwary clinician; respiratory distress can
also be the first manifestation. Often, the otherwise healthy child
suddenly develops a sore throat and fever. Within a matter of hours,
the patient appears toxic, swallowing is difficult, and breathing is
labored. Drooling is usually present, and the neck is hyperextended
in an attempt to maintain the airway. The child may assume the
tripod position, sitting upright and leaning forward with the chin
up and mouth open while bracing on the arms. A brief period of air
hunger with restlessness may be followed by rapidly increasing cyanosis and coma. Stridor is a late finding and suggests near-­complete
airway obstruction. Complete obstruction of the airway and death
can ensue unless adequate treatment is provided. The barking cough
typical of croup is rare. Usually, no other family members are ill with
acute respiratory symptoms.
The diagnosis requires visualization under controlled circumstances
of a large, cherry red, swollen epiglottis by laryngoscopy. Occasionally, the other supraglottic structures, especially the aryepiglottic folds,
are more involved than the epiglottis itself. In a patient in whom the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2570 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
diagnosis is certain or probable based on clinical grounds, laryngoscopy should be performed expeditiously in a controlled environment
such as an operating room or intensive care unit. Anxiety-­provoking
interventions such as phlebotomy, intravenous line placement, placing the child supine, or direct inspection of the oral cavity should be
avoided until the airway is secure. If epiglottitis is thought to be possible but not certain in a patient with acute upper airway obstruction, the
patient may first undergo lateral radiographs of the upper airway. Classic radiographs of a child who has epiglottitis show the thumb sign (Fig.
433.2). Proper positioning of the patient for the lateral neck radiograph
is crucial to avoid some of the pitfalls associated with interpretation of
the film. Adequate hyperextension of the head and neck is necessary.
In addition, the epiglottis can appear to be round if the lateral neck is
taken at an oblique angle. If the concern for epiglottitis still exists after
the radiographs, direct visualization should be performed. A physician
skilled in airway management and use of intubation equipment should
accompany patients with suspected epiglottitis at all times. An older
cooperative child might voluntarily open the mouth wide enough for a
direct view of the inflamed epiglottis.
Establishing an airway by endotracheal or nasotracheal intubation
or, less often, by tracheostomy is indicated in patients with epiglottitis, regardless of the degree of apparent respiratory distress, because as
many as 6% of children with epiglottitis without an artificial airway die
compared with <1% of those with an artificial airway. No clinical features have been recognized that predict mortality. Pulmonary edema
can be associated with acute airway obstruction. The duration of intubation depends on the clinical course of the patient and the duration of
epiglottic swelling, as determined by frequent examination using direct
laryngoscopy or flexible fiberoptic laryngoscopy. In general, children
with acute epiglottitis are intubated for 2-­3 days, because the response
to antibiotics is usually rapid. Most patients have concomitant bacteremia; occasionally, other infections are present, such as pneumonia,
cervical adenopathy, or otitis media. Meningitis, arthritis, and other

invasive infections with H. influenzae type b are rarely found in conjunction with epiglottitis (but bacteremia is present).

Acute Infectious Laryngitis

Laryngitis is a common illness. Viruses cause most cases; diphtheria is
an exception but is extremely rare in highly developed, industrialized
countries (see Chapter 233). The onset is usually characterized by an
upper respiratory tract infection during which sore throat, cough, and
hoarseness appear. The illness is generally mild; respiratory distress is
unusual except in the young infant. Hoarseness and loss of voice may
be out of proportion to systemic signs and symptoms. The physical
examination is usually not remarkable except for evidence of pharyngeal inflammation. Inflammatory edema of the vocal cords and subglottic tissue may be demonstrated laryngoscopically. The principal site
of obstruction is usually the subglottic area.

Spasmodic Croup

Spasmodic croup occurs most often in children 1-­3 years of age and
is clinically similar to acute laryngotracheobronchitis, except that the
history of a viral prodrome and fever in the patient and family are often
absent. The cause is viral in some cases, but allergic and other factors
may also contribute.
Occurring most commonly in the evening or nighttime, spasmodic
croup begins with a sudden onset that may be preceded by mild to
moderate coryza and hoarseness. The child awakens with a characteristic barking, metallic/brassy cough, noisy inspiration, and respiratory
distress and appears anxious and frightened. The patient is usually afebrile. The severity of the symptoms generally diminishes within several
hours, and the following day, the patient often appears well except for
slight hoarseness and cough. Similar, but usually less severe, attacks
without extreme respiratory distress can occur for another night or
two. Such episodes often recur several times. Spasmodic croup might
represent more of an allergic reaction to viral antigens than direct
infection, although the pathogenesis is unknown.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Fig. 433.2 Epiglottitis in a 5-­yr-­old male with respiratory distress and

drooling. A lateral soft tissue neck radiograph shows a markedly thickened epiglottis (white arrow), which is referred to as the “thumb” sign.
The aryepiglottic folds (black arrow) also are thickened. (From Laya BF,
Lee EY. Upper airway disease. In Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019: Fig. 51.2, p. 477.)

These four syndromes must be differentiated from one another and
from a variety of other entities that can present as upper airway
obstruction. Bacterial tracheitis is the most important differential
diagnostic consideration and has a high risk of airway obstruction.
Diphtheritic croup is extremely rare in North America and Europe,
although a major epidemic of diphtheria occurred in countries of the
former Soviet Union beginning in 1990 from the lack of routine immunization. Early symptoms of diphtheria include malaise, sore throat,
anorexia, and low-­grade fever. Within 2-­3 days, pharyngeal examination reveals the typical gray-­white membrane, which can vary in size
from covering a small patch on the tonsils to covering most of the soft
palate. The membrane is adherent to the tissue, and forcible attempts
to remove it cause bleeding. The course is usually insidious, but respiratory obstruction can occur suddenly. Measles croup almost always
coincides with the full manifestations of systemic disease, and the
course may be fulminant (see Chapter 293).
Sudden onset of respiratory obstruction can be caused by aspiration
of a foreign body (see Chapter 435). The child is usually 6 months to
3 years of age. Choking and coughing occur suddenly, usually without
prodromal signs of infection, although children with a viral infection
can also aspirate a foreign body. A retropharyngeal or peritonsillar
abscess can mimic respiratory obstruction (see Chapter 432). CT scans
of the upper airway are helpful in evaluating for possible retropharyngeal abscess. A peritonsillar abscess is a clinical diagnosis. Other possible causes of upper airway obstruction include extrinsic compression
of the airway (laryngeal web, vascular ring) and intraluminal obstruction from masses (laryngeal papilloma, subglottic hemangioma); these
tend to have chronic or recurrent symptoms.
Upper airway obstruction is occasionally associated with angioedema of the subglottic areas as part of anaphylaxis and generalized
allergic reactions, edema after endotracheal intubation for either general anesthesia or respiratory failure, hypocalcemic tetany, infectious
mononucleosis, trauma, and tumors or malformations of the larynx. A

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 433 u Acute Inflammatory Upper Airway Obstruction
crouplike cough may be an early sign of asthma. Vocal cord dysfunction can also occur. Epiglottitis, with the characteristic manifestations
of drooling or dysphagia and stridor, can also result from the accidental
ingestion of very hot liquid.

COMPLICATIONS

Complications occur in approximately 15% of patients with viral
croup. The most common is extension of the infectious process to
involve other regions of the respiratory tract, such as the middle ear,
the terminal bronchioles, or the pulmonary parenchyma. Bacterial tracheitis may be a complication of viral croup rather than a distinct disease. If associated with toxin-­producing S. aureus or S. pyogenes, toxic
shock syndrome can develop. Bacterial tracheitis may have a biphasic
illness, with the second phase after a crouplike illness associated with
high fever, toxicity, and airway obstruction. Alternatively, the onset of
tracheitis occurs without a second phase and appears as a continuation of the initial crouplike illness, but with higher fever and worsening respiratory distress rather than the usual recovery after 2-­3 days of
viral croup. Pneumonia, cervical lymphadenitis, otitis media, or, rarely,
meningitis or septic arthritis can occur during the course of epiglottitis. Pneumomediastinum and pneumothorax are the most common
complications of tracheotomy.

TREATMENT

The mainstay of treatment for children with croup is airway management and treatment of hypoxemia. Treatment of the respiratory distress
should take priority over any testing. Most children with either acute
spasmodic croup or infectious croup can be managed safely at home.
Despite the observation that cold night air is beneficial, a Cochrane
review has found no evidence supporting the use of cool mist in the
emergency department for the treatment of croup.
Nebulized racemic epinephrine is the established treatment for
moderate and severe croup. The mechanism of action is believed to
be constriction of the precapillary arterioles through the β-­adrenergic
receptors, causing fluid resorption from the interstitial space and a
decrease in the laryngeal mucosal edema. Traditionally, racemic epinephrine, a 1:1 mixture of the d-­ and l-­isomers of epinephrine, has
been administered. A dose of 0.25-­0.5 mL of 2.25% racemic epinephrine in 3 mL of normal saline can be used as often as every 20 minutes.
Racemic epinephrine was initially chosen over the more active and
more readily available l-­epinephrine to minimize anticipated cardiovascular side effects such as tachycardia and hypertension. Current evidence does not favor racemic epinephrine over L-­epinephrine (5 mL of
1:1,000 solution) in terms of efficacy or safety.
The indications for the administration of nebulized epinephrine
include moderate to severe stridor at rest, the possible need for intubation, respiratory distress, and/or hypoxemia. The duration of activity of
racemic epinephrine is <2 hours. Consequently, observation is mandated. The symptoms of croup might reappear, but racemic epinephrine does not cause rebound worsening of the obstruction. Patients can
be safely discharged home after a 2-­to 3-­hour period of observation
provided they have no stridor at rest; have received steroids; and have
normal air entry, normal pulse oximetry, and normal level of consciousness. Nebulized epinephrine should still be used cautiously in
patients with tachycardia, heart conditions such as tetralogy of Fallot,
and ventricular outlet obstruction because of possible side effects.
The effectiveness of oral corticosteroids in viral croup is well established. Corticosteroids decrease the edema in the laryngeal mucosa
through their antiinflammatory action. Oral steroids are beneficial, even
in mild croup, as measured by improved symptoms at 2 hours, reduced
return visits, reduced hospitalization, shorter duration of hospitalization, and reduced need for subsequent interventions such as epinephrine
administration. Most studies that demonstrated the efficacy of oral dexamethasone used a single dose of 0.6 mg/kg to a maximum dose of 16 mg; a
dose as low as 0.15 mg/kg may be just as effective. More randomized controlled trials are needed to further evaluate the effectiveness of lower dose
dexamethasone compared to 0.6 mg/kg. Prednisolone at a dose of 1 mg/kg
has also been found to be noninferior to standard and low-­dose dosing of
dexamethasone. Intramuscular dexamethasone and nebulized budesonide

2571

have an equivalent clinical effect; oral dosing of dexamethasone is as effective as intramuscular administration. The only adverse effect in the treatment of croup with corticosteroids is the development of Candida albicans
laryngotracheitis in a patient who received dexamethasone 1 mg/kg/24 hr
for 8 days. Corticosteroids should not be administered to children with
varicella or tuberculosis (unless the patient is receiving appropriate antituberculosis therapy) because they worsen the clinical course.
Antibiotics are not indicated in croup. Nonprescription cough and cold
medications should not be used in children younger than 6 years of age.
A helium-­oxygen mixture (heliox) may be considered in the treatment
of children with severe croup for whom intubation is being considered,
although the evidence is inconclusive. Children with croup should be
hospitalized for any of the following: progressive stridor, severe stridor at
rest, respiratory distress, hypoxemia, cyanosis, depressed mental status,
poor oral intake, persistent moderate croup symptoms (stridor and/or
retractions at rest without agitation) after 4 hours after one dose of nebulized epinephrine and systemic glucocorticoids requiring more than one
dose of nebulized epinephrine, or the need for reliable observation.
Epiglottitis is a medical emergency and warrants immediate treatment with an artificial airway placed under controlled conditions,
either in an operating room or intensive care unit. All patients should
receive oxygen en route unless the mask causes excessive agitation.
Racemic epinephrine and corticosteroids are ineffective. Cultures of
blood, epiglottic surface, and, in selected cases, cerebrospinal fluid
should be collected after the airway is stabilized. Ceftriaxone (dose 100
mg/kg/24 hr in one or two divided doses) plus vancomycin (dose 15
mg/kg/24 hr every 8 hours) should be given parenterally, pending culture and susceptibility reports, because 10–40% of H. influenzae type
b cases are resistant to ampicillin. After insertion of the artificial airway, the patient should improve immediately, and respiratory distress
and cyanosis should disappear. Epiglottitis resolves after a few days of
antibiotics, and the patient may be extubated; antibiotics should be
continued for at least 10 days. Chemoprophylaxis is not routinely recommended for household, childcare, or nursery contacts of patients
with invasive H. influenzae type b infections, but careful observation
is mandatory, with prompt medical evaluation when exposed children develop a febrile illness. Indications for rifampin prophylaxis
(20 mg/kg orally once a day for 4 days; maximum dose: 600 mg) for
all household members include if a child within the home is younger
than 4 years of age and incompletely immunized, is younger than 12
months of age and has not completed the primary vaccination series,
or is immunocompromised.
Acute laryngeal swelling on an allergic basis responds to epinephrine (1 mg/mL concentration, previously referred to as 1:1,000 dilution,
in dosage of 0.01 mL/kg to a maximum of 0.5 mL/dose) administered
intramuscularly or racemic epinephrine (dose of 0.5 mL of 2.25% racemic epinephrine in 3 mL of normal saline) (see Chapter 190). Corticosteroids may be considered, although there is little evidence of benefit
(1-­2 mg/kg/24 hr of prednisone for 1-­2 days). However, patients who
require hospitalization or have a history of asthma may benefit from
corticosteroids. After recovery, the patient and parents should be discharged with a preloaded syringe of epinephrine to be used in emergencies. Reactive mucosal swelling, severe stridor, and respiratory
distress unresponsive to mist therapy may follow endotracheal intubation for general anesthesia in children. Racemic epinephrine and corticosteroids are helpful.

Endotracheal/Nasotracheal Intubation and
Tracheotomy

With the introduction of routine intubation or, less often, tracheotomy
for epiglottitis, the mortality rate for epiglottis has decreased to almost
zero. These procedures should always be performed in an operating
room or intensive care unit if time permits; prior intubation and general anesthesia greatly facilitate performing a tracheotomy without
complications. The use of an endotracheal or nasotracheal tube that is
0.5-­1.0 mm smaller than estimated by age or height is recommended
to facilitate intubation and reduce long-­term sequelae. The choice of
procedure should be based on the local expertise and experience with
the procedure and postoperative care.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2572 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Intubation or, less often, tracheotomy is required for most patients
with bacterial tracheitis and all young patients with epiglottitis. It
is rarely required for patients with laryngotracheobronchitis, spasmodic croup, or laryngitis. Severe forms of laryngotracheobronchitis
that require intubation in a high proportion of patients have been
reported during severe measles and influenza A virus epidemics.
Assessing the need for these procedures requires experience and
judgment because they should not be delayed until cyanosis and
extreme restlessness have developed (see Chapter 86). An endotracheal or nasotracheal tube that is 0.5-­1.0 mm smaller than estimated
by age or height is recommended.
The endotracheal tube or tracheostomy must remain in place until
edema and spasm have subsided and the patient is able to handle secretions satisfactorily. It should be removed as soon as possible, usually
within a few days. Adequate resolution of epiglottic inflammation that
has been accurately confirmed by fiberoptic laryngoscopy, permitting
much more rapid extubation, often occurs within 24 hours. Racemic epinephrine and dexamethasone (0.5 mg/kg/dose 6-­12 hr before extubation
with a maximum dose of 16 mg) may be useful in the treatment of upper
airway edema seen postintubation.

be mucosal swelling at the level of the cricoid cartilage, complicated
by copious, thick, purulent secretions, sometimes causing pseudomembranes. Suctioning these secretions, although occasionally
affording temporary relief, usually does not sufficiently obviate the
need for an artificial airway.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis is based on evidence of bacterial upper airway disease,
which includes high fever, purulent airway secretions, and an absence
of the classic findings of epiglottitis. X-­rays are not needed but can
show the classic findings (Fig. 433.3); purulent material is noted below
the cords during endotracheal intubation (Fig. 433.4).

PROGNOSIS

In general, the length of hospitalization and the mortality rate for cases
of acute infectious upper airway obstruction increase as the infection
extends to involve a greater portion of the respiratory tract, except in
epiglottitis, in which the localized infection itself can prove to be fatal.
Most deaths from croup are caused by a laryngeal obstruction or by
the complications of tracheotomy. Rarely, fatal out-­of-­hospital arrests
caused by viral laryngotracheobronchitis have been reported, particularly in infants and in patients whose course has been complicated by
bacterial tracheitis. Untreated epiglottitis has a mortality rate of 6% in
some series, but if the diagnosis is made and appropriate treatment is
initiated before the patient is moribund, the prognosis is excellent. The
outcome of acute laryngotracheobronchitis, laryngitis, and spasmodic
croup is also excellent.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

433.2 Bacterial Tracheitis
Kristine Knuti Rodrigues and Genie E. Roosevelt

A

B

Fig. 433.3 Bacterial tracheitis in a 9-­yr-­old female with a high fever,
cough, and stridor. A, Frontal soft tissue neck radiograph shows subglottic tracheal narrowing (arrows). B, Lateral soft tissue neck radiograph shows irregular linear membranous debris within the trachea (arrows). (From Laya BF, Lee EY. Upper airway disease. In Coley BD, ed.
Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2019: Fig. 51.9, p. 481.)

Bacterial tracheitis is an acute bacterial infection of the upper airway that is potentially life-­threatening. S. aureus (see Chapter 227.1)
is the most commonly isolated pathogen, with isolated reports of
methicillin-­resistant S. aureus, S. pneumoniae, S. pyogenes, Moraxella catarrhalis, and nontypable H. influenzae; anaerobic organisms
have also been implicated. The mean age is between 5 and 7 years.
There is a slight male predominance. Bacterial tracheitis often follows a viral respiratory infection (especially laryngotracheitis or
influenza virus infection), so it may be considered a bacterial complication of a viral disease, rather than a primary bacterial illness.
This life-­threatening entity is more common than epiglottitis in
vaccinated populations.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Typically, the child has a metallic/brassy cough, apparently as part
of a viral laryngotracheobronchitis. High fever and toxicity with
respiratory distress can occur immediately or after a few days of
apparent improvement. The patient can lie flat, does not drool, and
does not have the dysphagia associated with epiglottitis. The usual
treatment for croup (racemic epinephrine) is ineffective. Intubation or tracheostomy may be necessary, but only 50–60% of patients
require intubation for management, with younger patients more
likely to need intubation. The major pathologic feature appears to

A

B

Fig. 433.4 Thick tracheal membranes seen on rigid bronchoscopy.

The supraglottis was normal. A, Thick adherent membranous secretions. B, The distal tracheobronchial tree is unremarkable. In contrast
to croup, tenacious secretions are seen throughout the trachea, and
in contrast to bronchitis, the bronchi are not affected. (From Salamone FN, Bobbitt DB, Myer CM, et al. Bacterial tracheitis reexamined:
is there a less severe manifestation? Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg.
2004;131:871–876.Copyright 2004 American Academy of Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery Foundation, Inc.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 434 u Congenital Anomalies of the Larynx, Trachea, and Bronchi
TREATMENT

Appropriate antimicrobial therapy, which usually includes antistaphylococcal agents, should be instituted in any patient whose
course suggests bacterial tracheitis. Empiric therapy recommendations for bacterial tracheitis include vancomycin or clindamycin
and a third-­or fourth-­generation cephalosporin (e.g., ceftriaxone or cefepime). When bacterial tracheitis is diagnosed by direct
laryngoscopy or is highly suspected on clinical grounds, an artificial
airway should be strongly considered. Supplemental oxygen is usually necessary.

COMPLICATIONS

Chest radiographs often show patchy infiltrates and may show focal
densities. Subglottic narrowing and a rough and ragged tracheal air
column can often be demonstrated radiographically. If airway management is not optimal, cardiorespiratory arrest can occur. Toxic shock
syndrome has been associated with staphylococcal and group A streptococcal tracheitis (see Chapter 227.2).

PROGNOSIS

The prognosis for most patients is excellent. Patients usually
become afebrile within 2-­3 days of the institution of appropriate
antimicrobial therapy, but prolonged hospitalization may be necessary. In recent years, there appears to be a trend toward a less
morbid condition. With a decrease in mucosal edema and purulent
secretions, extubation can be accomplished safely, and the patient
should be observed carefully while antibiotics and oxygen therapy
are continued.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 434

Congenital Anomalies of
the Larynx, Trachea, and
Bronchi
Michael Gorelik and James W. Schroeder Jr.
The larynx functions as a breathing passage, a valve to protect the
lungs during swallowing, and the primary organ of communication.
Symptoms related to congenital anomalies of the larynx include airway obstruction, noisy breathing, difficulty feeding, and abnormalities
of phonation (see Chapter 421). Obstructive congenital lesions of the
upper airway create turbulent airflow according to the laws of fluid
dynamics. Turbulent airflow across a narrowed segment of the respiratory tract produces distinctive sounds that are diagnostically useful.
The location of the obstruction produces characteristic changes in
the sound of inspiration and/or expiration. Intrathoracic lesions typically cause expiratory wheezing and/or stridor, often masquerading as
asthma or other pulmonary processes. The expiratory wheezing contrasts to the inspiratory stridor caused by the extrathoracic lesions of
congenital laryngeal anomalies, specifically laryngomalacia and bilateral vocal cord paralysis. Stertor describes the low-­pitched inspiratory
snoring sound typically produced by soft tissue from nasal or nasopharyngeal obstruction.

2573

The timing of noisy breathing in relation to the sleep–wake cycle is
important. Obstruction of the pharyngeal airway (by enlarged tonsils,
adenoids, pharyngeal soft tissue, tongue, or syndromes with midface
hypoplasia) typically produces worse obstruction during sleep than
during waking. Obstruction that is worse when awake is typically
laryngeal, tracheal, or bronchial and is exacerbated by exertion. The
location of the obstruction dictates the respiratory phase, tone, and
nature of the sound, and these qualities direct the differential diagnosis.
With airway obstruction, the degree of the obstructing lesion and
the resulting work of breathing determine the necessity for diagnostic procedures and surgical intervention. Obstructive symptoms vary
from mild to severe stertor or stridor with episodes of apnea, cyanosis,
suprasternal (tracheal tugging) and subcostal retractions, dyspnea, and
tachypnea. Significant congenital anomalies of the trachea and bronchi
can create serious respiratory difficulties from the first minute of life
and may sometimes be diagnosed in the prenatal period. If a severe
obstruction is suspected prenatally, an airway birth plan should be
developed by a high-­risk maternal–fetal medicine expert, a neonatologist, and a pediatric airway surgeon. Congenital high airway obstruction
syndrome, or CHAOS, can lead to immediate postnatal distress (see
Chapters 117 and 118). Chronic obstruction can cause failure to thrive
and chronic hypoxemia and may have long-­term effects on growth and
development.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

434.1 Laryngomalacia
Michael Gorelik and James W. Schroeder Jr.
Laryngomalacia accounts for 45–75% of congenital laryngeal anomalies in children with stridor. Stridor is inspiratory and can vary from
high-­to low-­pitched. It can be present at rest and exacerbated by any
exertion: crying, agitation, or feeding. The stridor is caused, in part, by
decreased laryngeal tone leading to supraglottic collapse during inspiration, which creates a narrow airway and turbulent airflow. Symptoms usually appear within the first 2 weeks and increase in severity
for up to 6 months, although gradual improvement can begin at any
time. Many infants who do not require surgical intervention often have
spontaneous resolution of stridor around 7-­9 months of age, and the
majority will have complete resolution of stridor by 18 months of age.
Gastroesophageal reflux disease, laryngopharyngeal reflux disease, and
neurologic disease with associated muscle hypotonia can influence the
severity of the disease and thereby the clinical course.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis is made primarily based on clinical symptoms and is confirmed by outpatient, awake flexible laryngoscopy (Fig. 434.1). When
the work of breathing is moderate to severe, airway films and chest
radiographs are indicated. Laryngomalacia can contribute to feeding
difficulties and dysphagia in some children because of decreased laryngeal sensation and poor suck-­swallow-­breath coordination. When the
inspiratory stridor sounds wet or is associated with a cough or when
there is a history of repeat upper respiratory illness or pneumonia, dysphagia should be considered. When dysphagia is suspected, a contrast
swallow study and/or a fiberoptic endoscopic evaluation of swallowing
(FEES) may be considered. Because 15–60% of infants with laryngomalacia have synchronous airway anomalies, complete bronchoscopy
is undertaken for patients with moderate to severe obstruction.

TREATMENT

Expectant observation is suitable for most infants because most symptoms resolve spontaneously as the child and airway grow. Laryngopharyngeal reflux is managed with antireflux medications, such as
histamine H2-­receptor antagonists or proton pump inhibitors (PPIs).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2574 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Acquired subglottic stenosis refers to stenosis caused by extrinsic factors, most commonly resulting from prolonged intubation, and is discussed in further detail in Chapter 436.

DIAGNOSIS

Fig. 434.1 Endoscopic example of laryngomalacia. On inspiration,
the epiglottic folds collapse into the airway. The lateral tips of the epiglottis are also collapsing inward (arrow). (From Slovis T, ed. Caffey’s
Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2008.)

The risk-­to-­benefit ratio should be assessed in each patient because
these medications, particularly PPIs, have been associated with iron-­
deficiency anemia and increased incidence of pneumonia, gastroenteritis, and Clostridium difficile infections, among others. In 15–20%
of patients with laryngomalacia, symptoms are severe enough to cause
progressive respiratory distress, cyanosis, failure to thrive, or cor pulmonale. In these patients, surgical intervention via supraglottoplasty
is considered. Supraglottoplasty is 90% successful in relieving upper
airway obstruction caused by laryngomalacia. Some comorbidities,
such as cardiac disease, neurologic disease, pulmonary disorders, or
craniofacial anomalies, may be poor prognostic indicators that would
suggest earlier intervention.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

434.2 Congenital Subglottic Stenosis
Michael Gorelik and James W. Schroeder Jr.
Congenital subglottic stenosis is the second most common cause of
stridor. The subglottis is the narrowest part of the upper airway in a
child and is located in the space extending from the undersurface of the
true vocal folds to the inferior margin of the cricoid cartilage. Subglottic stenosis is a narrowing of the subglottic larynx and in a term newborn is defined as a cricoid diameter of less than 3.5 mm resulting from
malformation of the cricoid cartilage. Subglottic stenosis manifests in
the infant with respiratory distress and biphasic or primarily inspiratory stridor. It may be congenital or acquired. Symptoms may present spontaneously with a higher degree of stenosis but manifest after a
respiratory tract infection because of edema and thickened secretions
of a narrow and already compromised airway leading to recurrent or
persistent crouplike symptoms.
Biphasic or primarily inspiratory stridor is the typical presenting
symptom for congenital subglottic stenosis. In a child with recurrent
bronchiolitis or croup, a diagnosis of congenital subglottic stenosis
should be considered. The stenosis can be caused by an abnormally
shaped elliptical cricoid cartilage; by a first tracheal ring that becomes
trapped underneath the cricoid cartilage; or by soft tissue thickening caused by ductal cysts, submucosal gland hyperplasia, or fibrosis.

The diagnosis made by airway radiographs is confirmed by direct
laryngoscopy and bronchoscopy. During diagnostic laryngoscopy, the
subglottic larynx is visualized directly and sized objectively using endotracheal tubes (Fig. 434.2). The percentage of stenosis is determined by
comparing the size of the patients’ larynx to a standard of laryngeal
dimensions based on age. Stenosis >50% is usually symptomatic and
often requires treatment. As with all cases of upper airway obstruction,
tracheostomy is avoided when possible. Subglottic stenosis is typically
measured using the Myer-­Cotton system, with grade I through grade
IV subglottic stenosis indicating the severity of narrowing. Other factors to consider aside from the degree of narrowing are whether the
stenotic segment is soft or firm, which can determine the appropriate
type of surgical intervention. Dilation and endoscopic laser surgery
can be attempted in grade I and II, although they may not be effective
because most congenital stenoses are cartilaginous. Anterior cricoid
split, anterior-­posterior cricoid split, tracheostomy, or laryngotracheal
reconstruction with cartilage graft augmentation are surgical options
typically reserved for grade III and IV subglottic stenosis. The differential diagnosis includes other anatomic anomalies, as well as a subglottic
hemangiomas or respiratory papillomatosis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

434.3 Vocal Cord Paralysis
Michael Gorelik and James W. Schroeder Jr.
Vocal cord paralysis is the third most common congenital laryngeal
anomaly that produces stridor in infants and children. Congenital
central nervous system lesions such as Chiari malformation, myelomeningocele, and hydrocephalus or birth trauma may be associated with
bilateral paralysis. Additionally, congenital anomalies of the heart or
great vessels can be associated with vocal cord paralysis. Bilateral vocal
cord paralysis produces airway obstruction at the level of the glottis
and is manifested by respiratory distress and high-­pitched inspiratory
stridor, aphonatory or dysphonic sound, or inspiratory weak cry. More
than 50% of cases of vocal cord paralysis in children are bilateral.
Unilateral vocal cord paralysis is most often iatrogenic, as a result
of surgical treatment for aerodigestive (tracheoesophageal fistula) and
cardiovascular (patent ductus arteriosus repair) anomalies and thyroid
or parathyroid surgery, although it may also be idiopathic. Unilateral
paralysis can lead to aspiration, coughing, and choking. Often the cry
is weak and breathy, whereas stridor and other symptoms of airway
obstruction are less common. Vocal cord paralysis in older children
may be the result of a Chiari malformation or tumors compressing the
vagus or recurrent laryngeal nerve. Vocal cord paralysis/palsies have
also been reported in patients with Guillain-­Barré syndrome (GBS)
and its Miller Fisher variant either as an isolated finding or associated with other features of GBS. Other neurologic disorders producing vocal cord paralysis include stroke, multiple sclerosis, and other
polyneuropathies. The prognosis for spontaneous recovery is better for
unilateral, acquired, and right-­sided paralysis.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of vocal cord paralysis is made by awake flexible
laryngoscopy. The examination will demonstrate an inability or
weakness to abduct the involved vocal cord. A thorough investigation for the underlying primary cause is indicated. Because of
the association with other congenital lesions, evaluation includes
neurology and cardiology consultations, imaging of the course of
the recurrent laryngeal nerve, and diagnostic endoscopy of the larynx, trachea, and bronchi. During endoscopy, it is critical to palpate the cricoarytenoid joint to rule out joint fixation, which can be

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 434 u Congenital Anomalies of the Larynx, Trachea, and Bronchi

A

B

2575

C

Fig. 434.2 Endoscopic repair of subglottic stenosis with radial cuts at 12, 3, and 9 o’clock positions using a laryngeal sickle knife or laser. A, Preoperative view. B, Diagram of planned incisions. C, After cuts and balloon dilation. (From Lawlor CM, Rahbar R, Choi SS. Glottic and subglottic stenosis
and related voice disorders. In: Lesperance MM, ed. Cummings Pediatric Otolaryngology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Fig. 28.8, p. 409.)

mistaken for bilateral vocal fold paralysis. Intraoperative laryngeal
electromyography (EMG) is the most specific and sensitive test to
determine the presence of vocal cord paralysis.

TREATMENT

Treatment is based on the severity of the symptoms. Idiopathic vocal
cord paralysis in infants usually resolves spontaneously within 6-­12
months. If it is not resolved by 2-­3 years of age, function typically
does not recover. Patients with unilateral vocal cord paralysis often
do not require intervention secondary to spontaneous recovery or
compensation for the contralateral vocal cord. If there is persistent
dysphonia or aspiration, surgical options include vocal fold injection, surgical medialization, or reinnervation using the ansa cervicalis, which has been successful in regaining unilateral vocal cord
function. Postoperative voice therapy is helpful to achieve optimum
results.
Bilateral paralysis may require temporary tracheotomy in 50% of
patients. Airway augmentation procedures in bilateral vocal cord
paralysis typically focus on widening the posterior glottis, such as
an endoscopically placed or open posterior glottis cartilage graft,
arytenoidectomy, or arytenoid lateralization, sometimes in conjunction with cordotomy. These procedures are generally successful
in reducing the obstruction; however, they may result in dysphagia
and aspiration.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

434.4 Congenital Laryngeal Webs and
Atresia
Michael Gorelik and James W. Schroeder Jr.
Congenital laryngeal webs account for about 5% of congenital
laryngeal anomalies. They are typically located in the anterior glottis with subglottic extension and associated subglottic stenosis.
During early embryogenesis, laryngeal webs form if the laryngotracheal lumen fails to fully recannulate. The clinical presentation
ranges from asymptomatic, to dysphonia, to severe airway compromise secondary to the degree of obstruction caused by the web.
Laryngeal webs are categorized from type I to type IV, which is the
most severe.

Fig. 434.3 Anterior glottic web, endoscopic view. (Courtesy Dr. Jeff
Rastatter, Division of Pediatric Otolaryngology, Lurie Children’s Hospital, Chicago, IL.)

Laryngeal atresia occurs as a complete glottic web due to failure
of laryngeal and tracheal recanalization and may be associated with
tracheal agenesis and tracheoesophageal fistula. Laryngeal atresia
may be detected in the prenatal period, and preparations should
be made for establishment of definitive airway, either before or at
birth. Other times, congenital laryngeal atresia is a cause of respiratory distress in the newborn and is diagnosed only upon initial
direct laryngoscopy.
Diagnosis is made by direct laryngoscopy (Fig. 434.3). Thick webs
may be suspected in lateral radiographs of the airway. Chromosomal
and congenital cardiovascular anomalies, as well as chromosome
22q11 deletion, are common in patients with laryngeal webs. Treatment may require only incision or dilation for thin webs. Thick webs
can require laryngofissure and temporary stenting. Webs with associated subglottic stenosis are likely to require cartilage augmentation of
the cricoid cartilage (laryngotracheal reconstruction). Voice outcomes
are variable after surgical management.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2576 Part XVII u The Respiratory System

A

B

Fig. 434.4 A and B, Case of tracheal hemangioma prepropranolol
and postpropranolol therapy (pictures 2 weeks apart). (From Bush A,
Abel R, Chitty L, et al. Congenital lung disease. In: Wilmott RW, Deterding RR, Li A, et al., eds. Kendig’s Disorders of the Respiratory Tract in
Children, 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019: Fig. 18.18, p. 308.)

434.5 Congenital Subglottic Hemangioma
Michael Gorelik and James W. Schroeder Jr.
See also Chapter 438.3.
Subglottic infantile hemangiomas are benign vascular malformations and a rare cause of early infancy respiratory distress. They
present more commonly in females than in males, with symptoms of
a barky cough and inspiratory or biphasic stridor in the absence of
dysphonia. Symptoms typically present within the first 1-­6 months
of life. The most common presenting symptom is biphasic stridor,
somewhat more prominent during inspiration. This is exacerbated
by crying and acute viral illnesses. A barking cough, hoarseness,
and symptoms of recurrent or persistent croup are typical and can
mask the diagnosis. Roughly 50% of those with a subglottic hemangioma will have a cutaneous hemangioma, but only 1% of children
who have cutaneous hemangiomas will have a subglottic hemangioma (see Chapter 691). However, a facial hemangioma in the
beard distribution (preauricular area, lips, chin, and neck) is associated with a much higher incidence of subglottic hemangiomas and,
when present, should prompt further investigation. Chest and neck
radiographs can show the characteristic asymmetric narrowing of
the subglottic larynx. CT and MRI can also assist with the diagnosis. Airway vascular lesions may also be associated with PHACES
syndrome, characterized by posterior fossa malformations, hemangioma, arterial lesions of the head and neck, cardiac anomalies,
eye anomalies, and sternal cleft (see Chapter 691). More than 50%
of children with PHACES syndrome have an airway vascular lesion.
Treatment options range from conservative monitoring, medical
management, steroid injection, laser treatment, and open surgical
resection to tracheotomy and airway reconstruction. Propranolol
has become a mainstay in initial therapy of subglottic hemangioma;
however, it is estimated that up to 50% of patients with subglottic
hemangioma may not have a long-­term response to propranolol,
indicating a need for close airway monitoring in these patients (Fig.
434.4). Treatment is further discussed in Chapter 438.3.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Fig. 434.5 Endoscopic photograph of a saccular cyst. (From Ahmad
SM, Soliman AMS. Congenital anomalies of the larynx. Otolaryngol Clin
North Am. 2007;40:177–191, Fig. 3.)

to hoarseness and dyspnea. Laryngoceles may be confined to the
larynx or extend into the neck and are described as internal, external, or both. A saccular cyst (congenital cyst of the larynx) is distinguished from the laryngocele in that its lumen is isolated from
the interior of the larynx and it contains mucus, not air. Saccular
cysts can be located in the anterior and lateral portions of the glottis
and supraglottis. In infants and children, laryngoceles cause hoarseness and dyspnea that may increase with crying. Saccular cysts may
cause respiratory distress and stridor at birth and may require early
airway intervention. Infection of saccular cysts can lead to rapid
expansion and acute airway compromise. Intubation can be challenging because the supraglottic and laryngeal anatomy may be
distorted. In addition, complete airway obstruction may occur
on induction with neuromuscular blockade because of decreased
laryngeal tone. A saccular cyst may be visible on radiography, but
the diagnosis is made by laryngoscopy (Fig. 434.5). Needle aspiration of the cyst confirms the diagnosis but rarely provides a cure.
Surgical excision is the therapy of choice for management of saccular cysts and laryngoceles. Approaches include endoscopic CO2
laser excision, endoscopic extended ventriculotomy (marsupialization or unroofing), or, traditionally, external excision.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

434.7 Posterior Laryngeal Cleft and
Laryngotracheoesophageal Cleft
Michael Gorelik and James W. Schroeder Jr.

434.6 Laryngoceles and Saccular Cysts
Michael Gorelik and James W. Schroeder Jr.
Saccular cysts and laryngoceles are uncommon etiologies of pediatric airway obstruction. A laryngocele is an abnormal air-­filled
dilation of the laryngeal saccule that arises vertically between the
false vocal cord, the base of the epiglottis, and the inner surface
of the thyroid cartilage. As there is open communication with the
laryngeal lumen when it intermittently fills with air, this can lead

The posterior laryngeal cleft is the result of a deficiency in the midline of the posterior larynx caused by a failure of fusion of the posterior cricoid lamina. This results in an abnormal communication
between the posterior larynx and esophagus leading to aspiration.
Posterior laryngeal clefts are categorized into four types depending
how far inferiorly the cleft extends. A type I cleft extends to, but not
beyond, the vocal cords. A type II cleft extends beyond the vocal
cords to, but not through, the cricoid cartilage. A type III cleft
extends through the cricoid cartilage into the cervical trachea. A

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 434 u Congenital Anomalies of the Larynx, Trachea, and Bronchi
type IV cleft extends into the thoracic trachea. Laryngeal clefts can
occur in families and are likely to be associated with tracheal agenesis, tracheoesophageal fistula, and multiple congenital anomalies,
including Opitz-­Frias syndrome, Townes-­Brock syndrome, chromosome 1q43 deletion, trisomy 21, and Pallister-­Hall syndrome.
Type I clefts may cause mild symptoms, but at least 60% of these
will cause no symptoms and will not require surgical repair. Type I
and, more commonly, type II clefts can present with feeding problems, recurrent aspiration, pneumonias, or respiratory complaints.
Infants with type III and IV clefts will present more commonly
in the newborn period with significant aspiration and respiratory
distress.
Diagnostic workup includes an esophagogram, which is undertaken to evaluate the presence of aspiration or laryngeal penetration
of ingested contrast material. A FEES exam may be undertaken by an
otolaryngologist with the assistance of a speech-­language and pathology team to observe patterns of liquid spillage during swallow and may
identify a cleft. However, the gold standard of diagnosis remains operative laryngoscopy and bronchoscopy with palpation of the posterior
larynx. This assists in determining the length of the cleft and guides
treatment options.
Treatment is based on the cleft type and the symptoms; in general,
a type I cleft may be managed endoscopically, whereas higher grades
may require an open procedure. Stabilization of the airway is the
first priority. Gastroesophageal reflux must be controlled, and a careful assessment for other congenital anomalies is undertaken before
repair. Several endoscopic and open cervical and transthoracic surgical
repairs have been described.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

434.8 Vascular and Cardiac Anomalies
Michael Gorelik and James W. Schroeder Jr.
Aberrant cardiopulmonary vascular anatomy may directly affect
the trachea and bronchi, resulting in respiratory and feeding problems (Fig. 434.6). The aberrant innominate artery is the most common cause of secondary tracheomalacia (see Chapter 481). It may
be asymptomatic and discovered incidentally, or it may cause severe
symptoms. Expiratory wheezing and cough occur and, rarely, reflex
apnea or “dying spells.” Surgical intervention is rarely necessary.
Infants are most commonly treated expectantly because the problem is often self-­limited.
The term vascular ring is used to describe vascular anomalies that
result from abnormal development of the aortic arch complex. Vascular rings are categorized as complete or incomplete. Double aortic
arch is the most common type of complete vascular ring, followed
by right aortic arch with aberrant left subclavian artery and left
ligamentum arteriosum. These account for more than 95% of complete rings. The double aortic arch encircles and compresses both
the trachea and esophagus. With few exceptions, these patients are
symptomatic by 3 months of age. Respiratory symptoms predominate, but dysphagia may be present. The diagnosis is established
by barium esophagogram that shows a posterior indentation of the
esophagus by the vascular ring (see Fig. 434.6). CT or MRI with
angiography provides the cardiothoracic surgeon the information
needed. Surgical treatment for symptomatic patients entails division of the vascular ring.
Other vascular anomalies include the pulmonary artery sling,
which also requires surgical correction. The most common open

2577

(incomplete) vascular ring is the left aortic arch with aberrant right
subclavian artery. It is usually asymptomatic, although dysphagia lusoria has been described. This is characterized as dysphagia
caused by an aberrant subclavian artery coursing behind the esophagus, leading to esophageal compression and difficulty with bolus
transit.
Congenital cardiac defects are likely to compress the left main bronchus or lower trachea. Any condition that produces significant pulmonary hypertension increases the size of the pulmonary arteries, which
in turn causes compression of the left main bronchus. Surgical correction of the underlying pathology to relieve pulmonary hypertension
relieves the airway compression.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

434.9 Tracheal Stenoses, Webs, and Atresia
Michael Gorelik and James W. Schroeder Jr.
Long-­segment congenital tracheal stenosis with complete tracheal
rings typically presents within the first year of life, usually after
a crisis has been precipitated by an acute respiratory illness. The
diagnosis may be suggested by plain radiographs. CT with contrast
delineates associated intrathoracic anomalies such as the pulmonary artery sling (in ~30%) or other cardiac anomalies (in about
25%), which can occur in one third of patients to one fourth of
patients, respectively. Bronchoscopy is the best method to define
the degree and extent of the stenosis and the associated abnormal
bronchial branching pattern. Care must be taken to avoid traumatic
passage of a telescope or bronchoscope through a stenotic or edematous segment, as even minor mucosal trauma may precipitate complete airway obstruction. Treatment of clinically significant stenosis
involves tracheal resection of short-­segment stenosis, slide tracheoplasty for long-­segment stenosis, or tracheal rings. Total autologous
tracheal replacement is another option. Congenital soft tissue stenosis and thin webs are rare. Dilation may be all that is required.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

434.10 Foregut Cysts
Michael Gorelik and James W. Schroeder Jr.
The embryologic foregut gives rise to the pharynx, lower respiratory tract, esophagus, stomach, duodenum, and hepatobiliary tract.
Foregut duplication cysts arise if heterotopic rests of foregut-­derived
epithelium persist anywhere along this tract. Foregut duplications
account for approximately one third of all duplications. The bronchogenic cyst, intramural esophageal cyst (esophageal duplication),
and enteric cyst can all produce symptoms of respiratory obstruction and dysphagia. The diagnosis is suspected when chest radiographs or CT scan delineates the mass and, in the case of enteric
cyst, the associated vertebral anomaly. The treatment of all foregut
cysts is surgical excision.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

434.11 Tracheomalacia and Bronchomalacia
See Chapter 437.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2578 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Esophagus

Trachea
Trachea

Left subclavian
artery

Right subclavian
artery
Right common
carotid artery

Left aberrant
subclavian artery

Esophagus

Left common
carotid artery

Double aortic arch

Right subclavian
artery

Left common
carotid artery

Right common
carotid artery

Left ligamentum
arteriosum

Double aortic arch

Pulmonary trunk
Pulmonary trunk

Aorta

Aorta

A

B

Esophagus
Left subclavian artery

Esophagus

Left common
carotid artery

Right aberrant
innominate artery
Trachea

Trachea
Left pulmonary artery sling

Aortic arch

Aorta

Pulmonary
trunk

D

C

Fig. 434.6 Vascular rings. A, Double aortic arch. B, Right aortic arch with aberrant left subclavian artery and left ligamentum arteriosum. C, Aber-

rant innominate artery. D, Left pulmonary artery sling. (From Green GF, Ohye RG. Diagnosis and management of tracheal anomalies and tracheal
stenosis. In: Lesperance MM, ed. Cummings Pediatric Otolaryngology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Fig. 30.6, p. 445.)

35

Chapter 435

Michael Gorelik and James W. Schroeder Jr.

Number of fatalities

Foreign Bodies in the
Airway

30
25
20
15
10
5

Choking is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality among children,
especially those younger than 4 years of age. From 2001 to 2009, an
average of 12,435 children ages 0-­14 years in the United States were
treated in emergency departments for choking on food without fatality. The majority of children found to have foreign body aspiration are
older infants and toddlers (Fig. 435.1), with males being 1.7 times more
likely than females to aspirate a foreign body. Roughly 80% of airway
foreign body aspirations occur in children younger than 3 years old,
with a peak in incidence between ages 1 and 2. Food items ranging
from nuts, seeds, popcorn, and food particles to hardware and pieces of
toys account for 59.5–81% of all cases. Nonfood and inorganic objects
such as coins, paper clips, pen caps, or small toys are more commonly

0

<1 1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12 13 14

Age (year)

Fig. 435.1 Number of fatalities versus victim age, all fatality types.

(From Milkovich SM, Altkorn R, Chen X, et al. Development of the small
parts cylinder: lessons learned. Laryngoscope. 2008;118[11]:2082–
2086.)

aspirated by older children. Globular, compressible, or round objects
such as hot dogs, grapes, nuts, balloons, marshmallows, meats, and
candies are particularly hazardous because of their ability to completely occlude the airway.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 435 u Foreign Bodies in the Airway 2579
Younger children are at a higher risk for foreign body aspiration
largely secondary to their developmental vulnerabilities and immature swallow function. Infants and toddlers often use their mouths
to explore their surroundings, and children are more likely to be distracted, playing, or ambulatory while eating. Infants have the ability
to suck and swallow and are equipped with basic involuntary reflexes
(gag, cough, and glottis closure) that help to protect against aspiration
during swallowing. Dentition develops at approximately 6 months of
age with the eruption of the incisors, whereas molars do not erupt
until approximately 1.5 years of age. Mature mastication takes longer
to develop.
Despite these various protective mechanisms, a child’s airway is
more vulnerable to obstruction than an adult’s airway. Young children are more likely to experience significant obstruction by small
foreign bodies because of the smaller diameter of the pediatric
airway. Mucus and secretions may form a seal around the foreign
body, making it more difficult to dislodge by forced exhalation. In
addition, the force of air generated by an infant’s or young child’s
cough is less effective in dislodging an airway obstruction. For these
reasons, it is recommended that children younger than 5 years of
age avoid foods like hard candy or chewing gum and that raw fruits
and vegetables be cut into small pieces. Additionally, children with
developmental delays or neurologic and muscular disorders are at
higher risk for foreign body aspiration.

new-­onset wheezing and asymmetric breath sounds are highly suggestive of a foreign body in the airway, and bronchoscopy should
be carried out promptly. A comprehensive physical exam is also
essential, including examination of the nose, oral cavity, pharynx,
neck, and lungs. Several reliable physical exam findings for airway
foreign bodies include cough, decreased lung sounds, and wheezing. In addition to history and physical examination, radiology
studies have an important role in diagnosing foreign bodies in the
airway. Plain films are typically recommended first, although many
foreign bodies are radiolucent (80–96%), and therefore providers
often must rely on secondary findings (such as air trapping, asymmetric hyperinflation, obstructive emphysema, atelectasis, mediastinal shift, and consolidation) to indicate suspicion of a foreign
body. Expiratory or lateral decubitus films can assist in revealing
these suggestive secondary findings. The indication for computed
tomography of the chest is currently being explored because of
its high sensitivity and specificity, its ability to detect radiolucent
objects, and its potential to eliminate the need for anesthesia and
a procedure. However, with the known risks of radiation and the
time-­sensitive need for intervention, advanced imaging is rarely
obtained. However, even in the absence of radiologic evidence on
plain films, when the history and physical examination are suggestive of aspiration, bronchoscopy should be pursued.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The treatment of choice for airway foreign bodies is prompt endoscopic removal with rigid instruments by a specialist (otolaryngologist or pulmonologist). Bronchoscopy is deferred only until providers
have obtained preoperative studies and the patient has been prepared
by adequate hydration and emptying of the stomach, though this can
depend on the acuity of the clinical scenario. Airway foreign bodies
are usually removed the same day the diagnosis is first considered.
As with any treatment modality, providers must give careful consideration to the risks and benefits of the bronchoscopy procedure
when the diagnosis is unclear. Potential complications of rigid bronchoscopy include bronchospasm, desaturation, bleeding, and airway
edema; need for intubation; repeat procedures; and the inherent risks
of anesthesia. Many surgeons maintain a lower threshold for intervention with the appropriate clinical history given the high risk of
complications for a missed foreign body. Beyond the understanding of diagnosis and management of airway foreign bodies, there
is a strong need and push for awareness, education, and prevention
among caregivers, healthcare providers, and manufacturers of food
and toys.

Foreign bodies of the airway have variable presentations and complications, depending on the characteristics, duration, and location of the
foreign body. The clinical manifestations range from an asymptomatic
state to severe respiratory distress. A high index of suspicion is often
required, as delayed presentation is common, with more than 50%
of cases presenting after 24 hours of the suspected aspiration event.
The most serious complication of foreign body aspiration is complete
obstruction of the airway, which may be recognized in the conscious
child as sudden respiratory distress followed by an inability to speak
or cough.
There are typically three stages of symptoms that result from aspiration of an object into the airway:
1.	Initial event: Paroxysms of coughing, choking, gagging, and possible airway obstruction occur immediately after aspiration of the
foreign body. This may be accompanied by tachypnea and stridor.
The child is sometimes able to expel the foreign body during this
stage.
2.	Asymptomatic interval: The foreign body becomes lodged, reflexes
fatigue, and the immediate irritating symptoms subside. The lack
of symptoms can be particularly misleading to the provider when a
child presents in this stage and accounts for a large percentage of delayed diagnoses and overlooked foreign bodies. Some patients with
delayed presentation may eventually develop dyspnea, wheezing, or
chronic cough.
3.	Complications: Obstruction, erosion, or infection develops,
which again directs attention to the presence of a foreign body. In
this third stage, complications include fever, cough, hemoptysis,
pneumonia, and atelectasis. Acute or chronic complications have
been reported in almost 15% of cases of foreign bodies of the
airway.

DIAGNOSIS

The clinical history is the most important factor in determining the
need for operative bronchoscopy. A positive history must never be
ignored, but a negative history can be misleading. Because nuts and
seeds are the most common bronchial foreign bodies, the physician
should specifically question the child’s parents about these items,
though it is important to keep in mind that aspiration events can
be unwitnessed. Choking or coughing episodes accompanied by

TREATMENT

435.1 Laryngeal Foreign Bodies
Michael Gorelik and James W. Schroeder Jr.
Although laryngeal foreign bodies are less common (2–12% of
cases) than bronchial or tracheal foreign bodies, they are particularly dangerous because of the risk of complete laryngeal obstruction, which can lead to asphyxiation unless it is promptly relieved
with the Heimlich maneuver (see Chapter 79 and Figs. 79.6 and
79.7). As with airway foreign bodies in other locations, the presenting symptoms of laryngeal foreign bodies are determined by the
size, shape, nature, and degree of obstruction. Objects that conform to the larynx can lead to complete obstruction, whereas with
smaller objects the presentation can range from dysphonia, aphonia, stridor, cough, dyspnea, cyanosis, hemoptysis, and crouplike
symptoms.
Clinical history is critical to establish an early diagnosis, and prompt
intervention is critical.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2580 Part XVII u The Respiratory System

435.2 Tracheal Foreign Bodies
Michael Gorelik and James W. Schroeder Jr.
Tracheal foreign bodies account for 3–12% of airway foreign body cases.
Children who have tracheal foreign bodies can present with dysphonia,
dysphagia, dry cough, or biphasic stridor. Posteroanterior and lateral soft
tissue neck radiographs (airway films) are abnormal in 92% of children,
whereas chest radiographs are abnormal in only 58% of these cases.

435.3 Bronchial Foreign Bodies
Michael Gorelik and James W. Schroeder Jr.
The majority of airway foreign bodies lodge in a bronchus (80–90% of
cases) with a propensity to the right side. Occasionally, fragments of a
foreign body may produce bilateral involvement or shifting infiltrates if

they move from lobe to lobe. Some children with bronchial foreign bodies present asymptomatically, whereas others have asymmetric breath
sounds, cough, and wheezing. Posteroanterior and lateral chest radiographs (including the abdomen) are standard in the diagnostic evaluation
of infants and children suspected of having aspirated a foreign object. An
expiratory posteroanterior chest film is most helpful. During expiration,
the bronchial foreign body obstructs the exit of air from the obstructed
lung, producing obstructive emphysema and air trapping. The persistent
inflation of the obstructed lung causes a shift of the mediastinum toward
the opposite side (Fig. 435.2). Air trapping is an immediate complication, whereas atelectasis is a late finding. Lateral decubitus chest films or
fluoroscopy can provide the same information as expiratory films but are
often unnecessary. Low-dose CT is considered by some a standard imaging study if previous conventional imaging is nondiagnostic. Clinical
history and physical examination, not radiographs, ultimately determine
the indication for bronchoscopy.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Fig. 435.2 A, Normal inspiratory

chest radiograph in a toddler with a
peanut fragment in the left main bronchus. B, Expiratory radiograph of the
same child showing the classic obstructive emphysema (air trapping) on
the involved (left) side. Air leaves the
normal right side, allowing the lung to
deflate. The medium shifts toward the
unobstructed side.

A

Chapter 436

Laryngotracheal Stenosis
and Subglottic Stenosis
Taher S. Valika and James W. Schroeder Jr.
Laryngotracheal stenosis is the second most common cause of stridor in neonates and is the most common cause of airway obstruction
requiring tracheostomy in infants. The glottis (vocal cords) and the

B

upper trachea are compromised in most cases of laryngeal stenosis,
particularly those that develop after endotracheal intubation. Subglottic stenosis is a narrowing of the subglottic larynx, which is the
space extending from the undersurface of the true vocal cords to the
inferior margin of the cricoid cartilage. Subglottic stenosis is considered congenital when there is no other apparent cause such as a history of laryngeal trauma or intubation. Approximately 90% of cases
manifest in the first year of life. Management relies on optimizing the
airway, while ensuring the patient continues to grow. Knowledge of
preventive measures is imperative to all healthcare members.

436.1 Congenital Subglottic Stenosis
See Chapter 434.2.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 437 u Bronchomalacia and Tracheomalacia

436.2 Acquired Laryngotracheal Stenosis
Taher S. Valika and James W. Schroeder Jr.
Ninety percent of acquired stenoses are a result of endotracheal intubation. The narrowest portion of the pediatric larynx is the subglottic
region because of the narrow cricoid cartilage. When the pressure of
the endotracheal tube against the cricoid mucosa is greater than the
capillary pressure, ischemia occurs, followed by necrosis and ulceration. Secondary infection and perichondritis develop with exposure
of cartilage (Fig. 436.1). Granulation tissue forms around the ulcerations. These changes and edema throughout the larynx usually resolve
spontaneously after extubation. Chronic edema and fibrous stenosis
develop in only a small percentage of cases.
A number of factors predispose to the development of laryngeal stenosis. Laryngopharyngeal reflux of acid and pepsin from the stomach is
known to exacerbate endotracheal tube trauma. More damage is caused
in areas left unprotected, owing to loss of mucosa. Congenital subglottic stenosis narrows the larynx, which makes the patient more likely to
develop acquired subglottic stenosis because significant injury is more
likely to occur with use of an endotracheal tube of age-­appropriate
size. Other risk factors for the development of acquired subglottic stenosis
include sepsis, malnutrition, chronic inflammatory disorders, and immunosuppression. An oversized endotracheal tube is the most common
factor contributing to laryngeal injury. A tube that allows a small air
leak at the end of the inspiratory cycle minimizes potential trauma.
Other extrinsic factors—traumatic intubation, multiple reintubations,
movement of the endotracheal tube, and duration of intubation—can
contribute to varying degrees in individual patients.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Symptoms of acquired and congenital stenosis are similar. Spasmodic
croup, the sudden onset of severe croup in the early morning hours,
is usually caused by laryngopharyngeal reflux with transient laryngospasm and subsequent laryngeal edema. These frightening episodes
resolve rapidly, often before the family and child reach the emergency
department. Other presentations can also involve neonates who fail
extubation, despite multiple attempts, and children with permanent
dyspnea, stridor, or dysphonia.

2581

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis can be made by posteroanterior and lateral airway radiographs. The gold standard to confirm the diagnosis is via direct laryngoscopy and bronchoscopy in the operating room. High-­resolution CT
imaging and ultrasonography are of limited value. This is similar to the
workup associated with congenital subglottic stenosis.

TREATMENT

The severity, location, and type (cartilaginous or soft tissue) of the
stenosis determine the treatment. Mild cases can be managed without operative intervention because the airway will improve as the child
grows. Moderate soft tissue stenosis is treated by endoscopy using
gentle dilations or CO2 laser. Severe laryngotracheal stenosis is likely
to require laryngotracheal reconstructive (expansion) surgery or resection of the narrowed portion of the laryngeal and tracheal airway (cricotracheal resection). Every effort is made to avoid tracheotomy using
endoscopic techniques or open surgical procedures.
Fundamental knowledge of the airway can help reduce the incidence of stenoses. The use of age-­appropriate tubes and cuffless tubes,
treatment of gastroesophageal reflux, and reducing the duration of
mechanical ventilation have led to an overall decrease in laryngotracheal stenoses in the past decade.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 437

Bronchomalacia and
Tracheomalacia
Jonathan D. Finder
Tracheomalacia and bronchomalacia refer to chondromalacia of a central airway, leading to insufficient cartilage to maintain airway patency
throughout the respiratory cycle. These are common causes of persistent
wheezing in infancy. Tracheomalacia and bronchomalacia can be either
primary or secondary (Table 437.1). Primary tracheomalacia and bronchomalacia are often seen in premature infants, although most affected
patients are born at term. Secondary tracheomalacia and bronchomalacia refer to the situation in which the central airway is compressed by
an adjacent structure (e.g., vascular ring; see Fig. 434.6) or is deficient in
cartilage because of tracheoesophageal fistula (see Chapter 365). Bronchomalacia is common after lung transplantation, assumed to be secondary to the loss of bronchial artery supply leading to ischemia of the
bronchial cartilage. This form of bronchomalacia may take months to
Table 437.1  Classification of Tracheomalacia
PRIMARY TRACHEOMALACIA
Congenital absence of tracheal-­supporting cartilages

Fig. 436.1 Bronchoscopy in a 2-­mo-­old infant showing mucosal erosion and cartilage exposure in the subglottic region. The child was intubated with an age-­appropriate tube but with an excess of air in the cuff.
(Courtesy Dr. Taher S. Valika, Division of Pediatric Otolaryngology, Ann
& Robert H. Lurie Children’s Hospital of Chicago.)

SECONDARY TRACHEOMALACIA
Esophageal atresia, tracheoesophageal fistula
Vascular rings (double aortic arch)
Tracheal compression from an aberrant innominate artery
Tracheal compression from mediastinal masses
Abnormally soft tracheal cartilages associated with connective tissue
disorders
Prolonged mechanical ventilation, chronic lung disease
From McNamara VM, Crabbe DC. Tracheomalacia. Paediatr Respir Rev. 2004;5:147–154.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 437 u Bronchomalacia and Tracheomalacia

436.2 Acquired Laryngotracheal Stenosis
Taher S. Valika and James W. Schroeder Jr.
Ninety percent of acquired stenoses are a result of endotracheal intubation. The narrowest portion of the pediatric larynx is the subglottic
region because of the narrow cricoid cartilage. When the pressure of
the endotracheal tube against the cricoid mucosa is greater than the
capillary pressure, ischemia occurs, followed by necrosis and ulceration. Secondary infection and perichondritis develop with exposure
of cartilage (Fig. 436.1). Granulation tissue forms around the ulcerations. These changes and edema throughout the larynx usually resolve
spontaneously after extubation. Chronic edema and fibrous stenosis
develop in only a small percentage of cases.
A number of factors predispose to the development of laryngeal stenosis. Laryngopharyngeal reflux of acid and pepsin from the stomach is
known to exacerbate endotracheal tube trauma. More damage is caused
in areas left unprotected, owing to loss of mucosa. Congenital subglottic stenosis narrows the larynx, which makes the patient more likely to
develop acquired subglottic stenosis because significant injury is more
likely to occur with use of an endotracheal tube of age-­appropriate
size. Other risk factors for the development of acquired subglottic stenosis
include sepsis, malnutrition, chronic inflammatory disorders, and immunosuppression. An oversized endotracheal tube is the most common
factor contributing to laryngeal injury. A tube that allows a small air
leak at the end of the inspiratory cycle minimizes potential trauma.
Other extrinsic factors—traumatic intubation, multiple reintubations,
movement of the endotracheal tube, and duration of intubation—can
contribute to varying degrees in individual patients.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Symptoms of acquired and congenital stenosis are similar. Spasmodic
croup, the sudden onset of severe croup in the early morning hours,
is usually caused by laryngopharyngeal reflux with transient laryngospasm and subsequent laryngeal edema. These frightening episodes
resolve rapidly, often before the family and child reach the emergency
department. Other presentations can also involve neonates who fail
extubation, despite multiple attempts, and children with permanent
dyspnea, stridor, or dysphonia.

2581

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis can be made by posteroanterior and lateral airway radiographs. The gold standard to confirm the diagnosis is via direct laryngoscopy and bronchoscopy in the operating room. High-­resolution CT
imaging and ultrasonography are of limited value. This is similar to the
workup associated with congenital subglottic stenosis.

TREATMENT

The severity, location, and type (cartilaginous or soft tissue) of the
stenosis determine the treatment. Mild cases can be managed without operative intervention because the airway will improve as the child
grows. Moderate soft tissue stenosis is treated by endoscopy using
gentle dilations or CO2 laser. Severe laryngotracheal stenosis is likely
to require laryngotracheal reconstructive (expansion) surgery or resection of the narrowed portion of the laryngeal and tracheal airway (cricotracheal resection). Every effort is made to avoid tracheotomy using
endoscopic techniques or open surgical procedures.
Fundamental knowledge of the airway can help reduce the incidence of stenoses. The use of age-­appropriate tubes and cuffless tubes,
treatment of gastroesophageal reflux, and reducing the duration of
mechanical ventilation have led to an overall decrease in laryngotracheal stenoses in the past decade.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 437

Bronchomalacia and
Tracheomalacia
Jonathan D. Finder
Tracheomalacia and bronchomalacia refer to chondromalacia of a central airway, leading to insufficient cartilage to maintain airway patency
throughout the respiratory cycle. These are common causes of persistent
wheezing in infancy. Tracheomalacia and bronchomalacia can be either
primary or secondary (Table 437.1). Primary tracheomalacia and bronchomalacia are often seen in premature infants, although most affected
patients are born at term. Secondary tracheomalacia and bronchomalacia refer to the situation in which the central airway is compressed by
an adjacent structure (e.g., vascular ring; see Fig. 434.6) or is deficient in
cartilage because of tracheoesophageal fistula (see Chapter 365). Bronchomalacia is common after lung transplantation, assumed to be secondary to the loss of bronchial artery supply leading to ischemia of the
bronchial cartilage. This form of bronchomalacia may take months to
Table 437.1  Classification of Tracheomalacia
PRIMARY TRACHEOMALACIA
Congenital absence of tracheal-­supporting cartilages

Fig. 436.1 Bronchoscopy in a 2-­mo-­old infant showing mucosal erosion and cartilage exposure in the subglottic region. The child was intubated with an age-­appropriate tube but with an excess of air in the cuff.
(Courtesy Dr. Taher S. Valika, Division of Pediatric Otolaryngology, Ann
& Robert H. Lurie Children’s Hospital of Chicago.)

SECONDARY TRACHEOMALACIA
Esophageal atresia, tracheoesophageal fistula
Vascular rings (double aortic arch)
Tracheal compression from an aberrant innominate artery
Tracheal compression from mediastinal masses
Abnormally soft tracheal cartilages associated with connective tissue
disorders
Prolonged mechanical ventilation, chronic lung disease
From McNamara VM, Crabbe DC. Tracheomalacia. Paediatr Respir Rev. 2004;5:147–154.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2582 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
present after transplantation. Laryngomalacia can accompany primary
bronchomalacia or tracheomalacia. Involvement of the entire central airway (laryngotracheobronchomalacia) is also seen.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Primary tracheomalacia and bronchomalacia are principally disorders
of infants, with a male:female ratio of 2:1. The dominant finding—low-­
pitched, monophonic wheezing heard predominantly during expiration—is most prominent over the central airways. Parents often describe
persistent respiratory congestion even in the absence of a viral respiratory
infection. When the lesion involves only one main bronchus (more commonly the left), the wheezing is louder on that side and there may be unilateral palpable fremitus. In cases of tracheomalacia, the wheeze is loudest
over the trachea. Hyperinflation and/or subcostal retractions do not occur
unless the patient has concurrent dysphagia with chronic aspiration, viral
bronchiolitis, asthma, or other causes of peripheral airway obstruction. In
the absence of asthma, patients with tracheomalacia and bronchomalacia
are not helped by administration of a bronchodilator. Acquired tracheomalacia and bronchomalacia are seen in association with vascular compression (vascular rings, slings, and innominate artery compression) or in
association with the loss of bronchial artery supply in lung transplantation.
Persistent tracheomalacia is the rule after correction of tracheoesophageal fistula. Other causes of acquired tracheomalacia and bronchomalacia
(especially left-sided) include cardiomegaly. The importance of the physical exam cannot be understated; one study found that pediatric pulmonologists made a correct assessment of malacia based on symptoms, history,
and lung function before bronchoscopy in ∼70% of cases. The cough in
tracheomalacia and bronchomalacia can lead to collapse of the airway,
which can lead to difficulty in airway clearance. The cough in tracheomalacia and bronchomalacia often has a barking, croupy quality. This can
be managed in older patients with handheld positive expiratory pressure
devices. Persistent cough in older children with tracheomalacia can cause
irritation of the airway mucosa from the physical trauma and induce some
degree of habitual cough.

DIAGNOSIS

Definitive diagnoses of tracheomalacia and bronchomalacia are
established by flexible or rigid bronchoscopy (Fig. 437.1). The lesion
is difficult to detect on plain radiographs. Although fluoroscopy can

A

B

demonstrate dynamic collapse and avoid the need for invasive diagnostic techniques, it is poorly sensitive. Pulmonary function testing
can show a pattern of decreased peak flow and flattening of the flow-­
volume loop. Other important diagnostic modalities include MRI and
CT scanning. Dynamic airway assessment using three-dimensional CT
reconstruction at end-inspiration and end-expiration can be diagnostic and avoid the need for invasive evaluation. MRI with angiography is
especially useful when there is a possibility of vascular ring and should
be performed when a right aortic arch is seen on plain film radiography.

TREATMENT

Postural drainage can help with clearance of secretions. β-­Adrenergic
agents should be avoided in the absence of asthma because they can
exacerbate loss of airway patency due to decreased airway tone. Nebulized ipratropium bromide may be useful. Endobronchial stents have
been used in severely affected patients but have a high incidence of
complications, ranging from airway obstruction caused by granulation
tissue to erosion into adjacent vascular structures. Continuous positive
airway pressure via tracheostomy may be indicated for severe cases.
A surgical approach (aortopexy and bronchopexy) is rarely required
and only for patients who have life-­threatening apnea, cyanosis, and
bradycardia (cyanotic spells) from airway obstruction and/or who
demonstrated vascular compression. Reports of creation and use of
three-­dimensional (3D) printed, bioresorbable external tracheobronchial stents in pediatric patients with life-­threatening tracheobronchomalacia have shown great promise.

PROGNOSIS

Primary bronchomalacia and tracheomalacia have excellent prognoses
because airflow improves as the child and the airways grow. Patients with
primary airway malacia usually take longer to recover from common
respiratory infections. Wheezing at rest usually resolves by age 3 years.
Prolonged bacterial bronchitis has been reported as a complication of
bronchomalacia. The prognosis in secondary and acquired forms varies
with cause. Patients with concurrent asthma need considerable supportive treatment and careful monitoring of respiratory status.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

C

D

Fig. 437.1 Four examples of tracheomalacia appearances. A, Comma-­shaped trachea caused by innominate artery compression requiring aor-

topexy. B, Bunched-­up trachealis muscle and compressed trachea caused by a double aortic arch. C, Flattened trachea and increased trachealis
diameter with a tracheoesophageal fistula in the posterior wall. D, Ovoid-­shaped trachea from external compression by the innominate artery. (From
Deacon JWF, Widger J, Soma MA. Paediatric tracheomalacia—a review of clinical features and comparison of diagnostic imaging techniques. Int J
Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2017;98:75–81.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 438 u Neoplasms of the Larynx, Trachea, and Bronchi

2583

Chapter 438

Neoplasms of the Larynx,
Trachea, and Bronchi
Saied Ghadersohi, Lauren D. Holinger, and
James W. Schroeder Jr.
438.1 Vocal Nodules
Saied Ghadersohi and James W. Schroeder Jr.
Vocal nodules, which are not true neoplasms, are the most common
cause of chronic hoarseness in children. Chronic vocal abuse or misuse
(i.e., frequent yelling and screaming) produces localized vascular congestion, edema, hyalinization, and epithelial thickening in the bilateral
vocal cords. This grossly appears as nodules that disrupt the normal
vibration of the cords during phonation. Vocal abuse is the main factor,
and the voice is worse in the evenings. The differential diagnosis can
include unilateral lesions such as vocal cord cysts and polyps; however,
these usually have an acute inciting event and are rarer in children.
Diagnosis is typically via laryngoscopy and stroboscopy to assess the
characteristics of the bilateral nodules. Occasionally biopsy is needed
in atypical-­behaving/-­appearing lesions. Treatment is primarily nonsurgical, with voice therapy used in children >4 years of age who can
participate in therapy and clinical monitoring with behavioral therapy
in younger children or those with developmental delay. In addition,
laryngopharyngeal reflux commonly exacerbates vocal abuse–induced
irritation of the cord; therefore antireflux therapy can also be implemented (see Chapter 369). Surgical excision of vocal cord nodules in
children is controversial and is rarely indicated but may be necessary
if the child is unable to communicate adequately, becomes aphonic, or
requires tension and straining to make an utterance.

438.2 Recurrent Respiratory Papillomatosis
Saied Ghadersohi and James W. Schroeder Jr.
Papillomas are the most common respiratory tract neoplasms in children, occurring in 4.3 in 100,000. They are simply warts—benign
tumors—caused by the human papillomavirus (HPV), most commonly types 6 and 11 (see Chapter 313). Seventy-­five percent of recurrent respiratory papilloma (RRP) cases occur in children younger
than age 5 years, but the diagnosis may be made at any age. In general, neonatal-­onset disease is a poor prognostic factor with higher
mortality and need for tracheostomy. Sixty-­seven percent of children
with RRP are born to mothers who had condylomas during pregnancy
or parturition. The mode of HPV transmission is still not clear but is
thought to be through exposure to HPV when traversing the birth
canal of an infected mother. Other identified risk factors include first
born, >10 hours of labor, and a young mother. However, HPV exposure
is fairly common and RRP remains rare; additionally, in mothers with
vaginal condylomata, only 1 in 231-­400 vaginal births go on to develop
respiratory papillomatosis. Therefore other risk factors contribute to
transmission, and cesarean-­section delivery for prevention cannot be
recommended. However, preventive measures can include the prospective widespread use of the quadrivalent HPV vaccine to help eliminate maternal and paternal HPV reservoirs and possibly decrease cases
of RRP caused by HPV-­6 and -­11.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The clinical course involves remissions and exacerbations of recurrent
papilloma, most commonly on the larynx (usually the vocal cords),

Fig. 438.1 Laryngoscopic view of respiratory papillomas causing
near-­complete obstruction at glottic level. (From Derkay CS, Wiatrak
B. Recurrent respiratory papillomatosis: a review. Laryngoscope.
2008;118:1236–1245.)

causing progressively worsening hoarseness, sleep-­disordered breathing, exertional dyspnea, stridor, and, if left untreated, eventually severe
airway obstruction (Fig. 438.1). Although it is a benign disease, lesions
can spread throughout the aerodigestive tract in 31% of patients, most
commonly the oral cavity, trachea, and bronchi. Rarely these lesions
can undergo malignant conversion (1.6%); however, some patients
may have spontaneous remission. Patients may be initially diagnosed
with asthma, croup, vocal nodules, or allergies.

DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT

Diagnosis of RRP is via laryngoscopy and bronchoscopy. Biopsy
should be obtained at the initial surgical intervention and regular
intervals to rule out malignancy and to subtype the HPV, as it can
affect prognosis. Treatment of RRP is endoscopic surgical removal
with three goals. First, debulking/complete removal of the lesions;
second, preservation of normal structures; and finally, prevention of
scar formation in the affected areas. Most surgeons in North America
prefer the microdebrider, although microsurgery, CO2, and KTP laser
techniques have been described. Despite these techniques, some form
of adjunct therapy may be needed in up to 20% of cases. The most
widely accepted indications for adjunct therapy are a need for more
than four surgical procedures per year, rapid regrowth of papillomata
with airway compromise, or distal multisite spread of disease. Adjunct
therapies can be inhaled or administered intralesionally or systemically and include antiviral modalities (interferon, ribavirin, acyclovir, cidofovir), antiangiogenic agents such as bevacizumab (Avastin),
photodynamic therapy, dietary supplement (indole-­3-­carbinol), nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (COX-­2 inhibitors, Celebrex), retinoids, and mumps vaccination.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

438.3 Congenital Subglottic Hemangioma
Saied Ghadersohi and James W. Schroeder Jr.
See also Chapter 434.5.
Typically, congenital subglottic hemangiomas are symptomatic
within the first 2 months of life, with almost all occurring before 6
months of age. Much like the cutaneous infantile hemangiomas, these
lesions have two phases: a proliferative phase with rapid growth in
the first 6 months of life and then they stabilize by 1 year and a slow
involution phase typically by age 3. Patients present with usually inspiratory but sometimes biphasic stridor. The infant can have a barking
cough and temporarily respond to steroids, similar to persistent croup.
Fifty percent of congenital subglottic hemangiomas are associated

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2584 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
with facial lesions, but the converse is not true. Radiographs classically
delineate an asymmetric subglottic narrowing. The diagnosis is made
by direct laryngoscopy.

DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT

The diagnosis of subglottic hemangioma is based on history and laryngoscopic exam. MRI imaging with contrast can also be obtained to confirm the diagnosis of a vascular lesion. If the lesion does not respond
to medical therapy, then biopsy (with GLUT1 staining; positive suggests
hemangioma) may be indicated to rule out other vascular tumors. Subglottic hemangiomas are treated similarly to cutaneous hemangiomas
(see Chapter 691). Propranolol is the first-­line treatment of cutaneous
and subglottic infantile hemangiomas. Typically, treatment is with 1-­3
mg/kg/day of propranolol for 4-­12 months (see Chapter 691). Prescreening patients with cardiology workup (i.e., electrocardiogram) is advised.
Side effects include hypotension, bradycardia, bronchospasm, and hypoglycemia, which can be avoided by giving the medication with a feed.
There remains a role for systemic steroids, racemic epinephrine, and
helium/oxygen treatment in the acute management of the airway and
in lesions that are slow or nonresponsive to propranolol treatment (i.e.,
large hemangiomas with critical airway narrowing).
Surgical management is offered in severe cases or those not responsive to medical therapy. Interventions can range from intralesional steroid injection to avoid systemic steroid side effects, CO2, or KTP laser
endoscopic excision or open surgical excision, and ultimately as a last
resort tracheostomy can establish a safe airway, allowing time for the
lesion to involute per its natural course.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

infiltrative nature of these fibromas. Rhabdomyosarcoma (see Chapter
549) and other malignant tumors of the larynx are rare. Symptoms of
hoarseness and progressive airway obstruction prompt initial evaluation by flexible laryngoscopy in the office.

438.6 Tracheal Neoplasms
Saied Ghadersohi, James W. Schroeder Jr., and
Lauren D. Holinger
Tracheal tumors are extremely rare and include malignant and benign
neoplasms; they may initially be misdiagnosed as asthma. The two
most common benign tumors are inflammatory pseudotumor and
hamartoma. The inflammatory pseudotumor is probably a reaction to
a previous bronchial infection or traumatic insult. Growth is slow, and
the tumor may be locally invasive. Hamartomas are tumors of primary
tissue elements that are abnormal in proportion and arrangement.
Tracheal neoplasms manifest with stridor, wheezing, cough, or
pneumonia and are rarely diagnosed until 75% of the lumen has been
obstructed (Fig. 438.2). Chest radiographs or airway films can identify
the obstruction. Pulmonary function studies demonstrate an abnormal
flow-­volume loop. A mild response to bronchodilator therapy may be
misleading. Treatment is based on the histopathology.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

438.7 Bronchial Tumors
Saied Ghadersohi and James W. Schroeder Jr.

438.4 Vascular Malformations
Saied Ghadersohi and James W. Schroeder Jr.
Based on the International Society for the Study of Vascular Anomalies
classification system, these lesions can be classified into vascular malformations and vascular tumors. The most common vascular tumors
are infantile/subglottic hemangiomas. Vascular malformations are not
true neoplastic lesions. They have a normal rate of endothelial turnover
and various channel abnormalities. They are subcategorized based on
high or low flow and by their predominant type (capillary, venous, arterial, lymphatic, or a combination thereof). Overall, vascular malformations are uncommon, and they rarely occur in the larynx and airway.
When they do occur, they are often an extension from elsewhere in the
head and neck. It should be noted that these lesions can expand with
a viral upper respiratory infection or hemorrhage into the lesion. They
can be diagnosed with direct visualization during laryngoscopy or
bronchoscopy or seen on CT/MRI imaging. Treatment usually entails
a tailored multidisciplinary team approach with early surgery, laser
resection, or sclerotherapy.

Bronchial tumors are rare. In one series, carcinoid tumors were the
most common, followed by mucoepidermoid and inflammatory
pseudotumors. These patients can present with persistent pneumonia
despite adequate treatment. The diagnosis is confirmed at bronchoscopy and biopsy; treatment depends on the histopathology.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

438.5 Other Laryngeal Neoplasms
James W. Schroeder Jr. and Lauren D. Holinger
Neurofibromatosis (see Chapter 636.1) rarely involves the larynx.
When children are affected, limited local resection is undertaken to
maintain an airway and optimize the voice. Complete surgical extirpation is virtually impossible without debilitating resection of vital
laryngeal structures. Most surgeons select the option of less aggressive symptomatic surgery because of the poorly circumscribed and

Fig. 438.2 CT scan of the trachea with a circumscribed intraluminal

tracheal mass (arrow) in the tracheal wall. (From Venizelos I, Papathomas T, Anagnostou E, et al. Pediatric inflammatory myofibroblastic
tumor of the trachea: a case report and review of the literature. Pediatr
Pulmonol. 2008;43:831–835.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 439 u Wheezing, Bronchiolitis, and Bronchitis

Chapter 439

Wheezing, Bronchiolitis,
and Bronchitis
439.1 Wheezing in Infants: Bronchiolitis
Samantha A. House and Shawn L. Ralston
Wheezing, the production of a musical continuous sound that originates in narrowed airways, is heard on expiration as a result of airway
obstruction. Infants are more likely to wheeze than are older children as
a result of differing lung mechanics. Obstruction of airflow is affected by
both airway size and compliance of the infant lung. Resistance to airflow
through a tube is inversely related to the radius of the tube to the fourth
power. In children younger than 5 years, small-­caliber peripheral airways can contribute up to 50% of the total airway resistance. Marginal
additional narrowing, such as that caused by inflammation related to
viral infection, is then more likely to result in wheezing.
Infant chest wall compliance is also quite high; thus the inward pressure produced in normal expiration subjects the intrathoracic airways
to collapse. Differences in tracheal cartilage and airway smooth muscle
tone increase the collapsibility of the infant airways in comparison with
older children. These mechanisms combine to make the infant more
susceptible to airway obstruction, increased resistance, and subsequent
wheezing. The mechanical portion of the infant propensity to wheeze
resolves with normal growth and muscular development.
Although wheezing in infants most frequently results from inflammation due to acute viral infections, there are many potential causes of
wheezing (Table 439.1).

Acute Bronchiolitis

Acute bronchiolitis is a diagnostic term used to describe the clinical picture produced by multiple different viral lower respiratory tract infections
in infants and very young children. The respiratory findings observed in
bronchiolitis include tachypnea, wheezing, crackles, and rhonchi, which
result from inflammation of the small airways (Fig. 439.1). Despite its commonality, a universal set of diagnostic criteria for bronchiolitis does not
exist, with significant disagreement about the upper age limit for appropriate use of the diagnosis. Some clinicians restrict the term to children
younger than 1 year, and others extend it to the age of 2 years or beyond.
The pathophysiology of acute bronchiolitis is characterized by bronchiolar obstruction with edema, mucus, and cellular debris (see Fig.
439.1). Resistance in the small air passages is increased during both
inspiration and exhalation, but because the radius of an airway is smaller
during expiration, the resultant respiratory obstruction leads to expiratory wheezing, air trapping, and lung hyperinflation. If obstruction
becomes complete, trapped distal air will be resorbed and the child will
develop atelectasis. Hypoxemia may result from ventilation-­perfusion
mismatch. Hypercapnia may develop with severe obstructive disease.
Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is responsible for more than 50%
of cases of bronchiolitis. Other causal agents include human metapneumovirus, rhinovirus, parainfluenza, influenza, coronavirus, bocavirus, and adenovirus, among others. Viral co-­infection can occur; the
impact of co-­infection on severity and clinical manifestations of bronchiolitis remains unclear. Respiratory viruses can be identified in more
than one third of asymptomatic patients younger than the age of 1 year,
calling into question the specificity of nucleic acid amplification tests
for active infection with some viruses. Although bacterial pneumonia
is sometimes confused clinically with bronchiolitis, viral bronchiolitis
is only rarely followed by bacterial superinfection.
Over 100,000 young children are typically hospitalized annually in
the United States with the diagnosis of bronchiolitis, making it the most
common diagnosis resulting in hospitalization for children younger

2585

than 1 year of age in the United States over the past several decades.
Hospitalization rates have been relatively stable in pre–COVID-­19
pandemic years despite introduction and routine use of RSV immunoprophylaxis in selected high-­risk populations. Nonetheless, variants
of COVID-­19 have been associated with a bronchiolitis-­like syndrome. In addition, a robust RSV surge was observed in the latepandemic period. Co-infection with COVID-19 has been observed,
Table 439.1  Differential Diagnosis and Etiologies of
Wheezing in Infancy
INFECTION
Viral
Respiratory syncytial virus
Human metapneumovirus
Parainfluenza
Adenovirus
Influenza
Rhinovirus
Bocavirus
Coronavirus, including COVID-­19 variants
Enterovirus
Other
Chlamydia trachomatis
Tuberculosis
Histoplasmosis
Papillomatosis
ASTHMA
ANATOMIC ABNORMALITIES
Central Airway Abnormalities
Malacia of the larynx, trachea, and/or bronchi
Laryngeal or tracheal web
Tracheoesophageal fistula (specifically H-­type fistula)
Laryngeal cleft (resulting in aspiration)
Extrinsic Airway Anomalies Resulting in Airway Compression
Vascular ring or sling
Mediastinal lymphadenopathy from infection or tumor
Mediastinal mass or tumor
Esophageal foreign body
Intrinsic Airway Anomalies
Airway hemangioma or other tumor
Congenital pulmonary airway malformation (cystic adenomatoid
malformation)
Bronchial or lung cyst
Congenital lobar emphysema
Aberrant tracheal bronchus
Sequestration
Congenital heart disease with left-­to-­right shunt (increased
pulmonary edema)
Foreign body
Immunodeficiency States
Immunoglobulin A deficiency
B-­cell deficiencies
AIDS
Bronchiectasis
MUCOCILIARY CLEARANCE DISORDERS
Cystic fibrosis
Primary ciliary dyskinesia
Bronchiectasis
ASPIRATION SYNDROMES
Gastroesophageal reflux disease
Pharyngeal/swallow dysfunction
OTHER
Bronchopulmonary dysplasia
Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis
Interstitial lung disease, including bronchiolitis obliterans
Heart failure
Anaphylaxis
Inhalation injury—burns

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2586 Part XVII u The Respiratory System

Severity of
bronchiolitis
signs and
symptoms

Minute-to-minute variability
in lower respiratory symptoms
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

22

Day
Signs or symptoms

Pathophysiology

• Gradual resolution of symptoms with continued
variability
• New fever late in course might suggest new
co-infection (eg, otitis media, pneumonia, or
new virus)

• Persistent cough
• Increased work of
breathing:
• Scalene retractions
• Abdominal muscles
• Rales or wheeze, or both
• Impaired feeding

• Rhinorrhoea
• With or
without
fever

Upper and lower
respiratory:

Lower respiratory:

Upper respiratory:
• Virus infects epithelial
cells that are
sloughed to lower
respiratory tract

• Further epithelial infection with oedema,
sloughing of cells into airway, mucus
production, and oedema with associated
obstruction and air trapping
• Ciliary function is impaired
• Polymorphonuclear cells and lymphocytes
proliferate in an inflammatory response

Lower respiratory:
• Normal

• Regeneration
of epithelium

Lower airway
anatomy

Bronchiole lumen

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

22

Day

Fig. 439.1 Typical clinical course and pathophysiology of viral bronchiolitis. (From Florin TA, Plint PC, Zorc JJ. Viral bronchiolitis. Lancet.
2017;389:211–224, Fig. 1.)

but its implications on disease presentation and severity are not well
characterized.
Bronchiolitis is more common in males, those exposed to secondhand tobacco smoke, those who have not been breastfed, and those
living in crowded conditions. The risk is also higher for infants with
mothers who smoked during pregnancy. Older family members,
including older siblings, are a common source of infection; they might
experience only minor upper respiratory symptoms (colds) given
that bronchiolar edema may be less clinically apparent as airway size
increases.
Asthma (see Chapter 185) is another important cause of wheezing, and the possibility of this diagnosis complicates the treatment
of young children with bronchiolitis, although diagnosing asthma
in the very young can be difficult. In prospective, longitudinal population cohort studies of infants, up to half of the cohort experienced a wheezing illness before school age, although when followed
into adulthood only about 5–8% of patients prove to have asthma.
In the largest U.S. cohort, three patterns of infant wheezing were
proposed: transient early wheezing, comprising about 20% of the
cohort, characterized by lower lung function at birth that improves
with growth, resulting in resolution of wheezing by age 3; persistent

wheezing, comprising about 14% of the cohort, characterized by
declining lung function and wheezing before and after age 3; and
late-­onset wheezing, comprising 15% of the cohort, characterized
by relatively stable lung function and wheezing that does not begin
until after age 3. The remaining 50% of the population did not suffer a wheezing illness. Following the cohort into adulthood revealed
continued declines in the rates of persistent symptoms. Similar patterns are also seen in birth cohort studies in other countries.
Multiple studies attempting to predict which infants suffering
from early wheezing illnesses will go on to have asthma in later
life have failed to achieve discriminant validity. Interestingly, in
both U.S. and UK prospective cohorts, wheezing with an onset
after the first 18-­36 months of life is one of the strongest predictors of eventual asthma in both cohorts. Other proposed risk factors for persistent wheezing include parental history of asthma and
allergies, maternal smoking, persistent rhinitis (apart from acute
upper respiratory tract infections), allergen sensitization, eczema,
and peripheral eosinophilia, although no single factor is strongly
discriminative. There is no evidence that early administration of
systemic or inhaled corticosteroids to high-­risk populations can
prevent the development of asthma.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 439 u Wheezing, Bronchiolitis, and Bronchitis
Table 439.2  Pertinent Medical History in the Wheezing
Infant
Did the onset of symptoms begin at birth or thereafter?
Is the infant a noisy breather, and when is it most prominent?
Is the noisy breathing present on inspiration, expiration, or both?
Is there a history of cough apart from wheezing?
Was there an earlier lower respiratory tract infection?
Is there a history of recurrent upper or lower respiratory tract
infections?
Have there been any emergency department visits, hospitalizations,
or intensive care unit admissions for respiratory distress?
Is there a history of eczema?
Does the infant cough after crying or cough at night?
How is the infant growing and developing?
Is there associated failure to thrive?
Is there a history of electrolyte abnormalities?
Are there signs of intestinal malabsorption, including frequent,
greasy, or oily stools?
Is there a maternal history of genital herpes simplex virus infection?
What was the gestational age at delivery?
Was the patient intubated as a neonate?
Does the infant bottle-­feed in the bed or the crib, especially in a
propped position?
Are there any feeding difficulties, including choking, gagging,
arching, or vomiting with feeds?
Is there any new food exposure?
Is there a toddler in the home or lapse in supervision in which
foreign body aspiration could have occurred?
Is there a change in caregivers or a chance of nonaccidental trauma?

Diagnostic Evaluation

Evaluation of wheezing in infancy and early childhood depends on
suspected etiology. The diagnosis of acute bronchiolitis is clinical and
should be considered in an infant presenting with a first episode of
wheezing after a period of upper respiratory symptoms. Chest radiography is not routinely indicated in children with suspected bronchiolitis. Areas of atelectasis associated with bronchiolitis are often observed
on chest radiographs and may be difficult to distinguish from bacterial pneumonia; as a result, obtaining chest radiography in a patient
whose clinical course and exam are consistent with bronchiolitis may
lead to unnecessary antibiotic use. Laboratory testing is also not routinely indicated; the white blood cell and differential counts are usually
normal and are not predictive of bacterial superinfection. Viral testing
(polymerase chain reaction or rapid immunofluorescence) is not routinely recommended in the diagnosis of bronchiolitis but may be helpful if such testing prevents more invasive evaluations or treatments.
Concurrent serious bacterial infection (sepsis, pneumonia, meningitis)
is unlikely, although confirmation of viral bronchiolitis may obviate the
need for a sepsis evaluation in the young febrile infant. Otitis media
may complicate bronchiolitis.
For young children with wheezing in whom the presentation
does not clinically fit with the diagnosis of bronchiolitis, including those without other signs of viral infection, with very severe
presentation, or with a complicated clinical course, further workup
should be considered and should be dictated by individual clinical
context. Children with recurrent or refractory episodes of wheezing in infancy, particularly if associated with failure to thrive, may
require evaluation for chronic disorders such as cystic fibrosis or
immunodeficiency.

Treatment
Clinical Manifestations

The initial history of a wheezing infant should explore the onset,
duration, and associated factors (Table 439.2), as well as birth history (weeks of gestation, neonatal complications including history
of intubation or oxygen requirement, maternal complications)
and prenatal smoke exposure. Past medical history, including any
comorbid conditions, should be assessed. Family history of cystic
fibrosis, immunodeficiencies, asthma in a first-­degree relative, or
any other recurrent respiratory conditions in children should be
obtained. Social history should include any tobacco or other smoke
exposure, daycare exposure, number of siblings, pets, and concerns
regarding the home environment (e.g., dust mites, construction
dust, heating and cooling techniques, mold, cockroaches). The
patient’s growth chart should be reviewed for signs of failure to
thrive.
Acute bronchiolitis is usually preceded by exposure (daycare,
preschool, siblings) to contacts with a minor respiratory illness
within the previous week (see Fig. 439.1). The infant first develops signs of upper respiratory tract infection with sneezing and
clear rhinorrhea. This may be accompanied by diminished appetite
and fever. Gradually, respiratory distress ensues, with paroxysmal
cough, dyspnea, and irritability. The infant is often tachypneic,
which can interfere with feeding. Though rare, apnea may occur in
very young infants and may precede lower respiratory signs early
in the disease. Infants at a postconceptual age of <44 weeks are at
highest risk for apneic events, with premature birth providing an
additional risk factor.
On physical examination, evaluation of the patient’s vital signs
with special attention to the respiratory rate and oxygen saturation is an important initial step. The exam is often dominated by
wheezing and crackles. Expiratory time may be prolonged. Work of
breathing may be markedly increased, with nasal flaring and retractions. Complete obstruction to airflow can eliminate the turbulence
that causes wheezing; thus the lack of audible wheezing is not reassuring if the infant shows other signs of respiratory distress. Poorly
audible breath sounds suggest severe disease with nearly complete
bronchiolar obstruction.

2587

The treatment of children with viral bronchiolitis is supportive management. Those who are experiencing hypoxia, respiratory distress (inability to feed, extreme tachypnea, or significantly
increased work of breathing), or apnea should be hospitalized. Risk
factors for severe disease include younger age, preterm birth, or
underlying comorbidity. Hypoxemic children should receive supplemental oxygen. There is a developing consensus surrounding
target oxygen saturations; national guidelines in the United States
propose a threshold of 90%. Oxygen can be administered via a number of delivery devices, and some children with severe disease may
require positive pressure ventilation. High-­f low nasal oxygen cannula (HFNC) use has become common, though studies to date have
failed to demonstrate a consistent benefit on clinical outcomes.
Despite an apparent stabilization with HFNC, such therapy has
not consistently shortened the length of hospital stay or duration
of oxygen therapy. Continuous pulse oximetry monitoring can be
discontinued once patients are no longer requiring supplemental
oxygen and are clinically improving.
Some children may also require support with supplemental hydration.
Fluid can be administered intravenously or enterally via nasogastric tube,
with some preference given to the latter because of an association between
better outcomes with continued provision of enteral nutrition. If intravenous fluids are administered, care should be taken to use isotonic fluids
because of the risk of hyponatremia. Frequent suctioning of nasal and oral
secretions often provides relief of distress and improves work of breathing
and ability to feed, although this should be limited to the nares or oropharynx because deep tracheal suctioning does not provide additional benefit
and may cause harm. Chest physiotherapy has been extensively evaluated
and provides no benefit to children with bronchiolitis.
Pharmacologic agents have largely proven ineffective in the management of bronchiolitis. Multiple systematic reviews and meta-­analyses
have failed to demonstrate any impact on clinical outcomes with use of
albuterol or corticosteroids in bronchiolitis; neither are currently recommended for management. Response to bronchodilators is unlikely and
unpredictable in children younger than 1 year. The use of inhaled or
oral steroids in very young children with wheezing has not been shown
to affect the disease trajectory or prevent the progression of childhood
wheezing or development of asthma. There is debate over the use of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2588 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
inhaled hypertonic saline in children with bronchiolitis, although most
studies and meta-­analyses fail to demonstrate any major benefit. Racemic epinephrine has not been found to improve the length of stay or
clinical outcomes among inpatients with bronchiolitis, although there
is some evidence to suggest that it may reduce the risk of hospitalization when used in the outpatient setting. Ribavirin, the only currently
available antiviral medication targeting RSV, is also not currently recommended because of minimal impact on disease outcomes and because it
is costly, difficult to administer, and associated with important toxicities.

PROGNOSIS

Infants with acute bronchiolitis are generally considered to be at highest risk for further respiratory compromise in the first 72 hours after
onset of cough and dyspnea. The case fatality rate is <1% in developed
countries, with death attributable to respiratory arrest and/or failure or
severe dehydration and electrolyte disturbances. A majority of deaths
caused by bronchiolitis occur in children with complex medical conditions or comorbidities such as bronchopulmonary dysplasia, congenital
heart disease, or immunodeficiency. The median duration of symptoms
in ambulatory patients is approximately 14 days; 10% may be symptomatic for 3 weeks. Severe lower respiratory tract infection at an early
age has been identified as a possible risk factor for the development of
asthma, although most children with early childhood wheezing will
not go on to suffer from asthma. It is unclear whether viral infections
causing bronchiolitis incite an immune response that manifests as
asthma later in life or whether those infants have an inherent predilection for asthma that is first manifested as viral bronchiolitis.

PREVENTION (See also Chapter 307)

Meticulous hand hygiene is the best measure to prevent transmission of
the viruses responsible for bronchiolitis. Nirsevimab, a one dose longacting monoclonal antibody, is approved for prevention of RSV infection
in newborns and infants. Nirsevimab is indicated for infants < 8 months
of age born during or entering their first RSV season (in the continental
US this may be October to March, although there may be regional differences), including those previously recommended to receive palivizumab
(which is not given). Nirsevimab dose in the first RSV season is 50 mg if <
5 kg and 100 mg in infants ≥ 5 kg. In addition, older infants (8-19 months)
who are at increased risk of severe RSV infection entering their second
RSV season should also receive nirsevimab. These older infants include
those with:
• Chronic lung disease of prematurity that requires chronic steroid or
diuretic therapy or supplemental oxygen
• Severe immunocompromising conditions
• Cystic fibrosis with severe lung disease or poor weight gain
• American Indian and Alaska Native
The single dose of nirsevimab in the second RSV season is 200 mg
given as two 100 mg injections in different sites. Nirsevimab may be coadministered with other routine childhood immunizations. Because of
the availability of nirsevimab, immunization of high-risk populations
with palivizumab is no longer recommended even if they received
palivizumab in the previous RSV season.
In addition to immunization after birth, there is an FDA-approved
maternal vaccine to prevent neonatal and infant RSV infections. The
one dose vaccine (bivalent RSV prefusion F protein) is approved for
use in women between 32-36 weeks’ gestation. Nirsevimab is the only
recommended approach to RSV prevention by the ACIP (CDC) and
the AAP.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Acute tracheobronchitis is a term used when the trachea is prominently
involved, such as with pertussis, parainfluenza, or diphtheria.

ACUTE BRONCHITIS

Acute bronchitis often follows a viral upper respiratory tract infection.
It is more common in the winter when respiratory viral syndromes
predominate. The tracheobronchial epithelium is invaded by the infectious agent, leading to activation of inflammatory cells and release of
cytokines. Constitutional symptoms, including fever and malaise, follow. The tracheobronchial epithelium can become damaged or hypersensitized, leading to a protracted cough lasting 1-­3 weeks.
The child first presents with nonspecific upper respiratory infectious
symptoms, such as rhinitis. Three to four days later, a frequent, hacking
cough develops, which may or may not be productive. After several days,
the sputum can become purulent, indicating leukocyte migration but
not necessarily bacterial infection. Many children swallow their sputum,
which can produce emesis. Chest pain may be a prominent complaint
in older children and is exacerbated by coughing. The mucus gradually
thins, usually within 5-­10 days, and then the cough gradually abates. The
entire episode usually lasts about 2 weeks and seldom longer than 3 weeks.
Findings on physical examination vary with the age of the patient and
stage of the disease. Early findings include no or low-­grade fever and upper
respiratory signs such as nasopharyngitis, conjunctivitis, and rhinitis. Auscultation of the chest may be unremarkable at this early phase. As the syndrome progresses and cough worsens, breath sounds become coarse, with
coarse and fine crackles and scattered wheezing possible. Chest radiographs may be normal or may demonstrate increased bronchial markings.
The principal objective of the clinician is to exclude bacterial illnesses
requiring antibiotic treatment, such as pneumonia, pertussis, or bacterial
tracheitis. Obtaining sputum can be difficult in young children, and isolation of bacteria may not always indicate infection; thus sputum cultures
are not generally recommended outside of specific diseases such as cystic
fibrosis. Absence of vital sign abnormalities (tachycardia, tachypnea, fever)
and a normal physical examination of the chest reduce the likelihood of
pneumonia.

Differential Diagnosis

Persistent or recurrent symptoms should lead the clinician to consider
entities other than acute bronchitis. Many entities manifest with cough
as a prominent symptom (Table 439.3).
Table 439.3  Disorders with Cough as a Prominent Finding
CATEGORY

DIAGNOSES

Inflammatory

Asthma

Chronic
pulmonary
processes

Bronchopulmonary dysplasia
Postinfectious bronchiectasis
Cystic fibrosis
Tracheomalacia or bronchomalacia
Primary ciliary dyskinesia
Other chronic lung diseases

Other chronic
disease or
congenital
disorders

Laryngeal cleft
Swallowing disorders
Gastroesophageal reflux
Airway compression (such as a vascular ring or
hemangioma)
Congenital heart disease

Infectious or
immune
disorders

Immunodeficiency
Eosinophilic lung disease
Tuberculosis
Allergy
Sinusitis
Tonsillitis or adenoiditis
Chlamydia, Ureaplasma (infants)
Bordetella pertussis
Mycoplasma pneumoniae

Acquired

Foreign body aspiration, tracheal or esophageal

439.2 Bronchitis
Samantha A. House and Shawn L. Ralston
Nonspecific bronchial inflammation is termed bronchitis and can
occur in multiple childhood conditions. Acute bronchitis is a clinical
syndrome, usually viral in origin, with cough as a prominent feature.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 440 u Plastic Bronchitis
Treatment

There is no specific therapy for acute bronchitis. The disease is typically
a response to a viral infection and is self-­limited. Antibiotics, although
often prescribed, do not hasten improvement. Frequent shifts in position
can facilitate pulmonary drainage in infants. Older children are sometimes more comfortable with humidity, but this does not shorten the
disease course. Cough suppressants are contraindicated in the youngest
children, and although they may relieve symptoms, they can also increase
the risk of superinfection and therefore should be used judiciously. Antihistamines and expectorants are not indicated. Nonprescription cough
and cold medicines should not be used in children younger than 4 years
of age, and their use is cautioned in children age 4-­11 years.

CHRONIC BRONCHITIS

Chronic bronchitis is well recognized in adults, formally defined as 3
months or longer of productive cough each year for 2 or more years.
The disease can develop insidiously, with episodes of acute obstruction alternating with quiescent periods. Some predisposing conditions
can lead to progression of airflow obstruction or chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease, with smoking as the major factor (up to 80% of
patients have a smoking history). Other conditions include air pollution, occupational exposures, and repeated infections.
The applicability of this definition to children is unclear. The existence of chronic bronchitis as a distinct entity in children is controversial. Like adults, children with chronic inflammatory diseases or those
with toxic exposures can develop damaged pulmonary epithelium.
Thus chronic or recurring cough in children should lead the clinician
to search for underlying pulmonary or systemic disorders (see Table
439.3). One proposed entity that shares characteristics with asthma
and other forms of suppurative lung disease is persistent or protracted
bacterial bronchitis. Protracted bacterial bronchitis is defined as three
or more of the following criteria: (1) continuous wet or productive
cough >4 weeks, (2) no signs or symptoms to suggest other causes, and
(3) cough resolves with appropriate course of oral antibiotics.

2589

Table 440.1  Conditions Associated with Plastic Bronchitis
PROVEN CONDITIONS
Congenital heart disease with Fontan physiology
Pulmonary lymphatic anomalies
Influenza A pulmonary infection
Adenovirus infection
Mycoplasma pneumoniae infection
POSSIBLE CONDITIONS
Toxic inhalation
Sickle cell acute chest syndrome
Hypersecretory and near-­fatal asthma (eosinophilic casts)
Noonan syndrome
UNLIKELY AND UNPROVEN CONDITIONS
Bacterial pneumonia
Bronchiectasis
Cystic fibrosis
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Nephrotic syndrome
Modified from Rubin BK. Plastic bronchitis. Clin Chest Med. 2016;37:405–408, Box 1.

CIGARETTE SMOKING AND AIR POLLUTION

Exposure to environmental irritants, such as tobacco smoke and air pollution, can incite or aggravate cough. There is a well-­established association
between tobacco exposure and pulmonary disease, including bronchitis
and wheezing. This can occur through cigarette smoking or by exposure
to secondhand smoke. Marijuana smoke, electronic cigarettes, and other
inhalants are irritants sometimes overlooked when eliciting a history.
A number of pollutants compromise lung development and likely
precipitate lung disease, including particulate matter, ozone, acid
vapor, and nitrogen dioxide. Proximity to motor vehicle traffic is an
important source of these pollutants. Because these substances coexist
in the atmosphere, the relative contribution of any one to pulmonary
symptoms is difficult to discern.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 440

Plastic Bronchitis
Brett J. Bordini
Plastic bronchitis is a rare condition characterized by recurrent episodes
of airway obstruction secondary to the formation of large proteinaceous
branching casts that take on the shape of and obstruct the tracheobronchial tree. It is not a single disease entity, but rather represents a state of
altered respiratory epithelial function and is most frequently encountered
in the setting of underlying pulmonary or cardiac disease, although plastic bronchitis may also arise in lymphatic disorders, pulmonary infections, and the acute chest syndrome of sickle cell disease (Table 440.1). In

Fig. 440.1 Tracheobronchial casts after bronchoscopic extraction.

Casts show branched architecture corresponding to the bronchial tree.
(From Corrin B, Nicholson AG. Pathology of the Lungs, 3rd ed. London:
Churchill Livingstone; 2011: Fig. 3.20.)

comparison with the smaller bronchial and bronchiolar casts seen with
mucus plugging, the lesions of plastic bronchitis are more extensive, with
casts that can outline large segments of the airway to the level of the terminal bronchioles (Fig. 440.1). These casts may be spontaneously expectorated or may require bronchoscopic removal for relief of potentially fatal
airway obstruction. Cast composition varies, although it typically consists
of either a fibrin-­predominant or mucin-­predominant laminated matrix
with or without inflammatory cell infiltration. Plastic bronchitis may
be classified according to an associated disease, the cast histology, or a
combination.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Plastic bronchitis is rare, with an estimated prevalence of 6.8 cases per
100,000 pediatric patients. Prevalence varies according to the underlying
associated disease with rates as high as 14% in patients who have undergone staged palliation of complex congenital heart disease and much
lower rates in patients with asthma and atopic disease. A slight male predominance exists for cast formation in the setting of structural heart disease, whereas cast formation in the setting of asthma and atopic disease
demonstrates a female predominance. Children with single-­ventricle
Fontan physiology are at high risk for developing plastic bronchitis.

PATHOGENESIS

The mechanism of cast formation is unclear, although it is believed to
vary based on the underlying disease association and cast type. One

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2590 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
classification system differentiates type 1 inflammatory casts, composed primarily of fibrin with neutrophilic or, more often, eosinophilic infiltration, and type 2 acellular casts, composed primarily of
mucin with little to no cellular infiltration. Type 1 casts tend to be
associated with inflammatory and infectious disorders of the lung,
whereas type 2 casts tend to be associated with surgically palliated
structural heart disease, particularly single-­ventricle lesions. However, these distinctions are not absolute; patients with structural
heart disease can have fibrin-­predominant casts, and patients with
asthma or atopic disease can have mucin-­predominant casts, with
both mucin casts and fibrin casts demonstrating various degrees of
cellular infiltration.
Cast formation in the setting of structural heart disease may result
from alterations in pulmonary blood flow or lymphatic drainage, particularly after staged surgical palliation. Under these circumstances,
increased central venous pressure is believed to compromise the integrity of the bronchial mucosa, impeding lymphatic flow and resulting
in the development of collateral lymphatic vessels and potentially of
lymphoalveolar fistulae that may exude proteinaceous material into the
airway lumen.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Patients with plastic bronchitis may present with cough, dyspnea,
wheeze, or pleuritic chest pain. Depending on the degree of airway
obstruction, patients may be hypoxemic or in severe respiratory distress. The expectoration of large, branched casts that are often tan in
color and rubbery in consistency is pathognomonic for plastic bronchitis. Lung examination may reveal diminished breath sounds or
wheezing in the affected area. Rarely, auscultation may reveal a sound
similar to a flag flapping in the wind (bruit de drapeau), believed to
be related to the free end of a cast striking the bronchial wall during
inspiration or expiration. Further examination may provide clues to
underlying comorbidities.

DIAGNOSIS

The expectoration or endoscopic discovery of large tracheobronchial casts is pathognomonic for plastic bronchitis. History should be
directed at assessing for conditions known to have an associated risk
of tracheobronchial cast formation, such as uncorrected or surgically
palliated complex congenital heart disease (Fontan physiology); a history of atopic disease or asthma; lymphatic disorders such as Noonan
syndrome, Turner syndrome, lymphangiectasia, and yellow nail syndrome; sickle cell disease; and infectious exposures, particularly to
tuberculosis, adenovirus, influenza, or atypical mycobacteria. Other
predisposing conditions include cystic fibrosis, allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis, bronchiectasis, toxic inhalants, and granulomatous lung diseases.
Physical examination may provide indications of an underlying
diagnosis. Digital clubbing of the fingers or toes may suggest long-­
standing hypoxemia associated with cardiac or pulmonary disease.
Cardiac examination may provide information suggesting the presence
of unrecognized structural heart disease.
Chest radiography may demonstrate collapse of the involved areas of the
lung or areas of bronchiectasis distal to sites of long-­standing obstruction.
There should be a high index of suspicion for plastic bronchitis in
patients with known comorbidities who present with sudden respiratory decompensation. In the absence of cast expectoration, direct
visualization of casts via bronchoscopy is required for diagnosis and is
potentially therapeutic in relieving airway obstruction. Cast histology
should be defined to allow for specific therapies directed at alleviating
residual obstruction or preventing recurrence. In particular, the predominant component of the cast’s laminated matrix—either fibrin or
mucin—should be defined, and signs of inflammation or infiltration,
such as the presence of neutrophils, eosinophils, or Charcot-­Leyden
crystals, should be documented.

TREATMENT

Treatment is directed at correcting the underlying condition associated
with the development of plastic bronchitis, at relieving acute airway

obstruction secondary to the presence of casts, and at preventing the
development of further casts. Rigid or flexible bronchoscopy is typically required for cast removal, and if the predominant content of the
cast is known, therapy with either fibrinolytics such as tissue plasminogen activator or mucolytics such as N-­acetylcysteine or deoxyribonuclease may be considered as an adjunct to direct removal. Aerosolized
heparin or mucolytics have also been used for treatment or prevention
of recurrence, with varying success.
In the setting of inflammatory airway disease, additional preventive measures include inhaled or systemic corticosteroids, low-dose
azithromycin, and leukotriene inhibitors to minimize airway inflammation. Bronchodilators have not been shown to prevent cast formation or aid in their removal, though may be used in the setting of
concomitant bronchospasm.
In patients with surgically palliated complex congenital heart disease, measures aimed at decreasing central venous pressure, such
as sildenafil or Fontan conduit fenestration, have had varied success. Lymphangiography may be undertaken to identify aberrant
lymphatic vessels contributing to plastic bronchitis in the setting
of congenital heart disease or lymphangitic disorders. MRI-­guided
selective lymphatic embolization of these channels has led to resolution of plastic bronchitis while preserving central lymphatic
flow. Thoracic duct ligation has been helpful in patients in whom
selective embolization has failed. Mammalian target of rapamycin
(mTOR) inhibitors such as sirolimus have been used to treat lymphatic malformations, with varying success. Octreotide and low-fat
diets have demonstrated modest success in adult patients. Cardiac
transplantation typically results in resolution of plastic bronchitis in
the setting of repaired complex congenital heart disease.

COMPLICATIONS AND PROGNOSIS

Prognosis is related primarily to the underlying condition associated
with the development of plastic bronchitis. Patients whose plastic bronchitis is related to surgically palliated complex congenital heart disease
are at high risk for plastic bronchitis–related mortality. Mortality can
be high if casts obstruct significant portions of the airway, regardless
of underlying etiology. Mortality estimates vary from 6% to 50% in the
setting of asthma or atopic disease and from 14% to 50% in the setting
of complex congenital heart disease, with central airway obstruction
leading to death in the majority of patients.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 441

Emphysema and
Overinflation
Steven R. Boas and Vicki K. Masson
Pulmonary emphysema consists of distention of air spaces with irreversible disruption of the alveolar septa. It can involve part or all of
a lung. Overinflation is distention with or without alveolar rupture
and is often reversible. Compensatory overinflation can be acute or
chronic and occurs in normally functioning pulmonary tissue when,
for any reason, a sizable portion of the lung is removed or becomes partially or completely airless, which can occur with pneumonia, atelectasis, empyema, and pneumothorax. Obstructive overinflation results
from partial obstruction of a bronchus or bronchiole, when it becomes
more difficult for air to leave the alveoli than to enter. Air gradually
accumulates distal to the obstruction, the so-­called bypass, ball-­valve,
or check-­valve type of obstruction.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 441 u Emphysema and Overinflation 2591
LOCALIZED OBSTRUCTIVE OVERINFLATION

When a ball-­valve type of obstruction partially occludes the main stem
bronchus, the entire lung becomes overinflated; individual lobes are
affected when the obstruction is in lobar bronchi. Segments or subsegments are affected when their individual bronchi are blocked. When
most or all of a lobe is involved, the percussion note is hyperresonant
over the area and the breath sounds are decreased in intensity. The
distended lung can extend across the mediastinum into the opposite
hemithorax. Under fluoroscopic scrutiny during exhalation, the overinflated area does not decrease and the heart and the mediastinum shift
to the opposite side because the unobstructed lung empties normally.

Unilateral Hyperlucent Lung

The differential diagnosis for this resultant unilateral hyperlucent
lung is quite broad and can involve the lung parenchyma, airways,
pulmonary vasculature, chest wall (see Chapter 467), and mediastinum. Localized obstructions that can be responsible for overinflation
include airway foreign bodies and the inflammatory reaction to them
(see Chapter 435), abnormally thick mucus (cystic fibrosis, see Chapter
454), endobronchial tuberculosis or tuberculosis of the tracheobronchial lymph nodes (see Chapter 261), and endobronchial or mediastinal tumors.
Patients with unilateral hyperlucent lung can present with clinical
manifestations of pneumonia, but in some patients the condition is
discovered only when a chest radiograph is obtained for an unrelated
reason. A few patients have hemoptysis. Physical findings can include
hyperresonance and a small lung with the mediastinum shifted toward
the more abnormal lung.

Swyer-­James or Macleod Syndrome

The condition is thought to result from an insult to the lower respiratory tract after, most commonly, adenovirus (see Chapter 309) or
respiratory syncytial virus (see Chapter 307), Mycoplasma pneumoniae
(see Chapter 269), or measles (see Chapter 293). The infection can
cause pulmonary vascular hypoplasia with resultant hypoperfusion,
leading to unilateral hyperlucent lung (underdevelopment). Clinically,
children with this condition often have chronic cough, recurrent pneumonia, hemoptysis, and wheezing, although some are asymptomatic.
Some patients show a classic mediastinal shift away from the lesion
with exhalation. CT scanning or bronchography can often demonstrate
bronchiectasis. Thoracoscopic evaluation may be useful. The triad of
unilateral hyperlucent lung, diffusely decreased ventilation, and matching decreased perfusion of the affected lung supports the diagnosis. In
some patients, previous chest radiographs have been normal or have
shown only an acute pneumonia, suggesting that a hyperlucent lung
is an acquired lesion. For those with recurrent infection or severe lung
destruction, treatment may include immunization with influenza and
pneumococcal vaccines, as well as surgical resection. However, without
treatment, some individuals may become less symptomatic with time.

Table 441.1  Etiology of Congenital Lobar Emphysema
1. Idiopathic (50%)
2. Bronchial cartilage absence, hypoplasia, or dysplasia (25%)
3. Parenchymal diseases
• Polyalveolar lobe
• Pulmonary alveolar glycogenosis
4. Internal bronchial obstruction
• Bronchial stenosis
• Bronchomalacia
• Meconium aspiration
• Hypertrophic mucosa membranes
• Mold mucous plaques
• Foreign body aspiration
• Bronchial polyp
5. External bronchial obstruction
• Pulmonary artery sling anomaly
• Pulmonary rotation anomaly
• Bronchogenic cyst
• Lymphadenopathy
• Mediastinal mass
• Duplication of esophagus
From Demir OF, Hangul M, Kose M. Congenital lobar emphysema: diagnosis and
treatment options. J Chronic Obstr Pulm Dis. 2019;14:921–928, Table 1. Originally
published by and used with permission from Dove Medical Press Ltd.

Table 441.2  Concomitant Malformations Accompanying
Congenital Lobar Emphysema
Cardiac malformations 14–20%

Patent ductus arteriosus
Atrial septal defect
Ventricular septal defect
Tetralogy of Fallot
Pulmonary stenosis
Pulmonary valve atresia
Aortic coarctation
Pulmonary hypertension
Left aortic arch
Right descending aorta
Left ligamentum arteriosum
Double superior vena cava

Renal anomalies

Aplastic kidney
Horseshoe kidney

Musculoskeletal anomalies

Pectus excavatum
Hiatal hernia
Diaphragmatic hernia

Gastrointestinal tract

Omphalocele
Pyloric stenosis

Others

Cleft palate
Chondroectodermal dysplasia
Chondrodystrophy
Cystinosis
Bronchial atresia
Tracheal bronchus

Syndromes

Williams-­Beuren syndrome
Miller-­Dieker syndrome
Niemann-­Pick disease
Fanconi aplastic anemia

Congenital Lobar Emphysema (Congenital Large
Hyperlucent Lobe)

Congenital lobar emphysema (CLE) can result in severe respiratory
distress in early infancy and can be caused by localized obstruction.
Familial occurrence has been reported. In 50% of cases, a cause of CLE
can be identified (Table 441.1). Congenital deficiency of the bronchial
cartilage, external compression by aberrant vessels, bronchial stenosis,
redundant bronchial mucosal flaps, and kinking of the bronchus caused
by herniation into the mediastinum have been described as leading to
bronchial obstruction and subsequent CLE and commonly affect the
left upper lobe. Extrapulmonary lesions are noted in Table 441.2.
Clinical manifestations usually become apparent in the neonatal
period but are delayed for as long as 5-­6 years in 5% of patients.
Many cases are diagnosed by antenatal ultrasonography. Infants
with prenatally diagnosed cases are not always symptomatic at
birth. In some patients, CLE remains undiagnosed until school age
or beyond. Clinical signs range from mild tachypnea and wheeze
to severe dyspnea with cyanosis. CLE can affect one or more lobes;

From Demir OF, Hangul M, Kose M. Congenital lobar emphysema: diagnosis and
treatment options. J Chronic Obstr Pulm Dis. 2019;14:921–928, Table 2. Originally
published by and used with permission from Dove Medical Press Ltd.

it affects the upper and middle lobes, and the left upper lobe is the
most common site. The affected lobe is essentially nonfunctional
because of the overdistention, and atelectasis of the ipsilateral normal lung can ensue. With further distention, the mediastinum is
shifted to the contralateral side, with impaired function seen as well

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2592 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Suspected CLE

2 mo age

• Chest x-ray
• CT

Observe
Surgical
excision

2 mo age

Severe symptoms

Mild to moderate symptoms

• Chest x-ray
– Severe hyperaeration
• CT
– Severe herniation of lung
• VQ scan
– Perfusion defect
• Bronchoscopy
– Abnormal

• Chest x-ray
– Minimal hyperaeration
• CT
– Moderate herniation of lung
• VQ scan
– No perfusion defect
• Bronchoscopy
– Normal

A
Conservative management
with close follow up

Fig. 441.2 Algorithm for evaluation and treatment of congenital lobar emphysema (CLE). (Adapted from Karnak I, Senocak ME, Ciftci AO,
et al. Congenital lobar emphysema: diagnostic and therapeutic considerations. J Pediatr Surg. 1999;34:1347–1351, Fig. 4.)

as a pulmonary artery sling, can impinge the right main stem bronchus with resultant right-­sided hyperinflation or atelectasis producing hyperlucency on either the ipsilateral or contralateral side.
Pulmonary venolobar syndrome (see Chapter 475), also known as
scimitar syndrome, can also result in a hyperlucent contralateral
lung dependent on the extent of hypoplasia of the right lung.

B

GENERALIZED OBSTRUCTIVE OVERINFLATION

Fig. 441.1 Chest x-­ray (A) and CT scan (B) of a congenital large hy-

perlucent lobe (congenital lobar emphysema). (From Bush A, Abel R,
Chitty L, et al. Congenital lung disease. In: Wilmott RW, Deterding RR,
Li A, et al., eds. Kendig’s Disorders of the Respiratory Tract in Children,
9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019: Fig. 18.32.)

(Fig. 441.1). A radiolucent lobe and a mediastinal shift are often
revealed by radiographic examination. A CT scan can demonstrate
the aberrant anatomy of the lesion, and MRI or MR angiography
can demonstrate any vascular lesions that might be causing extraluminal compression. Nuclear imaging studies are useful to demonstrate perfusion defects in the affected lobe. Figure 441.2 outlines
the evaluation of an infant presenting with suspected CLE. The differential diagnosis includes pneumonia with or without an effusion,
pneumothorax, and cystic adenomatoid malformation.
Treatment by immediate surgery and excision of the lobe may be
lifesaving when cyanosis and severe respiratory distress are present,
but some patients respond to medical treatment. Selective intubation
of the unaffected lung may be of value. Some children with apparent
CLE have reversible overinflation, without the classic alveolar septal
rupture implied in the term emphysema. Bronchoscopy can reveal an
endobronchial lesion.

Pulmonary Vascular Abnormalities

Unilateral hyperlucency may result from unilateral pulmonary
agenesis (see Chapter 444) that typically presents in the neonatal
period. Volume loss of the affected lung results in a mediastinal
shift with hyperinflation of the contralateral lung. An anomalous
origin of the left pulmonary artery (see Chapter 481), also known

Acute generalized overinflation of the lung results from widespread
involvement of the bronchioles and is usually reversible. It occurs
more commonly in infants than in children and may be secondary
to a number of clinical conditions, including asthma, cystic fibrosis,
acute bronchiolitis, interstitial pneumonitis, atypical forms of acute
laryngotracheobronchitis, aspiration of zinc stearate powder, chronic
passive congestion secondary to a congenital cardiac lesion, and miliary tuberculosis.

Pathology

In chronic overinflation, many of the alveoli are ruptured and communicate with one another, producing distended saccules. Air can
also enter the interstitial tissue (i.e., interstitial emphysema), resulting in pneumothorax and pneumomediastinum (see Chapters 461
and 462).

Clinical Manifestations

Generalized obstructive overinflation is characterized by dyspnea, with
difficulty in exhaling. The lungs become increasingly overdistended, and
the chest remains expanded during exhalation. An increased respiratory
rate and decreased respiratory excursion result from the overdistention
of the alveoli and their inability to be emptied normally through the
narrowed bronchioles. Air hunger is responsible for forced respiratory
movements. Overaction of the accessory muscles of respiration results
in retractions at the suprasternal notch, the supraclavicular spaces,
the lower margin of the thorax, and the intercostal spaces. Unlike the
flattened chest during inspiration and exhalation in cases of laryngeal
obstruction, minimal reduction in the size of the overdistended chest
during exhalation is observed. The percussion note is hyperresonant.
On auscultation, the inspiratory phase is usually less prominent than the
expiratory phase, which is prolonged and roughened. Fine or medium
crackles may be heard. Cyanosis is more common in the severe cases.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 441 u Emphysema and Overinflation 2593

Fig. 441.3 Increased transradiancy in the right lower zone. A large

emphysematous bulla occupies the lower half of the right lung, and the
apical changes are in keeping with previous tuberculosis. (From Padley
SPG, Hansell DM. Imaging techniques. In: Albert RK, Spiro SG, Jett JR,
eds. Clinical Respiratory Medicine, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2008:
Fig. 1.48.)

Diagnosis

Radiographic and fluoroscopic examinations of the chest assist in
establishing the diagnosis. Both leaves of the diaphragm are low and
flattened, the ribs are farther apart than usual, and the lung fields
are less dense. The movement of the diaphragm during exhalation
is decreased, and the excursion of the low, flattened diaphragm in
severe cases is barely discernible. The anteroposterior diameter of
the chest is increased, and the sternum may be bowed outward.

A

Bullous Emphysema

Bullous emphysematous blebs or cysts (pneumatoceles) result from
overdistention and rupture of alveoli during birth or shortly thereafter, or they may be sequelae of pneumonia and other infections.
They have been observed in tuberculosis lesions during specific
antibacterial therapy and in end-­stage cystic fibrosis lung disease.
Bullous emphysema can also result from inhalational marijuana
use. These emphysematous areas presumably result from rupture
of distended alveoli, forming a single or multiloculated cavity. The
cysts can become large and might contain some fluid; an air-­fluid
level may be demonstrated on the radiograph (Fig. 441.3). The cysts
should be differentiated from pulmonary abscesses. In most cases,
treatment is not required, as the cysts disappear spontaneously
within a few months, although they can persist for a year or more.
Aspiration or surgery is not indicated except in cases of severe
respiratory and cardiac compromise.

Subcutaneous Emphysema

Subcutaneous emphysema results from any process that allows free
air to enter into the subcutaneous tissue (Fig. 441.4). The most
common causes include pneumothorax or pneumomediastinum
(see Chapters 461 and 462). In addition, it can be a complication of
fracture of the orbit, which permits free air to escape from the nasal
sinuses. In the neck and thorax, subcutaneous emphysema can follow tracheotomy, deep ulceration in the pharyngeal region, esophageal wounds, or any perforating lesion of the larynx or trachea. It is
occasionally a complication of thoracentesis, asthma, or abdominal
surgery. Rarely, air is formed in the subcutaneous tissues by gas-­
producing bacteria.

B
Fig. 441.4 A, Lateral x-­ray of neck showing subcutaneous emphysema. B, Axial section CT neck/thorax showing subcutaneous emphysema and pneumomediastinum. (From Zakaria R, Khwaja H. Subcutaneous emphysema in a case of infective sinusitis: a case report. J Med
Case Rep. 2010;4:235, Figs. 1 and 2.)

Tenderness over the site of emphysema and a crepitant quality
on palpation of the skin are classic manifestations. Subcutaneous
emphysema is usually a self-­limited process and requires no specific treatment. Minimization of activities that can increase airway
pressure (cough, performance of high-­pressure pulmonary function
testing maneuvers) is recommended. Resolution occurs by resorption of subcutaneous air after elimination of its source. Rarely, dangerous compression of the trachea by air in the surrounding soft
tissue requires surgical intervention.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2594 Part XVII u The Respiratory System

Chapter 442

α1-­Antitrypsin Deficiency
and Emphysema

Physical examination in childhood is usually normal. Affected
children rarely have growth failure, an increased anteroposterior
diameter of the chest with a hyperresonant percussion note, crackles to indicate active infection, or clubbing. Severe emphysema can
depress the diaphragm, making the liver and spleen more easily
palpable.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Homozygous deficiency of α1-­antitrypsin (α1-­AT) rarely produces lung
disease in children, but it is an important cause of early-­onset severe
panacinar pulmonary emphysema in adults in the third and fourth
decades of life and a significant cause of liver disease in children (see
Chapter 405.5). It is associated with panniculitis and antineutrophil
cytoplasmic antibody (cANCA)–associated vasculitis in adults with
the PI MZ phenotype.

Serum immunoassay measures low levels of α1-­AT; normal serum
levels are ∼80-­220 mg/dL. Serum electrophoresis reveals the phenotype, and genotype is determined by polymerase chain reaction;
whole gene sequencing is possible. In the rare patient with lung
disease in adolescence, chest radiograph reveals overinflation with
depressed diaphragms. Chest CT can show more hyperexpansion
in the lower lung zones, with occasional bronchiectasis; CT densitometry can be a sensitive method to follow changes in lung disease. Lung function testing is usually normal in children, but it can
show airflow obstruction and increased lung volumes, particularly
in adolescents who smoke.

PATHOGENESIS

TREATMENT

Vicki K. Masson and Steven R. Boas

The type and concentration of α1-­AT are inherited as a series of
codominant alleles on chromosomal segment 14q31-­
32.3. (See
Chapter 405.5 for a discussion of genotypes and liver disease.)
The autosomal recessive deficiency affects 1 in 1,600-­5,000 people,
but it remains underdiagnosed. Worldwide there are an estimated
116,000,000 carriers and 1,100,000 subjects with severe α1-­AT deficiency. The normal α1-­AT PiM protein is secreted by the liver into
the circulation at a rate of approximately 34 mg/kg/day; it is also
produced by lung epithelial cells and monocytes. Pathogenic variant
proteins are not produced (null) or are misfolded (PiZ and others);
they can polymerize in the endoplasmic reticulum or be degraded,
with subsequent low serum levels. Early adult-­onset emphysema
associated with α1-­AT deficiency occurs most commonly with PiZZ
(pathogenic variant in SERPINA1 gene), although Pi (null) (null)
and, to a lesser extent, other pathogenic Pi types such as SZ have
been associated with emphysema.
α1-­AT and other serum antiproteases help to inactivate proteolytic enzymes released from dead bacteria or leukocytes in the lung.
Deficiency of these antiproteases leads to an accumulation of proteolytic enzymes in the lung, resulting in destruction of pulmonary
tissue with subsequent development of emphysema. Polymerized
pathogenic proteins in the lungs may also be proinflammatory, and
there is evidence of increased oxidative stress. The concentration
of proteases (elastase) in an individual’s leukocytes may also be an
important factor in determining the severity of clinical pulmonary
disease with a given level of α1-­AT.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Most patients who have the PiZZ defect have little or no detectable pulmonary disease during childhood. A few have early onset of
chronic pulmonary symptoms, including dyspnea, wheezing, and
cough, and panacinar emphysema has been documented by lung
biopsy; it is probable that these findings occur secondarily to infection, which caused inflammation with consequent early disease.
Smoking increases the risk of emphysema in patients with mutant
Pi types. A newborn screen to identify children with the PiZZ phenotype provides useful guidance in support of smoking cessation
for close contacts and reduces adolescent smoking rates.

Therapy for α1-­AT deficiency is intravenous replacement (augmentation) with enzyme derived from pooled human plasma. A level of
80 mg/dL is protective for emphysema. This target level for augmentation therapy is usually achieved with initial doses of 60 mg/kg IV
weekly and results in the appearance of the transfused antiprotease
in pulmonary lavage fluid. The Food and Drug Administration has
approved the use of purified blood-­derived human enzyme for ZZ
and null-­null patients. Replacement therapy is indicated for those
with moderately severe obstructive lung disease (forced expiratory
volume in 1 second is 30–65% of predicted) or those with mild lung
disease experiencing a rapid decline in lung function. Augmentation therapy is not indicated for persons with the PiMZ type who
have pulmonary disease, because their disease is not from enzyme
deficiency. Recombinant sources of α1-­AT are under development,
but current products are rapidly cleared from the circulation when
given intravenously; they may be useful for inhalation therapy.
Inhalation of the plasma-­derived product is under evaluation. Lung
transplantation has been performed for end-­stage disease. Multiple
strategies for gene therapy are under development.

SUPPORTIVE THERAPY

Standard supportive therapy for chronic lung disease includes
aggressive treatment of pulmonary infection, routine use of pneumococcal and influenza vaccines, bronchodilators, and advice about
the serious risks of smoking and smoke exposure. Such treatment
is also indicated for asymptomatic family members found to have
PiZZ or null-­null phenotypes but not those with the PiMZ type.
The clinical significance of the PiSZ type is unclear, but nonspecific treatment is reasonable. All persons with low levels of serum
antiprotease should be warned that the development of emphysema
is partially mediated by environmental factors and that cigarette
smoking is particularly deleterious. Although early identification of
affected persons could help to prevent development of obstructive
lung disease, population screening programs are being considered
but are currently suspended.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 443 u Other Distal Airway Diseases

Chapter 443

Other Distal Airway
Diseases
443.1 Bronchiolitis Obliterans
Catherine Kier and Steven R. Boas
Bronchiolitis obliterans (BO) is a histopathologic diagnosis characterized by chronic obstructive lung disease of the bronchioles and
smaller airways resulting from an insult to the lower respiratory
tract leading to inflammation and fibrosis of the small airways. In
the nontransplant patient, BO most commonly occurs in the pediatric population after respiratory infections, particularly adenovirus
(see Chapter 309), but also Mycoplasma pneumoniae (see Chapter
269), measles (see Chapter 293), Legionella pneumophila (see Chapter 254), influenza (see Chapter 305), and pertussis (see Chapter
243); other causes include inflammatory diseases (juvenile idiopathic arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus [see Chapter 199],
scleroderma [see Chapter 201], Stevens-­Johnson syndrome [see
Chapter 193]) and inhalation of toxic fumes or particulate exposure
(NO2, incinerator fly ash, NH3, diacetyl flavorings from microwave
popcorn, papaverine, fiberglass) (Table 443.1). Postinfectious BO
(PIBO) may be more common in the Southern Hemisphere. BO
is also commonly seen in post lung or bone marrow transplant
recipients.
Bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome (BOS) is a clinical diagnosis
related to graft deterioration after transplantation, defined as a progressive decline in lung function based on forced expiratory volume
in 1 second (FEV1). The airway obstruction is generally irreversible. BOS is considered once other causes of airway obstruction are
excluded. It is recognized as a long-­term complication of both lung
and bone marrow transplantation, with more than one third of survivors of lung transplantation developing this disorder. Risk factors
for the development of BOS include the presence of cytomegalovirus (CMV) pneumonitis, Aspergillus colonization, primary graft
dysfunction, gastroesophageal reflux, and community-­
acquired
respiratory viruses, as well as prolonged transplantation ischemic
time.

PATHOGENESIS

After the initial insult, inflammation affecting terminal bronchioles, respiratory bronchioles, and alveolar ducts can result in the
obliteration of the airway lumen (Fig. 443.1). Epithelial damage
resulting in abnormal repair is characteristic of BO. Complete or
partial obstruction of the airway lumen can result in air trapping
or atelectasis. Parenchymal involvement is not seen. Bronchiolitis
obliterans organizing pneumonia (BOOP), or what is now termed
cryptogenic organizing pneumonia (COP), is a histopathologic
diagnosis. Although it is similar to many of the histologic features
of BO, COP is also characterized by extension of the inflammatory
process from distal alveolar ducts into alveoli with proliferation of
fibroblasts (parenchymal involvement).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND DIAGNOSIS

Cough, fever, cyanosis, dyspnea, chest pain, and respiratory distress followed by initial or no improvement with antibiotics may
be the early signs of BO. In this phase, BO is easily confused with
pneumonia, bronchitis, or bronchiolitis. Progression of the disease
can ensue, with increasing dyspnea, chronic cough, sputum production, and wheezing. Physical examination findings are usually

2595

nonspecific and can include wheezing, hypoxemia, and crackles.
Chest radiographs may be relatively normal compared with the
extent of physical findings but can demonstrate hyperlucency and
patchy infiltrates. Occasionally, Swyer-­James syndrome (unilateral
hyperlucent lung; see Chapter 441) develops. Pulmonary function
tests demonstrate variable findings but typically show signs of airway obstruction with a variable degree of bronchodilator response,
although more commonly irreversible. Exercise testing shows
reduced exercise capacity and impaired oxygen consumption.
Ventilation-­perfusion scans reveal a typical moth-­eaten appearance
of multiple matched defects in ventilation and perfusion. High-­
resolution chest CT often demonstrates patchy areas or a mosaic
pattern of hyperlucency, air trapping, and bronchiectasis (Fig.
443.2). Table 443.2 provides an overview of CT findings of BO and
related disorders. Physical and radiologic signs can wax and wane
over weeks or months. Open lung biopsy or transbronchial biopsy
remains the best means of establishing the diagnosis of BO or COP.

TREATMENT

Treatment is a combination of optimal supportive care and antiinflammatory therapy to impair lymphocyte proliferation. For
PIBO, it is recommended that bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar
lavage be performed to rule out persistent viral, bacterial, or fungal pathogens before initiation of systemic antiinflammatory treatment. Corticosteroids should be given early, pulse steroid therapy
with methylprednisolone is preferred, and a prolonged course of
oral steroids should be avoided to minimize severe side effects and
complications or mortality from infections. Immunomodulatory
agents, such as sirolimus, tacrolimus, aerosolized cyclosporine,
hydroxychloroquine, and macrolide antibiotics, have been used in
post–lung transplantation recipients with BO with variable success.
Supportive measures with oxygen, antibiotics for secondary infections, and bronchodilators are adjunct therapies. The role of gastroesophageal reflux and its association with BO has been raised,
with treatment suggested whenever the diagnosis is made. Azithromycin may be effective in patients with BOS. A combination of
fluticasone, azithromycin, montelukast, and pulse steroid may halt
pulmonary progression of BOS. Potential future treatment options
include using mesenchymal stem/stromal cells (MSCs) for immunomodulatory and possibly profibrotic effects and extracorporeal
photopheresis (ECP) and total lymphoid irradiation (TLI) for BOS,
but additional trials and studies are needed. Patients with asymptomatic or nonprogressive COP can be observed.

PROGNOSIS

Some patients with BO experience rapid deterioration in their condition and die within weeks of the initial symptoms; most nontransplant patients survive with chronic disability. BO tends to be severe
once progression ensues. In contrast to BO, a better prognosis
exists for patients with COP, with complete recovery seen in many
patients, although outcome depends on the underlying systemic
disease. COP can relapse, especially if treatment duration is <1 year;
COP is amenable to repeat courses of oral corticosteroids. Unlike
the more common idiopathic COP, progressive COP characterized
by acute respiratory distress syndrome is rare but is aggressive in its
clinical course, leading to death.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

443.2 Follicular Bronchitis
Catherine Kier and Steven R. Boas
Follicular bronchitis and pediatric lymphocytic interstitial pneumonia
are lymphoproliferative lung disorders characterized by the presence of
lymphoid follicles alongside the airways (bronchi or bronchioles) and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2596 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Table 443.1  Etiology of Bronchiolitis Obliterans
POSTINFECTION
Adenovirus types 3, 7, and 21
Influenza
Parainfluenza
Measles
Respiratory syncytial virus
Varicella
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
POSTTRANSPLANTATION
Chronic rejection of lung or heart/lung transplantation
Graft versus host disease associated with bone marrow
transplantation
CONNECTIVE TISSUE DISEASE/INFLAMMATORY
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Sjögren syndrome
Scleroderma
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Castleman disease
Inflammatory bowel disease

Fig. 443.1 Complete obliteration of airway lumen with fibromyxoid

tissue in lung transplant recipient with bronchiolitis obliterans. (From
Kurland G, Michelson P. Bronchiolitis obliterans in children. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2005;39:193–208.)

TOXIC FUME INHALATION
NO2
NH3
Diacetyl flavorings (microwave popcorn)
Sulfur mustards
Fly ash (incinerator)
Fiberglass
CHRONIC HYPERSENSITIVITY PNEUMONITIS
Avian antigens
Mold
ASPIRATION
Stomach contents: gastroesophageal reflux
Foreign bodies
DRUGS
Penicillamine
Cocaine
STEVENS-­JOHNSON SYNDROME
Idiopathic
Drug induced
Infection related
From Moonnumakal SP, Fan LL. Bronchiolitis obliterans in children. Curr Opin Pediatr.
2008;20:272–278.

infiltration of the walls of bronchi and bronchioles. The disease presents early and is associated with immune dysregulation. Autoantibodies
have been found in some children, and in a few patients, disease-­causing
pathogenic variants have been found in COPA. Most children present
with symptoms in the first 2 years of life, but with a lag time of diagnosis
to about 4 years. Cough, moderate respiratory distress, fever, and fine
crackles are common clinical findings. Fine crackles generally persist
over time, and recurrence of symptoms is common. Chest radiographs
may be relatively benign initially (air trapping, peribronchial thickening) but evolve into the typical interstitial pattern. Chest CT can show
hilar lymphadenopathy, pulmonary nodules, ground-­glass opacity, focal
consolidation, and bronchiectasis but can also appear normal (see Table
443.2). Definitive diagnosis is made by open lung biopsy (Fig. 443.3).
Treatment is limited—systemic steroids, intravenous pulse or oral,
showed high response rates. Prognosis is related to early diagnosis and
treatment, which are critical to improve the outcome. Some patients have
significant progression of pulmonary disease, and others develop only
mild obstructive airway disease.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Fig. 443.2 High-­resolution CT scan of the chest of a child with bron-

chiolitis obliterans demonstrating mosaic perfusion and vascular attenuation. Air-­trapping is demonstrated by lack of increase in attention
or decrease in lung volume in dependent lung. (Image courtesy Alan
Brody, MD, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati,
Ohio.)

443.3 Pulmonary Alveolar Microlithiasis
Catherine Kier and Steven R. Boas
Pulmonary alveolar microlithiasis (PAM) is a rare disease characterized by the formation of lamellar concretions of calcium phosphate, or
“microliths,” within the alveoli, creating a classic pattern on the radiograph (Fig. 443.4).

EPIDEMIOLOGY AND ETIOLOGY

Although the mean age at the time of diagnosis is in the mid-­30s,
the onset of the disease can occur in childhood and in newborns.
PAM is inherited in an autosomal recessive disorder and is caused
by a pathogenic variant in the type II sodium phosphate cotransporter NPT2b (SCL34A2). To date, there are 27 identified pathogenic variants. This gene is expressed in high levels in the lungs,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 443 u Other Distal Airway Diseases

2597

Table 443.2  High-­Resolution CT Patterns in a Child with Interstitial Lung Disease
STUDIES (N)

GROUND-­GLASS
OPACITY

THICK SEPTA

NODULES

MOSAIC
PATTERN

HONEYCOMBING

Bronchiolitis obliterans

4

—

—

—

X

—

Nonspecific interstitial
pneumonitis

6

X

—

—

—

X

Desquamative
interstitial
pneumonitis

4

X

—

—

—

X

Follicular bronchitis
or neuroendocrine
cell hyperplasia of
infancy

4

X

—

—

X

—

Lymphocytic interstitial
pneumonitis

4

—

—

X

—

—

Lymphangiomatosis

2

—

X

—

—

—

Lymphangiectasia

2

—

X

—

—

—

Pulmonary alveolar
proteinosis

2

X

X

—

—

—

From Long FR. Interstitial lung disease. In: Slovis T, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2008: Table 74.1; original data from Lynch DA, Hay T,
Newell JD Jr, et al. Pediatric diffuse lung disease: diagnosis and classification using high-­resolution CT. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 1999;173:713–718; and Copley SJ, Coren M, Nicholson
AG, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of thin-­section CT and chest radiography of pediatric interstitial lung disease. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2000;174:549–554.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

In early stages of the disease, patients are usually asymptomatic. When symptomatic, patients with PAM usually complain of
dyspnea on exertion, nonproductive cough, and fever. Physical
examination of the lungs can reveal fine inspiratory crackles and
diminished breath sounds. Clubbing occurs, although this is usually a more advanced sign. Discordance between the clinical and
radiographic manifestations is common. Many children are often
asymptomatic on initial presentation and present with symptoms
during adulthood. Complications of pneumothorax, pleural adhesions and calcifications, pleural fibrosis, apical bullae, and extrapulmonary sites of microliths have been reported (kidneys, prostate,
gallbladder, sympathetic chain, and testes). Progression to respiratory failure may occur.
Fig 443.3 Follicular bronchiolitis in a 3-­year-­old child with mosaic

attenuation and cylindrical bronchiectasis. CT findings suggested
bronchiolitis obliterans, but a biopsy documented the presence of
follicular bronchiolitis. (From Long FR, Druhan SM, Kuhn JP. Diseases
of the bronchi and pulmonary aeration. In Slovis T, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2008: Fig.
73.71.)

predominantly on the surface of alveolar type II cells. Although the
precise role of this protein is unknown, it is speculated that it helps
to remove phosphate generated from surfactant metabolism in the
alveolar space, as well as functioning as a phosphate regulator in
other organs.
In some families, progression of disease is rapid. An equal male and
female incidence is noted. Although PAM is found throughout the
world, there is a high incidence in Turkey and a lesser incidence in
Italy and Japan.

DIAGNOSIS

Chest radiography typically reveals bilateral infiltrates with a fine
micronodular appearance or sandstorm appearance with greater
density in the lower and middle lung fields (see Fig. 443.4). CT
of the chest shows diffuse micronodular calcified densities, with
thickening of the microliths along the septa and around distal bronchioles, especially in the inferior and posterior regions (see Table
443.2). Diffuse uptake of technetium-­99 methylene diphosphonate
by nuclear scan has been reported. Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL)
may be helpful. Open lung and transbronchial lung biopsy reveal
0.1-­to 0.3-­mm laminated calcific concretions within the alveoli.
Although the alveoli are often normal initially, progression to pulmonary fibrosis with advancing disease usually ensues. Sputum
expectoration might reveal small microliths, although this finding is
not diagnostic for PAM and is not typically seen in children. Detection of calcium deposits in BAL fluid on bronchoscopy supports
the diagnosis. Pulmonary function testing reveals restrictive lung
disease with impaired diffusing capacity as the disease progresses,
whereas exercise testing demonstrates arterial oxygen desaturation.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2598 Part XVII u The Respiratory System

A

B

C

D

E

F

Fig. 443.4 Pulmonary alveolar microlithiasis. Chest radiograph and high-­resolution CT performed at the age of 1 year and 8 years. A, Chest radio-

graph shows bilateral alveolo-­interstitial opacities with middle lobe consolidation. Chest CT imaging shows diffuse but patchy ground-­glass opacities, alveolar consolidations in the middle and lower lobes, and calcifications in the lower lobes, at parenchymal (B) and mediastinal (C) windows. D,
Chest radiograph shows diffuse, even predominant in the lower and middle lobes, dense reticulonodular opacities. Chest CT imaging shows patchy
ground-­glass opacities, homogenous miliary consolidations with micronodular calcifications and subpleural and interlobular reticulations, parenchymal retractions, and architectural distortion suggestive of fibrosis onset mostly in the upper lobes, at parenchymal (E) and mediastinal (F) windows.
(From Sigur E, Roditis L, Labouret G, et al. Pulmonary alveolar microlithiasis in children less than 5 years of age. J Pediatr. 2020;217:158–164.e1,
Fig. 1.)

The diagnosis can usually be established radiographically. However,
lung tissue biopsy, BAL, and detection of a pathogenic variant in
the SCL34A2 gene can also be used to help confirm the diagnosis.
The differential diagnosis includes sarcoidosis, miliary tuberculosis, hemosiderosis, healed disseminated histoplasmosis, pulmonary
calcinosis, and metastatic pulmonary calcifications.

TREATMENT

No specific treatment is effective, although some clinicians have
used glucocorticosteroids, etidronate disodium, and bronchopulmonary lavage with limited success. Lung transplantation has been

performed for this condition without recurrence in the transplanted
lung.

PROGNOSIS

Progressive cardiopulmonary disease can ensue, leading to cor pulmonale, superimposed infections, and subsequent death in mid-­
adulthood. Because of the familial nature of this disease, counseling
and chest radiographs of family members are indicated.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 444 u Congenital Disorders of the Lung

Chapter 444

Congenital Disorders of
the Lung
444.1 Pulmonary Agenesis and Aplasia
Joshua A. Blatter and Jonathan D. Finder

2599

and congenital diaphragmatic hernia physically constrain the developing lung. Any condition that produces oligohydramnios (fetal renal
insufficiency or prolonged premature rupture of membranes) can
also lead to diminished lung growth. In these conditions, airway and
arterial branching are inhibited, thereby limiting the capillary surface
area. Large unilateral lesions, such as congenital diaphragmatic hernia or pulmonary airway malformation, can displace the mediastinum
and thereby produce a contralateral hypoplasia, although usually not
as severe as that seen on the ipsilateral side. Fetal akinesia deformation syndrome is also associated with pulmonary hypoplasia, in part
because of decreased fetal breathing movements.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Pulmonary agenesis differs from hypoplasia in that agenesis entails the
complete absence of a lung. Agenesis differs from aplasia by the absence
of a bronchial stump or carina that is seen in aplasia. Bilateral pulmonary agenesis is incompatible with life, manifesting as severe respiratory
distress and failure. Pulmonary agenesis is thought to be an autosomal
recessive trait, with an estimated incidence of 1 in 10,000-­15,000 births.

Pulmonary hypoplasia is usually recognized in the newborn period,
owing to either the respiratory insufficiency or the presentation of persistent pulmonary hypertension (see Chapter 130). Later presentation
(tachypnea) with stress or respiratory viral infection can be seen in
infants with mild pulmonary hypoplasia.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND PROGNOSIS

A variety of imaging techniques, including MRI and ultrasound, with
estimation of oligohydramnios, can be helpful to identify hypoplasia
but not to predict pulmonary function. Mechanical ventilation and
oxygen may be required to support gas exchange. Specific therapy to
control associated pulmonary hypertension, such as inhaled nitric
oxide, may be useful. In cases of severe hypoplasia, the limited capacity of the lung for gas exchange may be inadequate to sustain life.
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation can provide gas exchange for
a critical period of time and permit survival. Rib-­expanding devices
(vertically expansible prosthetic titanium ribs and magnetic expansion
control rods) can improve the survival of patients with thoracic dystrophies (see Chapter 741).

Unilateral agenesis or hypoplasia can have few symptoms and nonspecific findings, resulting in only 33% of the cases being diagnosed while
the patient is living. Symptoms tend to be associated with central airway complications of compression, stenosis, and/or tracheobronchomalacia. In patients in whom the right lung is absent, the aorta can
compress the trachea and lead to symptoms of central airway compression. Right lung agenesis has a higher morbidity and mortality than
left lung agenesis. Pulmonary agenesis is often seen in association with
other congenital anomalies such as the VACTERL sequence (vertebral
anomalies, anal atresia, congenital heart disease, tracheoesophageal fistula, renal anomalies, and limb anomalies), ipsilateral facial and skeletal
malformations, and central nervous system and cardiac malformations. Compensatory growth of the remaining lung allows improved
gas exchange, but the mediastinal shift can lead to scoliosis and airway
compression. Scoliosis can result from unequal thoracic growth.

DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT

Chest radiographic findings of unilateral lung or lobar collapse with
a shift of mediastinal structures toward the affected side can prompt
referral for suspected foreign body aspiration, mucus plug occlusion,
or other bronchial mass lesions. The diagnosis requires a high index
of suspicion to avoid the unnecessary risks of bronchoscopy, including potential perforation of the rudimentary bronchus. CT of the chest
is diagnostic, although the diagnosis may be suggested by chronic
changes in the contralateral aspect of the chest wall and lung expansion
on chest radiographs. Because pulmonary agenesis can be associated
with a wide variety of congenital lesions, whole body MRI can be useful
to determine whether other systems (e.g., cardiac, gastrointestinal) are
affected. Conservative treatment is usually recommended, although
surgery has offered benefit in selected cases. Referral for management
of scoliosis may be necessary.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

444.2 Pulmonary Hypoplasia
Joshua A. Blatter and Jonathan D. Finder
Pulmonary hypoplasia involves a decrease in both the number of
alveoli and the number of airway generations. The hypoplasia may be
bilateral in the setting of bilateral lung constraint, as in oligohydramnios or thoracic dystrophy. Pulmonary hypoplasia is usually secondary
to other intrauterine disorders that produce an impairment of normal
lung development (see Chapter 124). Conditions such as deformities
of the thoracic spine and rib cage (thoracic dystrophy), pleural effusions with fetal hydrops, congenital pulmonary airway malformation,

DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

444.3 Congenital Pulmonary Airway
Malformation (Congenital Cystic
Adenomatoid Malformation)
Joshua A. Blatter and Jonathan D. Finder
Congenital pulmonary airway malformation (CPAM), formerly
known as cystic adenomatoid malformation, consists of hamartomatous or dysplastic lung tissue mixed with more normal lung, usually
confined to one lobe. This congenital pulmonary disorder occurs in
approximately 1-­4 in 100,000 births. Prenatal ultrasonographic findings are classified as macrocystic (single or multiple cysts >5 mm) or
microcystic (echogenic cysts <5 mm). Five histologic and location
patterns have been described (Fig. 444.1). Type 0 (acinar dysplasia)
is least common (<2%) and consists of microcystic disease throughout the lungs. The prognosis is poorest for this type, and infants die at
birth. Type 1 (60–70%) is macrocystic and consists of a single or several large (>2 cm in diameter) cysts lined with ciliated pseudostratified
epithelium; the lesion is localized involving only a part of one lobe. One
third of cases have mucus-­secreting cells. Presentation is in utero or in
the newborn period. Cartilage is rarely seen in the wall of the cyst. This
type has a good prognosis for survival. Type 2 (15–20%) is microcystic
and consists of multiple small cysts with histology similar to that of
the type 1 lesion. Type 2 is associated with other serious congenital
anomalies (renal, cardiac, diaphragmatic hernia, esophageal atresia,
skeletal) and carries a poor prognosis. Type 3 (5–10%) is seen mostly
in males; the lesion is a mixture of microcysts and solid tissue with
bronchiole-­like structures lined with cuboidal ciliated epithelium and
separated by areas of nonciliated cuboidal epithelium. The prognosis
for this type, like type 0, is poor. Type 4 (∼10%) is commonly macrocystic and lacks mucus cells. It is associated with malignancy (type 1

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2600 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
pleuropulmonary blastoma) and can present either in childhood or in
asymptomatic adults.

ETIOLOGY

The lesion probably results from an embryologic injury before the 35th
day of gestation, with maldevelopment of terminal bronchiolar structures. Histologic examination reveals little normal lung and many glandular elements. Cysts are common; cartilage is rare. The presence of
cartilage might indicate a somewhat later embryologic insult, perhaps
extending into the 10th to 24th week. Although growth factor interactions and signaling mechanisms have been implicated in altered lung-­
branching morphogenesis, the exact roles in the maldevelopment seen
here remain obscure.

DIAGNOSIS

Cystic airway malformations can be diagnosed in utero by ultrasonography (Fig. 444.2). To better define and differentiate the lesion
from other congenital lung malformations, fetal MRI is indicated
(Fig. 444.3). Fetal cystic lung abnormalities can include CPAM (40%),
pulmonary sequestration (14%) (see Chapter 444.4), or both (26%);
the median age at diagnosis is usually 21 weeks of gestation. In one
series, only 7% had severe signs of fetal distress, including hydrops,
pleural effusion, polyhydramnios, ascites, or severe facial edema;
96% of the fetuses were born alive, two of whom died in the neonatal
period. CPAM volume ratio (CVR)—CPAM volume divided by head
circumference—can be used to predict the risk of fetal hydrops. A
CVR >1.6 is a high-­risk factor for developing hydrops. Lesions causing fetal hydrops have a poor prognosis. Large lesions, by compressing

adjacent lung, can produce pulmonary hypoplasia in nonaffected
lobes (see Chapter 444.2). Even lesions that appear large in early
gestation can regress considerably or decrease in relative size and be
associated with good pulmonary function in childhood. MRI allows
accurate diagnosis and sizing of the lesion and is indicated even in
asymptomatic neonates.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Patients can present in the newborn period or early infancy with respiratory distress, recurrent respiratory infection, and pneumothorax.
The lesion may be confused with a diaphragmatic hernia (see Chapter 131). Neonatal presentations include respiratory distress, cyanosis,
tachypnea, or a pneumothorax; hydrops is the most severe presentation. Patients with smaller lesions are usually asymptomatic until
mid-­childhood, when episodes of recurrent or persistent pulmonary
infection or chest pain occur. Breath sounds may be diminished, with
mediastinal shift away from the lesion on physical examination. Chest
radiographs reveal a cystic mass, sometimes with mediastinal shift
(Fig. 444.4). Occasionally, an air-­fluid level suggests a lung abscess (see
Chapter 453).

TREATMENT

Antenatal intervention in severely affected infants is controversial but
can include excision of the affected lobe for microcystic lesions, aspiration of macrocystic lesions, and, rarely, open fetal surgery. Maternal
therapy with intravenous betamethasone may inhibit CPAM growth
and reverse hydrops. If hydrops persists, a thoracoamniotic shunt may











A

B

Fig. 444.3 These two fetal MRIs depict a practical prenatal classifiFig. 444.1 Types of congenital pulmonary airway malformations.

Type 0, tracheobronchial; type 1, bronchial; type 2, bronchiolar;
type 3, alveolar duct; type 4, distal acinar. (Adapted from Stocker
JT. Cystic lung disease in infants and children. Fetal Pediatr Pathol.
2009;28:155–184.)

cation for congenital pulmonary airway malformations. A, Microcystic
lesion presenting as a solid hyperintense mass (star). B, Macrocystic lesion containing a large cyst >5.0 mm in diameter (star). (From Laje P,
Flake AW. Congenital bronchopulmonary malformations. In: Holcomb
III GW, Murphy JP, St. Peter SD, eds. Holcomb and Ashcraft’s Pediatric
Surgery, 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020: Fig. 22.3, p. 350.)

L
M

M

M

L
L

A

B

C

D

Fig. 444.2 Congenital pulmonary airway malformation (CPAM). A, Massive right CPAM mass (M) with pronounced mediastinal shift is seen. Note

the small size of the compressed left lung (L). B, Hydrops fetalis was present; ascites can be seen. C, A shunt was placed in the largest cavity. D,
Resolution of the hydrops was seen within 1 week. Cross section through the thorax shows expansion of the ipsilateral and contralateral lungs, repositioning of the heart, and reduction of the mass. (From Obican SG, Odibo A. Invasive fetal therapy. In: Lockwood CJ, Copel JA, Dugoff L, et al.,
eds. Creasy & Resnik’s Maternal-­Fetal Medicine, 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023: Fig 34-­11, p. 633.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 444 u Congenital Disorders of the Lung
be indicated. In the postnatal period, surgery is indicated for symptomatic patients. Although surgery may be delayed for asymptomatic
infants because postnatal resolution has been reported, true resolution
appears to be quite rare in that abnormalities usually remain detectable on CT or MRI. Sarcomatous and carcinomatous degeneration
have been described in patients with CPAM, so surgical resection by
1 year of age is typically recommended to limit malignant potential. If
surgery is not performed, the child should have imaging at least yearly
to track progression of the lesion. The mortality rate is <10%. Another
indication for surgery is to rule out pleuropulmonary blastoma
(PPB), a malignancy that can appear radiographically similar to type 1
CPAM or appear concurrently in a type 4 CPAM (mixed lesion). PPB
is associated with germline or somatic pathogenic variants in DICER1.
PPB usually has a systemic feeding vessel and is not connected to
the bronchial tree. However, it is often difficult to distinguish a PPB
from a CPAM without surgery. In addition to the risk of malignancy,
“asymptomatic” patients may have chronic inflammation with subtle
systemic manifestations, which parents report resolves after the lesion
is resected.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

444.4 Pulmonary Sequestration
Joshua A. Blatter and Jonathan D. Finder
Pulmonary sequestration is a congenital anomaly of lung development that can be intrapulmonary or extrapulmonary, according to the

2601

location within the visceral pleura. The majority of sequestrations are
intrapulmonary.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

The lung tissue in a sequestration does not connect to a bronchus and
receives its arterial supply from the systemic arteries (commonly off
the aorta) and returns its venous blood to the right side of the heart
through the inferior vena cava (extralobar) or pulmonary veins (intralobar). The sequestration functions as a space-­occupying lesion within
the chest; it does not participate in gas exchange and does not lead to a
left-­to-­right shunt or alveolar dead space. Communication with the airway can occur as the result of rupture of infected material into an adjacent airway. Collateral ventilation within intrapulmonary lesions via
pores of Kohn can occur. Pulmonary sequestrations can arise through
the same pathoembryologic mechanism as a remnant of a diverticular outgrowth of the esophagus. Some propose that intrapulmonary
sequestration is an acquired lesion primarily caused by infection and
inflammation; inflammation leads to cystic changes and hypertrophy
of a feeding systemic artery. This is consistent with the rarity of this
lesion in an autopsy series of newborns. Gastric or pancreatic tissue
may be found within the sequestration. Cysts also may be present.
Other associated congenital anomalies, including CPAM (see Chapter
444.3), diaphragmatic hernia (see Chapter 131), and esophageal cysts,
are not uncommon. Some believe that intrapulmonary sequestration
is often a manifestation of CPAM and have questioned the existence of
intrapulmonary sequestration as a separate entity.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND DIAGNOSIS

Recurrent pneumonia in the same lung location is suggestive of a
sequestration. Physical findings in patients with sequestration include
an area of dullness to percussion and decreased breath sounds over the
lesion. During infection, crackles may also be present. A continuous or
purely systolic murmur may be heard over the back. If findings on routine chest radiographs are consistent with the diagnosis, further delineation is indicated before surgical intervention (Fig. 444.5). CT with
contrast can demonstrate both the extent of the lesion and its vascular
supply. MR angiography is also useful. Ultrasonography can help to
rule out a diaphragmatic hernia and demonstrate the systemic artery.
Surgical removal is recommended. Identifying the blood supply before
surgery avoids inadvertently severing its systemic artery. Coil embolization (transumbilical in neonates; arterial in older patients) has been
successful in treating patients with sequestration.
Intrapulmonary sequestration is generally found in a lower lobe
and does not have its own pleura. Patients usually present with infection. In older patients, hemoptysis is common. A chest radiograph during a period when there is no active infection reveals a mass lesion;
an air-­fluid level may be present. During infection, the margins of the
lesion may be blurred. There is no difference in the incidence of this
lesion in each lung.

A

B

Fig. 444.5 A, Plain chest x-­ray showing changes in the region of the
Fig. 444.4 CT scans of CPAM in the left lower lobe of the lung. (From

Wong KKY, Flake AW, Tibboel D, et al. Congenital pulmonary airway
malformation: advances and controversies. Lancet Child Adolesc.
2018;2:290–296, Fig. 1.)

right lower/middle lobe of the lung. B, CT showing parenchymal changes in the right lower lobe of the lung in keeping with a sequestration.
(From Corbett HJ, Humphrey GME. Pulmonary sequestration. Paediatr
Respir Rev. 2004;5:59–68.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2602 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Extrapulmonary sequestration is much more common in boys
and almost always involves the left lung. This lesion is enveloped by a
pleural covering and is associated with diaphragmatic hernia and other
abnormalities such as colonic duplication, vertebral abnormalities, and
pulmonary hypoplasia. Many of these patients are asymptomatic when
the mass is discovered by routine chest radiography. Other patients
present with respiratory symptoms or heart failure. Subdiaphragmatic
extrapulmonary sequestration can manifest as an abdominal mass on
prenatal ultrasonography. The advent of prenatal ultrasonography has
also enabled evidence that fetal pulmonary sequestrations can spontaneously regress.

TREATMENT

Treatment of intrapulmonary sequestration is surgical removal of the
lesion, a procedure that usually requires excision of the entire involved lobe.
Segmental resection occasionally suffices. Surgical resection of the involved
area is often recommended for extrapulmonary sequestration as well,
but observation can be considered for asymptomatic patients with small
lesions. Coil embolization of the feeding artery has also been successful.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

444.5 Bronchogenic Cysts
Joshua A. Blatter and Jonathan D. Finder

ETIOLOGY AND PATHOLOGY

Bronchogenic cysts arise from abnormal budding of the tracheal diverticulum of the foregut before the 16th week of gestation and are originally lined
with ciliated epithelium. They are more commonly found on the right and
near a midline structure (trachea, esophagus, carina), but peripheral lower
lobe and perihilar intrapulmonary cysts are not infrequent. Diagnosis
may be precipitated by enlargement of the cyst, which causes symptoms
by pressure on an adjacent airway. When the diagnosis is delayed until an
infection occurs, the ciliated epithelium may be lost, and accurate pathologic diagnosis is then impossible. Cysts are rarely demonstrable at birth.
Later, some cysts become symptomatic by becoming infected or by enlarging and compromising the function of an adjacent airway.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND TREATMENT

Fever, chest pain, and productive cough are the most common presenting symptoms. Dysphagia may be present; some bronchogenic cysts
are asymptomatic. A chest radiograph reveals the cyst, which can contain an air-­fluid level (Fig. 444.6). CT scan or MRI is obtained in most
cases to better demonstrate the anatomy and extent of the lesion before
surgical resection. Treatment of symptomatic cysts is surgical excision
after appropriate antibiotic management. Asymptomatic cysts are generally excised in view of the high rate of infection.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

444.6 Congenital Pulmonary
Lymphangiectasia
Joshua A. Blatter and Jonathan D. Finder
Congenital pulmonary lymphangiectasia is characterized by greatly
dilated lymphatic ducts throughout the lung. It can occur in three
pathologic circumstances: pulmonary venous obstruction that produces an elevated transvascular pressure and engorges the pulmonary lymphatics and generalized lymphangiectasia, as a generalized
disease of several organ systems, including lymphedema, lungs, and
the intestines either associated with other syndromes (Noonan, Hennekam, yellow nail, trisomy 21) or nonsyndromic. Gorham-­Stout disease (vanishing bone disease) presents with pulmonary and abdominal
chylous effusions, destructive bone cysts, and multiple lymphangiomas;

Fig. 444.6 Chest x-­ray showing an ovoid, well-­defined soft tissue

density causing splaying of the carina because of a bronchogenic cyst.
(From Williams HJ, Johnson KJ. Imaging of congenital cystic lung lesions. Paediatr Respir Rev. 2002;3:120–127.)

primary lymphangiectasia limited to the lung is the third type, which
is a manifestation of an abnormality in lymphatic development.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND TREATMENT

Children with pulmonary venous obstruction or severe pulmonary
lymphangiectasia present with dyspnea and cyanosis in the newborn
period. Hydrops fetalis may be diagnosed antenatally. Chest radiographs reveal diffuse, dense, reticular densities with prominence of
Kerley B lines. Pleural effusions are common; thoracentesis will reveal
chylothorax in this setting. If the lung is not completely involved, the
spared areas appear hyperlucent. Respiration is compromised because
of impaired diffusion and decreased pulmonary compliance. The diagnosis can be suggested by CT scan and/or cardiac catheterization;
definitive diagnosis requires lymphangiography, lymphoscintigraphy,
or lung biopsy (either thoracoscopic or open) (Fig. 444.7).
Treatment is supportive and includes administration of oxygen,
mechanical ventilation, nutritional support (including gastrostomy
placement and use of feedings containing medium-­chain triglycerides),
and careful fluid management with diuretics. Octreotide, the somatostatin analog, can reduce chylous effusion in some patients. Primary
pulmonary lymphangiectasia in the neonate can produce severe pulmonary dysfunction that can require long-­term mechanical ventilation;
long-­term survival and resolution of respiratory insufficiency are possible even in severe cases, especially if the chylous effusions can be managed. Occasionally, the pulmonary venous obstruction is secondary to
left-­sided cardiac lesions; relief of the latter can produce improvement in
pulmonary dysfunction. Sildenafil may reduce pulmonary venous resistance and decrease lymphatic congestion. Sirolimus, which suppresses
lymphangiogenesis, may also be beneficial. Lymphangiographic-­directed
lymphatic injection with ethiodized oil may be another therapeutic
option. Generalized lymphangiectasia produces milder pulmonary dysfunction, and survival to mid-­childhood and beyond is not unusual.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 444 u Congenital Disorders of the Lung

444.7 Lung Hernia
Joshua A. Blatter and Jonathan D. Finder
A lung hernia is a protrusion of the lung beyond its normal thoracic
boundaries. Approximately 20% are congenital, with the remainder being
noted after chest trauma or thoracic surgery or in patients with pulmonary
diseases such as cystic fibrosis (see Chapter 454) or asthma (see Chapter
185), which cause frequent cough and generate high intrathoracic pressure.
A congenital weakness of the suprapleural membrane (Sibson fascia) or
musculature of the neck can play a role in the appearance of a lung hernia.
More than half of congenital lung hernias and almost all acquired hernias
are cervical. Congenital cervical hernias usually occur anteriorly through a
gap between the scalenus anterior and sternocleidomastoid muscles. Cervical herniation is usually prevented by the trapezius muscle (posteriorly,
at the thoracic inlet) and by the three scalene muscles (laterally).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND TREATMENT

The presenting sign of a cervical hernia (Sibson hernia) is usually a neck
mass noticed while straining or coughing. Some lesions are asymptomatic and detected only when a chest film is taken for another reason.
Findings on physical examination are normal except during Valsalva
maneuver, when a soft bulge may be noticed in the neck. In most cases,
no treatment is necessary, although these hernias can cause problems

2603

during attempts to place a central venous catheter through the jugular
or subclavian veins. They can resolve spontaneously.
Paravertebral or parasternal hernias are usually associated with rib
anomalies. Intercostal hernias usually occur parasternally, where the
external intercostal muscle is absent. Posteriorly, despite the seemingly
inadequate internal intercostal muscle, the paraspinal muscles usually
prevent herniation. Straining, coughing, or playing a musical instrument can have a role in causing intercostal hernias, but in most cases,
there is probably a preexisting defect in the thoracic wall.
Surgical treatment for lung hernia is occasionally justified for cosmetic reasons. In patients with severe chronic pulmonary disease and
chronic cough and for whom cough suppression is contraindicated,
permanent correction might not be achieved.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

444.8 Other Congenital Malformations of
the Lung
Joshua A. Blatter and Jonathan D. Finder

CONGENITAL LOBAR EMPHYSEMA AND
PULMONARY CYSTS
See Chapter 441.

PULMONARY ARTERIOVENOUS MALFORMATION
See Chapters 481 and 493.

BRONCHOBILIARY FISTULA

A

B

Fig. 444.7 A, Dynamic contrast MR lymphangiogram (DCMRL) in a pa-

tient with pulmonary lymphangiectasia demonstrating dilated thoracic duct
(TD) (arrow) and abnormal pulmonary lymphatic perfusion in the lung hilum
(arrowheads). B, Corresponding fluoroscopy image of the TD of the same
patient after injection of contrast material through the microcatheter positioned in the proximal part of the TD, which confirms the dilation of the
TD (arrow) and retrograde flow of the contrast in the mediastinal lymphatic
ducts (arrowhead). (From Itkin M, McCormack FX. Nonmalignant adult thoracic lymphatic disorders. Clin Chest Med. 2016;37:409–420, Fig. 7.)

A

B

A bronchobiliary fistula consists of a fistulous connection between the
right middle lobe bronchus and the left hepatic ductal system (Fig.
444.8). Although diagnosis can be delayed until adulthood, this rare
anomaly typically manifests with life-­threatening bronchopulmonary
infections in early infancy. Females are more commonly affected.
Definitive diagnosis requires endoscopy or exploratory surgery. Treatment includes surgical excision of the entire intrathoracic portion of the
fistula. If the hepatic portion of the fistula does not communicate with
the biliary system or duodenum, the involved segment might also have
to be resected. Bronchobiliary communications also occur as acquired
lesions resulting from hepatic disease complicated by infection.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

C

D

Fig. 444.8 Bronchobiliary fistula. A, Unusually bright yellow, serous sputum was observed. The sputum differed in appearance from the yellow

sputum containing leukocytes associated with infections. B, CT scan revealed an abnormal bronchial bifurcation originating in the right main bronchus and extending downward (arrow). C (Top), Bronchoscopic images of the right second carina revealed an anomalous orifice (yellow arrow) in the
medial side of the right intermediate bronchus (blue arrow). (Bottom), Close-­up photo of the abnormal orifice with yellow, serous secretion. D, Fistulography with a balloon catheter revealed contrast material slowly proceeding through the intraabdominal region (red arrows) to the intrahepatic
region (yellow arrows) below the diaphragm (blue arrow). (From Shimizu A, Otani Y, Ishitate M. Congenital bronchobiliary fistula with bright yellow
serous sputum. J Pediatr. 2020;243:235–236, Fig. 1.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2604 Part XVII u The Respiratory System

Chapter 445

Pulmonary Edema
Brandon T. Woods
Pulmonary edema is an abnormal fluid collection in the interstitium
and air spaces of the lung resulting in oxygen desaturation, decreased
lung compliance, and respiratory distress. The condition is common in
the acutely ill child.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

Although pulmonary edema is traditionally separated into two categories according to cause (cardiogenic and noncardiogenic), the end result
of both processes is a net fluid accumulation within the interstitial and
alveolar spaces. Noncardiogenic pulmonary edema in its most severe
state is also known as acute respiratory distress syndrome (see Chapters
86 and 421).
The hydrostatic pressure and colloid osmotic (oncotic) pressure on
either side of a pulmonary vascular wall, along with vascular permeability, are the forces and physical factors that determine fluid movement through the vessel wall. Baseline conditions lead to a net filtration
of fluid from the intravascular space into the interstitium. This extra
interstitial fluid is usually rapidly reabsorbed by pulmonary lymphatics. Conditions that lead to altered vascular permeability, increased
pulmonary vascular pressure, and decreased intravascular oncotic
pressure increase the net flow of fluid out of the vessel (Table 445.1).
Once the capacity of the lymphatics for fluid removal is exceeded,
water accumulates in the lung.
To understand the sequence of lung water accumulation, it is helpful to consider its distribution among four distinct compartments, as
follows:
• Vascular compartment: This compartment consists of all blood vessels that participate in fluid exchange with the interstitium. The vascular compartment is separated from the interstitium by capillary
endothelial cells. Several endogenous inflammatory mediators, as
well as exogenous toxins, are implicated in the pathogenesis of pulmonary capillary endothelial damage, leading to the leakiness seen
in several systemic processes.
• Interstitial compartment: The importance of this space lies in its
interposition between the alveolar and vascular compartments. As
fluid leaves the vascular compartment, it collects in the interstitium
before overflowing into the air spaces of the alveolar compartment.
• Alveolar compartment: This compartment is lined with type 1 and
type 2 epithelial cells. These epithelial cells have a role in active fluid
transport from the alveolar space, and they act as a barrier to exclude
fluid from the alveolar space. The potential fluid volume of the alveolar compartment is many times greater than that of the interstitial
space, perhaps providing another reason that alveolar edema clears
more slowly than interstitial edema.
• Pulmonary lymphatic compartment: There is an extensive network
of pulmonary lymphatics. Excess fluid present in the alveolar and
interstitial compartments is drained via the lymphatic system. When
the capacity for drainage of the lymphatics is surpassed, fluid accumulation occurs.

ETIOLOGY

The specific clinical findings vary according to the underlying mechanism (see Table 445.1).
Transudation of fluid as a result of increased pulmonary vascular pressure (capillary hydrostatic pressure) occurs in several cardiac
processes. A significant left-­to-­right shunting lesion, such as a septal
defect, leads to a pressure and volume load on the pulmonary vasculature. The resultant pulmonary edema is one of the hallmarks of congestive heart failure. Left ventricular failure, mitral valve disease, and
pulmonary venous obstructive lesions cause increased backpressure in

Table 445.1  Etiology of Pulmonary Edema
INCREASED PULMONARY CAPILLARY PRESSURE
Cardiogenic, such as left ventricular failure
Noncardiogenic, as in pulmonary venoocclusive disease, pulmonary
venous fibrosis, mediastinal tumors
INCREASED CAPILLARY PERMEABILITY
Bacterial and viral pneumonia
Acute respiratory distress syndrome
Immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS)
Cytokine release syndrome (CRS): CAR-T therapy
Inhaled toxic agents
Circulating toxins
Vasoactive substances such as histamine, leukotrienes, and
thromboxanes
Diffuse capillary leak syndrome, as in sepsis, SIRS
Immunologic reactions, such as transfusion reactions
Smoke inhalation
Aspiration pneumonia/pneumonitis
Drowning and near drowning
Radiation pneumonia
Uremia
LYMPHATIC INSUFFICIENCY
Congenital and acquired
DECREASED ONCOTIC PRESSURE
Hypoalbuminemia, as in renal and hepatic diseases, protein-­losing
states, and malnutrition
INCREASED NEGATIVE INTERSTITIAL PRESSURE
Upper airway obstructive lesions, such as croup and epiglottitis
Reexpansion pulmonary edema
MIXED OR UNKNOWN CAUSES
Neurogenic pulmonary edema
High-­altitude pulmonary edema
Eclampsia
Pancreatitis
Pulmonary embolism
Heroin (narcotic) pulmonary edema
SIRS, systemic inflammatory response syndrome.
Modified from Robin E, Carroll C, Zelis R. Pulmonary edema. N Engl J Med.
1973;288:239, 292; and Desphande J, Wetzel R, Rogers M. In: Rogers M, ed. Textbook
of Pediatric Intensive Care, 3rd ed. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins; 1996:432–442.

the pulmonary vasculature. This results in an increase in pulmonary
capillary pressure.
Increased capillary permeability is usually secondary to endothelial
damage. Such damage can occur secondary to direct injury to the alveolar epithelium or indirectly through systemic processes that deliver
circulating inflammatory mediators or toxins to the lung. Inflammatory mediators (tumor necrosis factor, leukotrienes, thromboxanes)
and vasoactive agents (nitric oxide, histamine) formed during pulmonary and systemic processes potentiate the altered capillary permeability that occurs in many disease processes, with sepsis being a common
cause.
Fluid homeostasis in the lung largely depends on drainage via the
lymphatics. Experimentally, pulmonary edema occurs with obstruction of the lymphatic system. Increased lymph flow and dilation of
lymphatic vessels occur in chronic edematous states.
A decrease in intravascular oncotic pressure leads to pulmonary
edema by altering the forces promoting fluid reentry into the vascular
space. This occurs in dilutional disorders, such as fluid overload with
hypotonic solutions, and in protein-­losing states, such as nephrotic
syndrome and malnutrition.
The excessive negative interstitial pressure seen in upper airway
diseases, such as croup and laryngospasm, may promote pulmonary
edema. Aside from the physical forces present in these diseases, other
mechanisms may also be involved. Theories implicate an increase in
CO2 tension, decreased O2 tension, and extreme increases in cardiac
afterload, leading to transient cardiac insufficiency.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 445 u Pulmonary Edema
The mechanism causing neurogenic pulmonary edema is not clear.
A massive sympathetic discharge secondary to a cerebral injury may
produce increased pulmonary and systemic vasoconstriction, resulting
in a shift of blood to the pulmonary vasculature, an increase in capillary pressure, and edema formation. Inflammatory mechanisms may
also play a role by increasing capillary permeability.
The mechanism responsible for high-­altitude pulmonary edema is
unclear, but it may also be related to sympathetic outflow, increased
pulmonary vascular pressures, and hypoxia-­induced increases in capillary permeability (see Chapter 87).
Active ion transport followed by passive osmotic water movement
is important in clearing the alveolar space of fluid. There are some
experimental data that β-­agonists and growth factors increase alveolar
fluid removal. Interindividual genetic differences in the rates of these
transport processes may be important in determining which individuals are susceptible to altitude-­related pulmonary edema. Although the
existence of these mechanisms suggests that therapeutic interventions
may be developed to promote resolution of pulmonary edema, no such
therapies currently exist.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The clinical features depend on the mechanism of edema formation. In
general, interstitial edema and alveolar edema prevent the inflation of
alveoli, leading to atelectasis and decreased surfactant production. This
results in diminished pulmonary compliance and tidal volume. The
patient must increase respiratory effort and/or the respiratory rate so as

2605

to maintain minute ventilation. The earliest clinical signs of pulmonary
edema include increased work of breathing, tachypnea, and dyspnea.
As fluid accumulates in the alveolar space, auscultation reveals fine
crackles and wheezing, especially in dependent lung fields. In cardiogenic pulmonary edema, a gallop may be present as well as peripheral
edema and jugular venous distention.
Chest radiographs can provide useful ancillary data, although findings of initial radiographs may be normal. Early radiographic signs that
represent accumulation of interstitial edema include peribronchial and
perivascular cuffing. Diffuse streakiness reflects interlobular edema
and distended pulmonary lymphatics. Diffuse, patchy densities, the so-­
called butterfly pattern, represent bilateral interstitial or alveolar infiltrates and are a late sign. Cardiomegaly is often seen with cardiogenic
causes of pulmonary edema. Heart size is usually normal in noncardiogenic pulmonary edema (Table 445.2). Chest tomography demonstrates edema accumulation in the dependent areas of the lung. As a
result, changing the patient’s position can alter regional differences in
lung compliance, functional residual capacity, and alveolar ventilation.
Measurement of brain natriuretic peptide, often elevated in heart
disease, can help to differentiate cardiac from pulmonary causes of pulmonary edema. A brain natriuretic peptide level >500 pg/mL suggests
heart disease; a level <100 pg/mL suggests lung disease.

TREATMENT

The treatment of a patient with noncardiogenic pulmonary edema is
largely supportive, with the primary goal being to ensure adequate

Table 445.2  Distinguishing Cardiogenic and Noncardiogenic Pulmonary Edema
HISTORY

EXAMINATION

LABORATORY TESTS

IMAGING

• Heart disease
• Renal disease
• Uncontrolled HTN
• Edema
• Orthopnea
• Recent administration
of IV fluids or blood
products

• Heart failure examination
findings:
• Distended neck veins
• S3 heart sound
• Dependent edema
• Elevated blood
pressure
• Cool extremities

• ↑ BNP >1200 pg/mL
• ↑ Creatinine (in setting
of volume overload)
• ↑ Troponin

• CXR:
• CMG pleural effusions
• Kerley B lines*
• Bedside USG: homogenous B lines and sliding
pleura in at least two lung
regions
• TEE:
• ↓ LVEF
• Diastolic filling defect
• Severe mitral or aortic
valvular disease
• Pericardial effusion with
tamponade
• VSD

• Sepsis
• Aspiration event
• Trauma (long bone
fractures)
• Burn injury
• Pancreatitis
• Multiple transfusions

• Signs of active infection
• Extensive burn injury
• Evidence of trauma
(absence of heart failure
examination findings)

• ↑ WBC
• BNP <200 pg/mL

• CXR:
• Diffuse central and
peripheral infiltrates
• Normal heart size
• No or minimal pleural
effusions
• Bedside USG: Presence of
nonhomogeneous B lines,
limited pleural sliding,
and other patterns such as
subpleural consolidations
in at least two to three lung
regions
• TEE:
• Normal LV and valvular
function
• No evidence of volume
overload

CARDIOGENIC

NONCARDIOGENIC

*Thin 1–2 cm hyperechoic lines indicating thickened interlobular septae in the lung apices or bases.
BNR, brain natriuretic peptide.
Modified from Pannu SR, Christman JW, Crouser ED: Pulmonary edema. In Vincent JL, Moore FA, Bellomo R, Marini JJ (eds). Textbook of Critical Care, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier,
2024. Table 11.1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2606 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
ventilation and oxygenation. Additional therapy is directed toward
the underlying cause. Patients should receive supplemental oxygen to
increase alveolar oxygen tension and pulmonary vasodilation. Patients
with pulmonary edema of cardiogenic causes should be managed with
diuretics, inotropic agents, and systemic vasodilators to reduce left ventricular afterload. Diuretics are also valuable in the treatment of pulmonary edema associated with total body fluid overload (sepsis, renal
insufficiency). Morphine is often helpful as a vasodilator and a mild
sedative.
Positive airway pressure improves gas exchange in patients with
pulmonary edema. In tracheally intubated patients, positive end-­
expiratory pressure can be used to optimize pulmonary mechanics.
Noninvasive forms of ventilation, such as mask or nasal prong continuous positive airway pressure, are also effective. The mechanism
by which positive airway pressure improves pulmonary edema is not
entirely clear but is not associated with decreasing lung water. Rather,
continuous positive airway pressure prevents complete closure of alveoli at the low lung volumes present at the end of expiration. It may
also recruit already collapsed alveolar units. This leads to increased
functional residual capacity and improved pulmonary compliance,
improved surfactant function, and decreased pulmonary vascular
resistance. The net effect is to decrease the work of breathing, improve
oxygenation, and decrease cardiac afterload.
When mechanical ventilation becomes necessary, especially in noncardiogenic pulmonary edema, care must be taken to minimize the
risk of development of complications from volutrauma or barotrauma,
including pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum, and primary alveolar
damage (see Chapter 86.1). Lung protective strategies include setting
low tidal volumes, relatively high positive end-­expiratory pressure, and
allowing for permissive hypercapnia.
High-­altitude pulmonary edema should be managed with altitude
descent and supplemental oxygen. Portable continuous positive airway
pressure or a portable hyperbaric chamber is also helpful. Nifedipine
(10 mg initially and then 20-­30 mg by slow release every 12-­24 hours)
in adults is also helpful. If there is a history of high-­altitude pulmonary
edema, nifedipine and β-­adrenergic agonists (inhaled) may prevent
recurrence (see Chapter 87).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 446

Acute Aspiration
Anastassios C. Koumbourlis
ASPIRATION SYNDROMES

Aspiration of material that is foreign to the lower airway produces a
varied clinical spectrum ranging from an asymptomatic condition to
acute life-­threatening events. Except for cases of self-­harm, episodes of
acute aspiration are almost always unintentional. Whether the aspiration will lead to the development of symptoms and how severe these
will be depends on the amount and nature of the aspirated material.
This chapter focuses on aspiration of biologic liquids (e.g., gastric
contents) and chemical substances such as hydrocarbons or oils. Other
chapters discuss the mechanical obstruction of large-­or intermediate-­
size airways from solid foreign bodies (see Chapter 435), drowning (see
Chapter 88), and chronic or recurrent (micro)aspiration (see Chapter
447).

GASTRIC CONTENTS

Aspiration of gastric contents may occur in the context of vomiting in
persons who are not able to protect their airways. This can be the result
of either a chronic neurologic impairment or temporary suppression of
the normal protective reflexes. Such circumstances include drowning,
seizures, trauma (especially head injury), and cardiopulmonary resuscitation. The most common nonacute condition that may predispose
to aspiration is anesthesia that suppresses the protective airway reflexes
(e.g., cough, glottic closure) not only during the procedure but even for
hours afterward. Fortunately, because of the strict guidelines of fasting
before receiving anesthesia, the actual incidence of aspiration during
anesthesia is extremely low (<0.4%). It should be noted that in-­office
sedation/anesthesia for dental procedures also has the potential to
cause suppression of the protective airway reflexes. Other conditions
that may lead to vomiting and aspiration are alcohol intoxication and
use of illicit drugs such as opiates, both of which can cause severe suppression of the level of consciousness.
The consequences of aspiration of gastric contents vary, depending
primarily on the pH and volume of the aspirate and on the amount
of particulate material it contains. Increased clinical severity is noted
with aspirated volumes greater than 0.8 mL/kg and/or pH <2.5, but
significant injury may also occur by fluids with alkaline pH such as bile
or even with human breast milk.
Acute aspiration may cause chemical pneumonitis that may progress to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) consisting of
hypoxemia, hemorrhagic pneumonitis, atelectasis, intravascular fluid
shifts, and pulmonary edema. These processes occur rapidly (within
minutes to 1-­2 hours). There is also a marked increase in lung parenchymal neutrophil infiltrations, mucosal sloughing, and alveolar consolidation that often correlates with increasing infiltrates on chest
radiographs. These changes tend to occur later (24-­72 hours) and are
more prolonged after aspiration of particulate material. Aspiration of
gastric contents does not cause infection per se, but it predisposes to
infection because of impairment of the airway epithelial defenses. If
the patient demonstrates clinical worsening, especially with fever and
leukocytosis, secondary bacterial pneumonia should be suspected.

HYDROCARBON ASPIRATION

Hydrocarbons are organic compounds that consist entirely of hydrogen and carbon. They are found in abundance in nature in fossil fuels
(crude oil, coal, natural gas) and in plants (and some animals). Hydrocarbons are used in numerous common household or industrial products, thus increasing the possibility of accidental (and/or intentional)
exposure. The major types of hydrocarbons and their common uses
can be found in Table 446.1.
There are thousands of unintentional exposures to hydrocarbons
each year, with the vast majority occurring in children under the age
of 5, who drink out of curiosity from poorly secured and unlabeled
containers. During adolescence, many exposures are intentional for
recreational purposes (e.g., glue sniffing). Among adults a common
accidental exposure occurs while attempting to siphon gasoline or
among performers such as “fire eaters.” Aspiration of hydrocarbons can
occur while drinking the substance or often in the context of vomiting
that follows an ingestion. Hydrocarbons have a noxious, unpleasant
taste, and they are highly irritating to mucous membranes, thus preventing ingestion and aspiration of large volumes. One exception is the
mineral seal oil that has a sweet taste that can lead to the ingestion of
fairly large amounts.
The toxicity of the hydrocarbons depends on the specific properties of the compound and the amount that was aspirated. The major
properties are:
• Viscosity: that is the resistance to flow through an orifice. Low viscosity allows deeper penetration into the tracheobronchial tree, and
it is the property that primarily determines the aspiration potential
for hydrocarbons.
• Surface tension: that refers to the cohesiveness of molecules along a
liquid surface. Low surface tension allows compounds to spread over
a larger area.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2606 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
ventilation and oxygenation. Additional therapy is directed toward
the underlying cause. Patients should receive supplemental oxygen to
increase alveolar oxygen tension and pulmonary vasodilation. Patients
with pulmonary edema of cardiogenic causes should be managed with
diuretics, inotropic agents, and systemic vasodilators to reduce left ventricular afterload. Diuretics are also valuable in the treatment of pulmonary edema associated with total body fluid overload (sepsis, renal
insufficiency). Morphine is often helpful as a vasodilator and a mild
sedative.
Positive airway pressure improves gas exchange in patients with
pulmonary edema. In tracheally intubated patients, positive end-­
expiratory pressure can be used to optimize pulmonary mechanics.
Noninvasive forms of ventilation, such as mask or nasal prong continuous positive airway pressure, are also effective. The mechanism
by which positive airway pressure improves pulmonary edema is not
entirely clear but is not associated with decreasing lung water. Rather,
continuous positive airway pressure prevents complete closure of alveoli at the low lung volumes present at the end of expiration. It may
also recruit already collapsed alveolar units. This leads to increased
functional residual capacity and improved pulmonary compliance,
improved surfactant function, and decreased pulmonary vascular
resistance. The net effect is to decrease the work of breathing, improve
oxygenation, and decrease cardiac afterload.
When mechanical ventilation becomes necessary, especially in noncardiogenic pulmonary edema, care must be taken to minimize the
risk of development of complications from volutrauma or barotrauma,
including pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum, and primary alveolar
damage (see Chapter 86.1). Lung protective strategies include setting
low tidal volumes, relatively high positive end-­expiratory pressure, and
allowing for permissive hypercapnia.
High-­altitude pulmonary edema should be managed with altitude
descent and supplemental oxygen. Portable continuous positive airway
pressure or a portable hyperbaric chamber is also helpful. Nifedipine
(10 mg initially and then 20-­30 mg by slow release every 12-­24 hours)
in adults is also helpful. If there is a history of high-­altitude pulmonary
edema, nifedipine and β-­adrenergic agonists (inhaled) may prevent
recurrence (see Chapter 87).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 446

Acute Aspiration
Anastassios C. Koumbourlis
ASPIRATION SYNDROMES

Aspiration of material that is foreign to the lower airway produces a
varied clinical spectrum ranging from an asymptomatic condition to
acute life-­threatening events. Except for cases of self-­harm, episodes of
acute aspiration are almost always unintentional. Whether the aspiration will lead to the development of symptoms and how severe these
will be depends on the amount and nature of the aspirated material.
This chapter focuses on aspiration of biologic liquids (e.g., gastric
contents) and chemical substances such as hydrocarbons or oils. Other
chapters discuss the mechanical obstruction of large-­or intermediate-­
size airways from solid foreign bodies (see Chapter 435), drowning (see
Chapter 88), and chronic or recurrent (micro)aspiration (see Chapter
447).

GASTRIC CONTENTS

Aspiration of gastric contents may occur in the context of vomiting in
persons who are not able to protect their airways. This can be the result
of either a chronic neurologic impairment or temporary suppression of
the normal protective reflexes. Such circumstances include drowning,
seizures, trauma (especially head injury), and cardiopulmonary resuscitation. The most common nonacute condition that may predispose
to aspiration is anesthesia that suppresses the protective airway reflexes
(e.g., cough, glottic closure) not only during the procedure but even for
hours afterward. Fortunately, because of the strict guidelines of fasting
before receiving anesthesia, the actual incidence of aspiration during
anesthesia is extremely low (<0.4%). It should be noted that in-­office
sedation/anesthesia for dental procedures also has the potential to
cause suppression of the protective airway reflexes. Other conditions
that may lead to vomiting and aspiration are alcohol intoxication and
use of illicit drugs such as opiates, both of which can cause severe suppression of the level of consciousness.
The consequences of aspiration of gastric contents vary, depending
primarily on the pH and volume of the aspirate and on the amount
of particulate material it contains. Increased clinical severity is noted
with aspirated volumes greater than 0.8 mL/kg and/or pH <2.5, but
significant injury may also occur by fluids with alkaline pH such as bile
or even with human breast milk.
Acute aspiration may cause chemical pneumonitis that may progress to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) consisting of
hypoxemia, hemorrhagic pneumonitis, atelectasis, intravascular fluid
shifts, and pulmonary edema. These processes occur rapidly (within
minutes to 1-­2 hours). There is also a marked increase in lung parenchymal neutrophil infiltrations, mucosal sloughing, and alveolar consolidation that often correlates with increasing infiltrates on chest
radiographs. These changes tend to occur later (24-­72 hours) and are
more prolonged after aspiration of particulate material. Aspiration of
gastric contents does not cause infection per se, but it predisposes to
infection because of impairment of the airway epithelial defenses. If
the patient demonstrates clinical worsening, especially with fever and
leukocytosis, secondary bacterial pneumonia should be suspected.

HYDROCARBON ASPIRATION

Hydrocarbons are organic compounds that consist entirely of hydrogen and carbon. They are found in abundance in nature in fossil fuels
(crude oil, coal, natural gas) and in plants (and some animals). Hydrocarbons are used in numerous common household or industrial products, thus increasing the possibility of accidental (and/or intentional)
exposure. The major types of hydrocarbons and their common uses
can be found in Table 446.1.
There are thousands of unintentional exposures to hydrocarbons
each year, with the vast majority occurring in children under the age
of 5, who drink out of curiosity from poorly secured and unlabeled
containers. During adolescence, many exposures are intentional for
recreational purposes (e.g., glue sniffing). Among adults a common
accidental exposure occurs while attempting to siphon gasoline or
among performers such as “fire eaters.” Aspiration of hydrocarbons can
occur while drinking the substance or often in the context of vomiting
that follows an ingestion. Hydrocarbons have a noxious, unpleasant
taste, and they are highly irritating to mucous membranes, thus preventing ingestion and aspiration of large volumes. One exception is the
mineral seal oil that has a sweet taste that can lead to the ingestion of
fairly large amounts.
The toxicity of the hydrocarbons depends on the specific properties of the compound and the amount that was aspirated. The major
properties are:
• Viscosity: that is the resistance to flow through an orifice. Low viscosity allows deeper penetration into the tracheobronchial tree, and
it is the property that primarily determines the aspiration potential
for hydrocarbons.
• Surface tension: that refers to the cohesiveness of molecules along a
liquid surface. Low surface tension allows compounds to spread over
a larger area.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 446 u Acute Aspiration 2607
Table 446.1  Classes and Uses of Common Hydrocarbons (HC)
CLASS AND CHEMICAL COMPOSITION

SOURCES AND EXAMPLES

USES

Aliphatic HC: Straight-­chain compounds

Source: crude oil
Examples: propane, kerosene, mineral seal oil

Furniture polishes, lamp oil, and lighter fluid

Aromatic HC: Cyclic compounds containing a
benzene ring

Source: fossil fuels
Examples: benzene, toluene, xylene

Solvents, glues, nail polishes, paints, and paint
removers

Halogenated HC: compounds in which at least
one hydrogen atom is replaced by a halogen
(chlorine, bromine, fluorine)

Source: synthetic
Examples: chloroform, bromopropane,
carbon tetrachloride, methylene chloride,
tetrachloroethylene

Solvents for dry cleaning, solvents for
degreasing of metals, adhesives,
refrigeration (Freon); insecticides

Terpene HC: cyclic hydrocarbons that consist
of 5-­carbon building blocks (isoprene)

Source: mostly plants
Examples: turpentine, pine oil

Paint thinners (turpentine) and cleaning
products (pine oil)

A

B

C

Fig. 446.1 Chest radiographs of a 17-­mo-­old toddler with hydrocarbon ingestion. A, Three hours after ingestion, the lungs are clear. B, At 24

hours, there are bibasilar coalescing nodular opacities. C, Three days later there is much clearing. (From Slovis T, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic
Imaging, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2008:1287.)

• Volatility: that is the ability to vaporize. High volatility increases the
risk of pulmonary absorption and central nervous system (CNS) depression.
Hydrocarbons with lower surface tensions (gasoline, turpentine,
naphthalene) have more potential for aspiration toxicity than heavier
mineral or fuel oils. Ingestion of >30 mL of hydrocarbon, the approximate volume of an adult swallow, is associated with an increased risk
of severe pneumonitis.
Most patients with hydrocarbon aspiration tend to remain asymptomatic. When symptomatic, patients have cough, choking, gagging,
and vomiting. These usually appear within the first 30 minutes after
the aspiration, but they may appear as late as 24 hours. Radiographic
findings may present within hours and consist of interstitial or alveolar
infiltrates in the perihilar regions and/or in the lower lobes (Fig. 446.1).
Additional symptoms develop gradually and may include fever and
increased work of breathing. Breath sounds may be decreased (or even
absent) with wheezing and/or crackles (especially in the lower lobes).
Symptomatic patients (especially those with radiographic abnormalities)
require hospitalization for prolonged observation and treatment. Most
patients require only supportive therapy (e.g., supplemental oxygen and
hydration), and they get discharged within 2-­3 days. A small number
of patients (∼5%) may develop ARDS with severe hypoxemia. Because
hydrocarbons evaporate, they displace the alveolar gas, thus exacerbating
the hypoxemia that is caused by the development of pulmonary edema
and atelectasis that characterize ARDS. Necrotizing pneumonia with
pneumatoceles, lipoid pneumonia, and hemorrhagic pulmonary edema
are typical manifestations of severe cases, and they are often complicated
by bacterial superinfection and sepsis, pleural effusions, and air leaks.
Fatalities may occur, but most patients are expected to recover. Pneumatoceles can resolve over the course of months.

ASPIRATION OF OTHER SUBSTANCES

Any substance that is not supposed to be found in the airways can
cause clinically significant disease. Other substances that can cause

significant lung injury when aspirated or inhaled include baby powder (talc), chlorine, shellac, beryllium, and mercury vapors. Repeated
exposure to low concentrations of these agents can lead to chronic lung
disease, such as interstitial pneumonitis and granuloma formation.
Corticosteroids may help reduce fibrosis development and improve
pulmonary function, although the evidence for this benefit is limited.
One substance that deserves special mentioning is cinnamon, which
achieved “notoriety” during the past decade because of the popularity among teenagers and young adults of the so-­called “cinnamon-­
challenge” in which a person attempts to swallow dry cinnamon.
Cinnamon is a caustic substance that causes the person to cough
violently while it elicits a severe gag that is apparently the “amusing”
part of the challenge for the spectators. Despite the gag, the possibility of aspiration is relatively high. Cinnamon causes significant airway
inflammation and a potential hypersensitivity reaction that in rare
cases may lead to respiratory distress and failure.

PRINCIPLES OF MANAGEMENT

Suctioning of the aspirated material can be effective only if it is performed during or immediately after the aspiration occurs (e.g., vomiting occurring in a patient who is seizing). Once aspiration occurs, the
aspirated fluid will be drawn (or pushed) quickly into the distal airways
with every spontaneous or positive pressure breath. Thus gastric emptying is generally contraindicated because the vomiting increases the
possibility of aspiration. An exception to this rule is the ingestion of a
large volume (>30 mL) of certain hydrocarbons with inherent systemic
toxicity, especially if the patient exhibits signs of altered mental status. Such compounds include camphor, halogenated carbons, aromatic
hydrocarbons, and those containing metals and pesticides (mnemonic:
CHAMP). Gastric emptying should be performed after a cuffed endotracheal tube has been inserted for protection from aspiration. However,
because intubating a patient with a full stomach is a high-­risk procedure by itself, it should be performed by a specialist with experience in
rapid sequence intubation to prevent vomiting and further aspiration.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2608 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Bronchoscopy should be considered if there is suspicion of aspiration of significant particulate material that could be potentially
removed (see Chapter 435).
Patients in whom large-­volume or toxic aspiration is suspected
should be observed for several hours (e.g., 6-­8 hours) for signs of respiratory distress and/or hypoxemia. A chest radiograph is warranted. A
“negative” chest radiograph taken shortly after the event does not rule
out the presence, nor does it predict the severity of aspiration, because
the radiographic findings usually lag behind the clinical symptoms (see
Fig. 447.1).
If the chest radiograph findings and oxygen saturation are normal
and the patient remains asymptomatic after several hours of observation, no other treatment is necessary. The caregivers should be
instructed to bring the child back to the hospital if respiratory symptoms or fever develop.
Supplemental oxygen is indicated to treat hypoxemia and/or to
decrease the work of breathing. High-­flow nasal cannula or noninvasive ventilation such as continuous positive airway pressure or bilevel
positive airway pressure should be instituted for patients who develop
increased work of breathing, progressive hypoxemia, and/or progressive hypercapnia. If these measures fail to control the symptoms, endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation are indicated. In rare
cases of refractory respiratory failure, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation may become necessary. Exogenous surfactant has been used
with success in some reported cases.
There is no specific pharmacologic therapy for aspiration. Bronchodilators may be tried to prevent and/or reverse the bronchospasm triggered by
the aspirate (especially if the patient has a history of airway hyperreactivity/asthma). Use of inhaled and especially of systemic corticosteroids may
be reasonable considering that severe aspiration triggers a massive inflammatory response, but their actual benefit is rather inconclusive. Animal
studies suggest that to be effective corticosteroids should be given nearly
simultaneously with the aspiration event. Prophylactic antibiotics are not
generally indicated because aspiration causes a “chemical” and not an
infectious pneumonitis. However, the possibility of a secondary infection
is high because of organisms (usually anaerobes) from the oropharynx
that enter the lower airways with the aspirate and/or organisms that may
already colonize the lower airways (e.g., in patients with artificial airways
and/or underlying conditions such as bronchiectasis). Thus the decision to
start antibiotics prophylactically should be based on the patient’s respiratory status, immune status, and colonization status (if known). Empiric
antibiotic therapy is usually targeted against anaerobic organisms. In
hospitalized or chronically ill patients (especially those with an artificial
airway), coverage of Pseudomonas, Staphylococcus aureus, and enteric
gram-­negative organisms should also be considered. If empiric antibiotics
are given, they can be discontinued if the condition improves rapidly and
the cultures are negative.

PREVENTION

The best prevention of unintentional aspiration is to keep toxic substances out of reach from young children in containers that are clearly
labeled and with safety caps. Prevention of aspiration should always be
the goal when airway manipulation is necessary for intubation or other
invasive procedures. Feeding with enteral tubes passed beyond the
pylorus, elevating the head of the bed 30-­45 degrees in mechanically
ventilated patients, and oral decontamination reduce the incidence of
aspiration complications in the intensive care unit. Acid neutralization
is not routinely recommended, but it may be considered if the airway
epithelium is damaged and thus unable to neutralize the acid. Minimizing use of sedation, monitoring for gastric residuals, and gastric
acid suppression may all help prevent aspiration. Any patient with
altered consciousness, especially one who is receiving nasogastric or gastrostomy tube feedings, is at high risk for aspiration.

PROGNOSIS

Most patients without any underlying conditions usually recover in
2-­3 weeks with minimal or no chronic residual clinical symptoms,
abnormal radiographic, or lung function changes. Prolonged lung
damage may occur, including scarring, bronchiolitis obliterans, and

bronchiectasis. The mortality is relatively low (approximately 5%) and
occurs primarily among patients with severe acute or chronic comorbidities. In adults the mortality is much higher (exceeding 20%), but it
is difficult to separate the contribution of the aspiration from the effect
of the underlying conditions.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 447

Chronic Recurrent
Aspiration
Anastassios C. Koumbourlis
The air that enters the lungs with every breath travels through the same
narrow spaces that solid foods and liquids use to enter the esophagus.
That aspiration does not occur routinely is the result of several mechanisms that protect the lower airways. The swallowing mechanism is a
complex process that starts early in fetal life but fully matures months
after birth; its goal is to receive, process, and transfer the food bolus
from the mouth to the esophagus while preventing food particles and/
or fluids from entering the trachea. When fully developed, the swallow
consists of four phases. The first two (oral preparatory and oral) are
voluntary and involve the preparation of the food bolus and its transfer
to the back of the throat, whereas the last two (pharyngeal and esophageal) are involuntary. Under normal circumstances, by the time the
food bolus reaches the pharynx, the respiration transiently stops, the
vocal cords close at the midline, the arytenoid cartilages come close to
each other, and the epiglottis flexes toward the posterior wall covering
the larynx. This allows the food bolus to slide around the epiglottis
into the pyriform sinuses and then into the esophagus where peristalsis and gravity help it move to the stomach. If these four phases are
not synchronized (e.g., drinking too fast), aspiration may occur. Oropharyngeal incoordination is reportedly the most common underlying
problem (with prevalence as high as 48%) associated with recurrent
pneumonia in hospitalized children. A wide variety of conditions may
impair one or more of the phases of the normal swallow (Table 447.1).
Various maxillofacial and oropharyngeal anatomic abnormalities such
as micrognathia, macroglossia, and cleft palate affect primarily the first
two phases of swallowing, whereas neurologic conditions (affecting the
central or the peripheral nervous system and the motor neuron junction) and primary muscle conditions affect the last two. In addition
to the mechanisms for airway protection that are part of the normal
swallow, there are several reflexes that can prevent aspiration. These
include:
1.	The pharyngeal reflex: Commonly referred to as the “gag” reflex,
it can be elicited by touching the posterior pharyngeal wall, the soft
palate, the tonsils, and/or the larynx. The gag reflex causes bilateral
acute contraction of the pharyngeal muscles and elevation of the soft
palate that prevent the bolus from advancing to the glottis. Damage
to the glossopharyngeal and/or vagal nerves affects the reflex unilaterally or bilaterally.
2.	The laryngeal spasm: When the glottis and/or subglottis get irritated,
they produce acute contraction of the laryngeal muscles that close the
vocal cords. This mechanism is very important when liquid and/or
particles reach the larynx from below (gastroesophageal reflux [GER]
or regurgitation) without involving the normal swallowing mechanism. Despite its protective role, laryngospasm may have negative
consequences, especially in infants, who have normally low breathing
reserves and can develop hypoxemia and hypercapnia within seconds.
In addition, if during laryngospasm the infant attempts to exhale, the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 447 u Chronic Recurrent Aspiration

2609

Table 447.1  Conditions Associated with Chronic Aspiration
DIRECT

IMPAIRED SWALLOWING MECHANISM

PREDISPOSING FACTORS

Anatomic causes
• Tracheoesophageal fistula
• Bronchoesophageal fistula
• Laryngotracheal cleft

Anatomic causes
• Cleft lip/cleft palate*
• Micrognathia
• Macroglossia
• Scarring (e.g., burns)
• Trauma
• Facial rigidity (scleroderma,
dermatomyositis)

Anatomic causes
• Choanal stenosis
• Laryngomalacia
• Esophageal stricture
• Esophageal foreign body
• External compression of the esophagus
(e.g., vascular ring, mass)

Functional causes
• Vocal cord paralysis in abduction
• Central nervous system disorders suppressing
the airway-­protective reflexes (severe
encephalopathy, coma)

Functional causes
• Muscle weakness (neuromuscular disorders)
• Bulbar dysfunction (motor neuron disorders)
• Nonspecific hypotonia (e.g., trisomy 21)

Functional causes
• Gastroesophageal reflux
• Esophageal achalasia
• Immature swallowing (e.g., prematurity)
• Severe tachypnea

*Preoperative and postoperative.

Hering-­Breuer reflex may cause apnea (this may be a cause of the
GER-­related apnea often seen among premature infants).
3.	The cough reflex: The presence of material in the glottis and subglottis will normally elicit a cough to expel the “foreign substance.”
Thus coughing while eating or drinking is an indication of impaired
swallowing and of possible aspiration. However, the absence of
cough while eating or drinking does not rule out aspiration because
several groups of patients (e.g., premature infants or patients with
neuromuscular disorders) may not be able to cough, resulting into
the so-­called “silent aspiration.”
When anatomic abnormalities connect the respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts, the airway protective mechanisms are completely
bypassed, and chronic aspiration ensues. Such abnormalities can be
found at the level of the larynx (e.g., laryngotracheoesophageal cleft) or
at the proximal tracheobronchial tree (e.g., tracheoesophageal and/or
bronchoesophageal fistula).

CLINICAL PRESENTATION

Repeated aspiration of even small quantities of gastric, nasal, or oral
contents can lead to chronic airway inflammation presenting as recurrent bronchitis, bronchiolitis, and/or pneumonitis. The symptoms vary,
but they usually include chronic unexplained cough (especially during
or after feeding), gagging, and wheezing. Noisy (“gurgly”) breathing
caused by accumulation of secretions in the hypopharynx is both a
predisposing and a predictive factor of aspiration. Infants (especially
those born prematurely) may present with apneic episodes associated
with laryngospasm. This can happen while drinking, as a result of oropharyngeal incoordination, or in between feedings due to episodes of
GER that reaches the laryngeal area eliciting the laryngeal spasm. Fever
is not usually a symptom of aspiration, but it may develop at any point
because the chronic airway inflammation caused by the aspiration predisposes to secondary infections.

Pathologic Sequelae

Chronic aspiration can lead to irreversible lung damage in the form
of bronchiectasis, granulomatous inflammation, fibrosis, and bronchiolitis obliterans. Recurrent episodes of lipoid pneumonia have
been reported after use of oil-­based home/folk remedies popular in
several parts of the world that are given orally or nasally to children
with impaired swallow.

Predisposing Factors

Many of the anatomic and functional abnormalities listed in Table
447.1 predispose the affected patients to aspiration, although technically they do not cause aspiration by themselves. These include but are
not limited to the following:

• Gastroesophageal reflux (see Chapter 369): GER is a physiologic
mechanism that is present from birth and throughout life. When severe, it predisposes to aspiration by bringing gastric contents near
the larynx. However, aspiration will not occur unless the protective
airway reflexes are defective. In general, GER is less frequently associated with recurrent pneumonia than is dysphagia. Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD; see Chapter 369) can cause pharyngeal
and laryngeal edema and vocal cord nodules that may interfere with
the swallowing mechanism and lead to aspiration. GERD has been
associated with chronic microaspiration and bronchiolitis obliterans
in lung transplant recipients.
• Anatomic and functional abnormalities such as cleft lip/palate,
micrognathia, macroglossia, and laryngomalacia can interfere with
the mechanism of bolus formation.
• Nonspecific hypotonia, seen in conditions such as trisomy 21 and
in otherwise healthy infants (especially those born prematurely),
may cause oropharyngeal discoordination and lead to recurrent microaspiration.
• Increased work of breathing, due to conditions that cause significant nasal obstruction and/or significant tachypnea place
otherwise healthy infants at risk for aspiration because they may
attempt to breathe and drink at the same time. Thus when a child
with an acute respiratory illness who is being fed enterally deteriorates unexpectedly, the possibility of aspiration should be considered.

DIAGNOSIS

A history of unexplained recurrent/persistent respiratory symptoms
such as cough and wheezing should always raise suspicions of chronic
aspiration. It is then important to determine whether the aspiration
occurs from above because of swallowing impairment or from below
because of GER. The circumstances around and the timing of the
symptoms may offer clues about the exact mechanism. Observation of
a feeding is an essential part of the examination when a diagnosis of
recurrent aspiration is being considered. Particular attention should be
given to nasopharyngeal reflux and difficulty with sucking or swallowing. Symptoms such as choking, cough, stridor, or wheezing occurring
during feedings are much more likely the result of impaired swallow.
Coughing during or immediately after swallowing points toward anatomic abnormalities (e.g., laryngeal cleft or tracheoesophageal fistula).
Symptoms occurring in between feedings, especially in a child with
frequent spitting up, vomiting, arching, or complaining of epigastric
discomfort, are more likely to be associated with GER.
Voice changes such hoarseness or muffled cry suggest GERD, whereas
noisy (wet) breathing suggests pooling of secretions in the hypopharynx. The oral cavity should be inspected for gross abnormalities and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2610 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Table 447.2  Diagnostic Modalities for the Detection of Chronic Aspiration
DIAGNOSTIC MODALITY

ADVANTAGES

DISADVANTAGES

Chest radiograph

• Easy to obtain and inexpensive
• Low radiation exposure

• Findings are not pathognomonic
• Does not distinguish between aspiration from above or
from below

Computed tomography of the
chest

• Provides details that may be missed in plain
chest x-­ray (CXR)

• Findings are not pathognomonic
• Does not distinguish between aspiration from above or
from below
• More expensive
• Considerably higher radiation exposure

Esophagogram

• Provides information on the anatomy and
function of the esophagus (e.g., stricture,
hiatal hernia, foreign body, achalasia,
decreased motility)
• Detects gastroesophageal
reflux (GER)
• Detects tracheoesophageal fistula
and external compression
(vascular ring)

• Considerable radiation exposure
• Short viewing time
• May miss a small H-­type tracheoesophageal fistula if
the patient is in the supine position

Videofluoroscopic swallowing
study (VFSS)

• Gold standard for the detection of
aspiration even in patients without obvious
respiratory symptoms

• Considerable radiation exposure
• Requires the presence of a trained speech
pathologist
• May lead to aspiration of barium that cannot be cleared
by the lung

Milk scintiscan

• More “physiologic”
• Provides significantly longer viewing time
• High specificity
• No radiation exposure

• Low sensitivity
• Does not provide any anatomic details

Salivagram

• High sensitivity (similar to VFSS)
• No radiation exposure

• Infants may spit out the radionucleotide before it is
mixed with the saliva and swallowed
• Does not provide information about GER

Fiberoptic endoscopic evaluation
of swallowing (FEES)

• Provides direct observation of the
swallowing mechanism
• Can be performed at the bedside or in the
office

• Moderately invasive
• Young patients may “fight” the insertion of the
laryngoscope in their nose

“Dye” studies

• Simple, easy to perform even at home

• Requires the presence of an artificial airway
• Possible toxicity from repeated use

Quantification of lipid-­laden
macrophages in the
bronchoalveolar lavage
(BAL) fluid

• High sensitivity

• Requires the performance of a bronchoscopy and
BAL
• Low specificity
• Does not distinguish whether the lipids are the
result of aspiration or release from cell damage/
death

stimulated to assess the gag reflex. Drooling or excessive accumulation
of secretions in the mouth suggests dysphagia. Sudden development of
crackles or wheezes, especially in the dependent lung segments after
feeding, is highly suggestive of aspiration.
The laboratory diagnosis of recurrent microaspiration is challenging
because of the lack of pathognomonic tests. Several diagnostic modalities
are currently used for the diagnosis of aspiration (Table 447.2) that can be
grouped in the following:
• Radiographs and computed tomography of the chest: Aspiration
may produce the “typical” segmental or lobar infiltrates in the dependent areas of the lung. However, their presence is not pathognomonic, and their absence does not rule out the diagnosis. Thus any
abnormal radiographic finding (e.g., diffuse infiltrates, lobar infiltrates, bronchial wall thickening, and bronchiectasis) that cannot be
explained by any other process should raise the possibility of chronic
aspiration, especially if the patient has any of the aforementioned
predisposing factors (Fig. 447.1).
• Contrast studies: Various tests, such as esophagogram, modified
barium swallow (MBS), and videofluoroscopic swallowing study

(VFSS), are currently considered the “gold standard” for the diagnosis of chronic aspiration. The patient swallows the contrast
material (usually barium) under direct fluoroscopic visualization,
which provides information on the swallow itself, on the presence
of penetration and/or aspiration, and on the anatomy and function
of the esophagus.
• Nuclear scans: These tests (milk scintigram and salivagram) are based
on the oral administration of radionucleotides. Their detection in the
lungs is proof of aspiration. A major benefit is that they do not
expose the patient to radiation. However, the milk scan has very
low sensitivity; the salivagram has much better sensitivity but it
does not provide any information on the anatomy or function of
the esophagus.
• Endoscopic studies: The fiberoptic endoscopic evaluation of swallowing (FEES) allows direct observation of the swallow and documents the aspiration in real time without radiation exposure. However, the child’s reaction to placement of the endoscope may alter
the assessment of function, depending on the level of comfort and
cooperation.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 447 u Chronic Recurrent Aspiration

A

B
Fig. 447.1 A, Chest radiograph of a developmentally delayed

15-­yr-­old with chronic aspiration of oral formula. Note posterior (dependent areas) distribution with sparing of heart borders. B, Chest CT
scan of same patient. Note lung consolidation in dependent regions is
of similar density to subcutaneous fat.

• Dye studies: These can be useful tests for patients with artificial
airways. A small amount of food coloring (such as methylene blue)
is placed in the patient’s mouth or into the stomach. If it appears
in the tracheobronchial secretions in a few minutes, it confirms
aspiration.
• Analysis of bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid: The quantification of lipid-­laden alveolar macrophages is a sensitive test for
aspiration in children. Its major limitation is that it cannot distinguish between exogenous and endogenous origin of the lipids.
The BAF fluid can be also examined for various food substances,
including lactose, glucose, food fibers, and milk antigens, as well
as pepsin. The specificity and sensitivity of these tests have not
been well studied.

MANAGEMENT

There is no specific treatment for aspiration. The focus of its management is the prevention or at least the minimization of the resulting morbidity. The recommended interventions depend largely on
the severity of the aspiration and on the nature and prognosis of the
underlying condition.
Mild morbidity (e.g., oropharyngeal incoordination due to
prematurity):
• Modifications of the food intake based on the results of the MBS
(e.g., thickening of the liquids, pureed food).

2611

• Modification of the feeding techniques (e.g., positioning of the
infant in a semierect position, use of special nipples, limiting the
amount of food).
These approaches can be used in dysphagia caused by immaturity
of the swallowing mechanism (such as that observed in prematurely
born and even in term infants) and in impaired swallowing caused by
factors that can improve spontaneously (e.g., GER, laryngomalacia) or
be corrected surgically (e.g., cleft lip/palate).
Moderate morbidity (e.g., difficulty sucking and swallowing
because of chronic lung disease, neuromuscular disorders; presence of
tracheostomy):
• Nasogastric tube feedings: they can be used temporarily during periods of transient dysphagia. They are minimally invasive but they
have several drawbacks such as easy dislodgement and exacerbation of GER (because the lower esophageal sphincter remains open).
They can also cause aspiration if placed incorrectly by inexperienced
caregivers.
• Gastrostomy: should be strongly considered for patients who are
not expected to develop or recover the ability to eat by mouth within
a relatively short period.
• Postpyloric feedings: providing the nutrition into the duodenum
or the jejunum is safer because it minimizes (but does not eliminate) GER. Postpyloric feedings can be given either by nasoduodenal or nasojejunal tube or by gastrojejunal (G-­J) tube (the
latter can be easily threaded through the existing gastrostomy).
G-­J tubes are recommended for patients with neuromuscular disorders who tend to have significant problems with gastric and
intestinal motility.
Severe morbidity:
• Surgical repair: Abnormalities such as tracheoesophageal fistula
and laryngeal cleft require surgical repair as soon as the infant is
stable enough to undergo the operation.
• Nissen fundoplication should be reserved for patients whose recurrent aspiration is primarily the result of GER not responding to
medical treatment and conservative management. Fundoplication
minimizes, but does not eliminate, GER. If tight, it can cause severe
retching in patients without muscle weakness.

Management of Oropharyngeal Secretions

The management of nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal secretions
poses a big problem in patients with impaired swallow because the
secretions tend to pool in the hypopharynx from where they can
easily be aspirated. Saliva can cause inflammation in the tracheobronchial mucosa and introduces organisms from the oropharynx into the lower airways, where they can become pathogenic.
The currently available treatments and interventions include the
following:
• Anticholinergic agents: Medications such as glycopyrrolate and
scopolamine are widely used but are of limited effectiveness. When
they are given via the gastrostomy tube, they may cause significant
dryness in the lower airway, promoting mucus plugging. Nebulization of the intravenous preparation of glycopyrrolate can be effective, but this is not an officially approved use, and the preparation
cannot be bought in retail pharmacies.
• Botox (botulinum toxin type A) injection: Botox injections in the
salivary glands provide a transient decrease in the amount of secretions. To be effective, they need to be repeated every few months
under anesthesia.
• Salivary gland ligation: This is currently the more definitive intervention for the management of oropharyngeal secretions. Once
done, it is irreversible, and therefore it is reserved for very severe
cases that are refractory to any other intervention.
• Tracheostomy: The role of tracheostomy in the management of
chronic aspiration and/or in the management of excessive oropharyngeal secretions is rather controversial. Tracheostomy per se
does not prevent aspiration (unless a cuffed tube is used). It actually impairs the swallowing mechanism, and because it is a “foreign body” inside the trachea, it tends to stimulate the production

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2612 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
of more secretions than usual. In addition, it bypasses the natural
defenses of the upper airways while it exposes the lower airways
directly to the environment, thus increasing the possibility of infection. Its major advantage is that it provides easy access for the
suctioning of the lower airways. Most importantly, it provides a
secure airway from which positive pressure can be applied, avoiding the risks of emergency endotracheal intubations. It should be
considered for patients at high risk for recurrent severe respiratory
failure.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 448

Immune and Inflammatory
Lung Disease
448.1 Hypersensitivity Pneumonia
Michelle L. Hernandez and Stephanie D. Davis
Hypersensitivity pneumonia (HP), aptly called extrinsic allergic
alveolitis because the inciting agent is almost uniformly inhaled
from the environment, is a complex immunologic-­mediated syndrome of the pulmonary alveoli and interstitium. There are numerous specific disease names based on the origin of the inhaled
offending antigen to describe HP. Prompt recognition of the signs
and symptoms allows for complete reversal of the disease without
long-­term adverse consequences if the source of the exposure is recognized and abated. Failure to recognize the disease early may lead
to chronic irreversible lung changes with persistent symptoms in
the patient.

ETIOLOGY

The most common sources of offending agents that cause HP
include agricultural aerosols, inhaled protein antigens from animals, antigens from microorganisms of bacteria, fungi, or protozoan origin, and chemicals of low and high molecular weight
(Table 448.1). Many of these inciting agents are associated with
occupational diseases, which occur in locations where children
do not regularly work. However, these same diseases can occur in
children because of exposures to many similar antigen sources in
nonoccupational environments, or in occupational environments
with teenage workers. In addition to HP, the same antigens (i.e.,
antigens from animal proteins and contaminated metal working
fluids or other inhaled antigens) may lead to allergic asthma or
chronic bronchitis.
More than 300 antigens have been associated with HP. In children, the primary sources have been the result of exposure to pet
birds (or feathers in bedding and pillows) such as parakeets, canaries, cockatiels, or cockatoos. Aerosol spread of bird droppings can
also occur through the vent of a clothes dryer or through heating vents from a garage where the birds were housed. Humidifiers
and hot tubs are notorious for contamination with thermophilic
organisms (bacteria and mold) as well as Mycobacterium avium
complex. Buildings with inadequate ventilation and insufficient
air turnover present an increased risk of mold exposure from prior
flooding or damp condensation. Despite exposures to the same
antigen sources, members of the same family may exhibit different
presentations of allergic disease. For instance, some family members may have symptoms of asthma or rhinitis, whereas another
may have HP.

PATHOGENESIS

The pathogenesis of HP is complex and appears to have a genetic component. Recurrent exposures to environmental agents associated with
HP (see Table 448.1) trigger an inflammatory response promoting the
development of immune complexes. These immune complexes activate
the complement pathway, ultimately resulting in the accumulation of
neutrophils in the airway that release enzymes such as neutrophil elastase that damage surrounding lung tissue. Activated macrophages in the
lung promote recruitment of lymphocytes into the tissues. Pathology
shows alveolitis with a mixed cellular infiltration composed of lymphocytes, macrophage, plasma cells, and neutrophils. Continued exposure
to the offending antigen results in the formation of loose, noncaseating
granulomas located near the respiratory or terminal bronchioles. Some
patients with chronic exposure develop progressive pulmonary fibrosis
similar to patients with interstitial pulmonary fibrosis (IPF). Although
the mechanisms are not entirely clear, this is thought to occur secondary to recruitment and activation of fibroblasts and uncontrolled
production of extracellular matrix cytokines, including transforming
growth factor beta (TGF-­ß). It is critical when a biopsy is being performed (transbronchial or surgical) that the pathologist knows that
HP is being considered because there are other interstitial lung diseases that produce similar granulomas with subtle location differences
depending on their disease origin. Genetic predisposition also appears
to be important, primarily in genes involved with antigen processing
and presentation (such as major histocompatibility complex [MHC] I
and II), lung homeostasis and wound repair, and telomere-­related gene
mutations.

Clinical Manifestations and Classification

The prevalence of HP is higher among older individuals but can
affect children and young adults. It is estimated that HP accounts
for 50% of all childhood idiopathic lung diseases (ILDs). HP had
been traditionally classified as acute, subacute, or chronic. However, because of the great variability and overlap in the presentation
and course of HP, the American Thoracic Society, Japanese Respiratory Society, and Asociación Latinoamericana de Tórax (ATS/
JRS/ALAT) guidelines recategorized HP into two phenotypes based
on the predominant presence or absence of fibrosis on imaging or
histopathologic examination: (1) nonfibrotic phenotype and (2)
fibrotic phenotype.
Regardless of fibrotic or nonfibrotic phenotype, common symptoms include cough and dyspnea after exposure. The time to symptom
presentation after exposure can vary from hours to years and may be
recurrent in nature. Acute symptoms can be confused with bacterial or
viral disease leading to treatment with antibiotics. For example, as early
as 4-­8 hours after exposure, patients can present with the abrupt onset
of cough, chest tightness, dyspnea, fever, chills, body aches, and fatigue
(Table 448.2). Rarely, findings of wheezing are present on the initial
examination. Rather, tachypnea with fine crackles may be heard by auscultation in the lung bases and presence of mid-­inspiratory squeaks.
The duration of symptoms has not been definitively associated with the
fibrotic or nonfibrotic phenotype.
The long-­term prognosis of HP is quite variable, with some
patients developing progressive shortness of breath, cough (productive), weight loss, malaise, loss of appetite, hypoxia, and
clubbing of the fingers. Those who have been diagnosed with nonfibrotic HP and are able to avoid exposure to the responsible agent
may achieve stabilization or full recovery. In contrast, fibrotic HP
is associated with reduced survival secondary to respiratory failure, especially among those with a usual interstitial pneumonia
(UIP)–like pattern.

Diagnosis

A diagnosis of HP is certain when the known exposure with the associated immune response to the offending antigen is identified, the
medical history and physical examination findings are abnormal on
examination, and the pattern of the high-­resolution computed tomography (HRCT) of the chest and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) findings

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 448.1  Antigen Sources Associated with Specific Causes of Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis

Chapter 448 u Immune and Inflammatory Lung Disease

2613

HYPERSENSITIVITY
PNEUMONITIS

ANTIGEN SOURCE

HYPERSENSITIVITY
PNEUMONITIS

Bagassosis (mold on pressed
sugar cane)

Thermoactinomyces sacchari
Thermoactinomyces vulgaris

Maple bark disease (moldy
maple bark)

Cryptostroma corticale

Bat lung (bat droppings)

Bat serum protein

Bible printer’s lung

Moldy typesetting water

Miller’s lung (dust-­
contaminated grain)

Sitophilus granarius (i.e., wheat
weevil)

Bird fancier’s lung (parakeets,
budgerigars, pigeons,
parrots, cockatiels, geese)

Droppings, feathers, serum
proteins

Moldy hay, grain, silage
(farmer’s lung)

Thermophilic actinomycetes
Fungi (e.g., Aspergillus umbrosus)
Sea snail shell

Byssinosis (“brown lung”)
(unclear if a true cause of
hypersensitivity pneumonitis;
asthma is common)

Cotton mill dust (carding and
spinning areas of cotton, flax, and
soft hemp)

Mollusk shell hypersensitivity
pneumonitis
Mushroom worker’s lung

Mushroom spores
Thermophilic actinomycetes

Canary fancier’s lung

Serum proteins

Paprika slicer’s lung (moldy
paprika pods)

Mucor stolonifer

Cheese washer’s lung (moldy
cheese)

Penicillium casei
Aspergillus clavatus

Pauli reagent alveolitis

Sodium diazobenzene sulfate

Chemical hypersensitivity
pneumonitis

Diphenylmethane diisocyanate (MDI)
Toluene diisocyanate (TDI)

Pearl oyster shell pneumonitis

Oyster shells

Pituitary snuff taker’s disease

Dried, powdered cattle or pig
pituitary proteins

Coffee worker’s lung

Coffee bean dust

Composter’s lung

T. vulgaris
Aspergillus species

Potato riddler’s lung (moldy
hay around potatoes)

Contaminated basement
(sewage) pneumonitis

Cephalosporium

Thermophilic actinomycetes
T. vulgaris
Faenia rectivirgula
Aspergillus spp.

Cloth wrappings of mummies

Poultry worker’s lung (feather
plucker’s disease)

Serum proteins (chicken products)

Coptic lung (mummy handler’s
lung)

Pyrethrum (pesticide)

Pyrethrum

Detergent worker’s lung
(washing powder lung)

Bacillus subtilis enzymes

Sauna taker’s lung

Aureobasidium spp., other sources

Dry rot lung

Merulius lacrymans

Sequoiosis (moldy wood dust)

Duck fever

Feathers, serum proteins

Epoxy resin lung

Phthalic anhydride (heated epoxy
resin)

Graphium
Pullularia
Trichoderma spp.
Aureobasidium pullulans

Suberosis (moldy cork dust)

Esparto dust (mold in plaster
dust)

Aspergillus fumigatus
Thermophilic actinomycetes

Thermoactinomyces viridis
Penicillium glabrum
Aspergillus conidia

Feather duvet lung (feather
bed, pillow, duvet)

Avian proteins on feathers

Summer-­type pneumonitis

Trichosporon cutaneum

Fish meal worker’s lung

Fish meal

Tea grower’s lung

Tea plants

Furrier’s lung (sewing furs;
animal fur dust)

Animal pelts

Thatched-­roof lung (huts in
New Guinea)

Saccharomonospora viridis (dead
grasses and leaves)

Grain measurer’s lung

Cereal grain (Sporobolomyces)
Grain dust (mixture of dust, silica,
fungi, insects, and mites)
Cladosporium spp.

Tobacco grower’s lung

Aspergillus spp.

Hot tub lung (mists; mold on
ceiling and around tub)
Humidifier fever

Mycobacterium avium complex
Thermoactinomyces (T. vulgaris, T.
sacchari, T. candidus)
Klebsiella oxytoca
Naegleria gruberi
Acanthamoeba polyphaga
Acanthamoeba castellani

ANTIGEN SOURCE

Scopulariopsis brevicaulis
Turkey handling disease

Serum proteins (turkey products)

Unventilated shower

Epicoccum nigrum

Upholstery fabric (nylon
filament, cotton/polyester,
and latex adhesive)

Aflatoxin-­producing fungus,
Fusarium spp.

Velvet worker’s lung

Unknown (? nylon velvet fiber,
tannic acid, potato starch)

Vineyard sprayer’s lung

Copper sulfate (Bordeaux mixture)

Laboratory worker’s lung (rats,
gerbils)

Urine, serum, pelts, proteins

Wine maker’s lung (mold on
grapes)

Botrytis cinerea

Lifeguard lung

Aerosolized endotoxin from pool-­
water sprays and fountains

Alternaria spp.

Lycoperdonosis (Lycoperdon
puffballs)

Puffball spores

Wood dust pneumonitis (oak,
cedar, and mahogany dust,
pine and spruce pulp)

Penicillium spp.

Machine operator’s lung

Pseudomonas fluorescens
Aerosolized metal working fluid

Wood pulp worker’s disease
(oak and maple trees)

Rhizopus spp., Mucor spp.

Malt worker’s disease (moldy
barley)

Aspergillus fumigatus, Aspergillus
clavatus

Wood trimmer’s disease
(contaminated wood
trimmings)

Bacillus subtilis

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2614 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Table 448.2  Clinical History Leading to a Diagnosis of
Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis

Table 448.3  Criteria Used in the Diagnosis of
Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis

Recurrent pneumonia
Pneumonia after repeat exposures (week, season, situation)
Cough, fever, and chest symptoms after making a job change or
home change
Cough, fever, wheezing after return to school or only at school
Pet exposure (especially birds that shed dust such as pigeons,
canaries, cockatiels, cockatoos)
Bird contaminant exposure (e.g., pigeon infestation)
Farm exposure to birds and hay
History of water damage
Use of hot tub, sauna, swimming pool
Other family members or workers with similar recurrent symptoms
Improvement after temporary environment change (e.g., vacation)

1.	Identified exposure to offending antigen(s) by:
• Medical history of exposure to suspected antigen in the patient’s
living environment
• Investigations of the environment confirm the presence of an
inciting antigen
• Identification of specific immune responses (immunoglobulin
G serum precipitin antibodies against the identified antigen) are
suggestive of the potential etiology but are insufficient in isolation
to confirm a diagnosis
• Abnormal response to an inhalation challenge testing to the
offending antigen via reexposure to the environment or inhalation
challenge to the suspected antigen
2.	Clinical, radiographic, or physiologic findings compatible with
hypersensitivity pneumonitis:
• Respiratory and often constitutional signs and symptoms
• Cough
• Breathlessness
• Crackles on auscultation of the chest
• Weight loss
• Episodic fever
• Wheezing
• Fatigue
NOTE: These findings are especially suggestive of hypersensitivity
pneumonitis when they appear or worsen several hours after
antigen exposure.
• High-­resolution chest CT findings typical of HP:
• Nonfibrotic HP pattern:
• At least one HRCT abnormality indicative of parenchymal
inﬁltration (such as ground-­glass opacities or mosaic attenuation)
in a diffuse distribution
• At least one HRCT abnormality indicative of small airway ­disease
(such as ill-­deﬁned, centrilobular nodules or air trapping) in a
diffuse distribution
• Fibrotic HP pattern:
• Lung ﬁbrosis (irregular linear opacities/coarse reticulation with
lung distortion; traction bronchiectasis and honeycombing) in
a random or mid-­lung zone predominant location
• At least one abnormality that is indicative of small airway
­disease
3.	Bronchoalveolar lavage with lymphocytosis (>20%, often >50%):
• Usually with low CD4:CD8 ratio (i.e., CD8 is higher than normal)
4.	Histopathology showing compatible changes with nonfibrotic or
fibrotic hypersensitivity pneumonitis and the absence of features
in any biopsy site to suggest an alternative diagnosis
• Nonfibrotic HP (purely inflammatory):
• Cellular interstitial pneumonia
• Chronic cellular bronchiolitis with a lymphocytic peribronchial
infiltration
• Poorly formed nonnecrotizing granulomas located near
respiratory or terminal bronchioles
• Fibrotic HP (mixed inflammatory plus fibrotic or purely fibrotic):
• Chronic ﬁbrosing interstitial pneumonia
• Airway-­centered ﬁbrosis
• Poorly formed nonnecrotizing granulomas

are consistent with HP (Table 448.3). These findings must prompt
the clinician to identify the exposure in order to secure the diagnosis
and eliminate the offending antigen. Without therapy, the progressive
inflammatory response leads to air trapping, honeycombing, emphysema, and mild fibrosis in the chronic state. Diagnostic components
are reviewed next.

LABORATORY

Most of the abnormal laboratory findings in HP are not specific and
represent evidence of activated inflammatory markers or lung injury.
For example, nonspecific elevation of immune globulins or the erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-­reactive protein may be found. Circulating immune complexes may be detected. Lactate dehydrogenase may
be elevated in the presence of lung inflammation and normalizes with
response to therapy.
Serum IgG precipitins to the offending agent are frequently positive and have a poor positive predictive value for disease. For example, among asymptomatic pigeon breeders, precipitating antibodies
are nearly universal. False negatives can also be seen as a result of
fluctuating serum antibody levels over time and a lack of standardized commercial antigens and reagents available for laboratory testing. It is critical that laboratories familiar with the performance of
these tests be used. Those laboratories often recognize the value
of processing antigens for precipitation from the environmental
source directly as the test substrate with patient serum. Skin testing for immunoglobulin E (IgE)-­mediated disease is not warranted
unless there is evidence of mixed lung pathology such as asthma
and interstitial lung opacities.

Radiology

Chest radiograph almost always precedes the use of HRCT of the
chest in children because of the need for sedation and concerns
regarding the risk of being exposed to an increased radiation dose
from HRCT. The plain radiograph may demonstrate a ground-­glass
appearance, interstitial prominence, with a predominant location
in the upper and middle lung fields. It is common for a chest radiograph to be considered normal by a radiologist early in the disease.
Late in the disease, interstitial fibrosis may become prominent in
the presence of increasing dyspnea, hypoxemia on room air, and
even clubbing of the fingers. Mediastinum widening from lymphadenopathy is not usually present; when present, the lymph nodes
are prominent along the airway near the carina, suggesting that the
antigen source is inhaled, and this represents the response of the
immune system.
HRCT of the chest is important in distinguishing nonfibrotic from
fibrotic HP and may reduce the need for a lung biopsy. HRCT of the
chest in nonfibrotic HP demonstrates (1) at least one abnormality

Data from Raghu G, Remy-­Jardin M, Ryerson CJ, et al. Diagnosis of hypersensitivity
pneumonitis in adults. An official ATS/JRS/ALAT clinical practice guideline [published
correction appears in Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2021 Jan 1;203(1):150–151] [published
correction appears in Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2022 Aug 15;206(4):518]. Am J Respir
Crit Care Med. 2020;202(3):e36–e69.

revealing evidence of parenchymal inﬁltration (such as ground-­glass
opacities or mosaic attenuation) and (2) at least one abnormality revealing evidence of small airway disease (such as ill-­deﬁned, centrilobular
nodules or air trapping), both distributed in a diffuse pattern. Fibrotic
HP is characterized by (1) a lung ﬁbrosis (irregular linear opacities/
coarse reticulation; traction bronchiectasis and honeycombing) located
in a random or mid-­lung zone and (2) at least one abnormality that is
consistent with small airway disease.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 448 u Immune and Inflammatory Lung Disease
Bronchoalveolar Lavage

BAL is one of the most sensitive tests in supporting the diagnosis of
HP. Lymphocytosis frequently exceeding 50% of the recovered cells is
seen in the BAL fluid and should alert the clinician to the possibility
of HP. Sarcoid, IPF, cryptogenic organizing pneumonia, berylliosis,
granite workers lung disease, amiodarone pneumonia, lymphoma,
and Langerhans cell histiocytosis may demonstrate lymphocytosis on
BAL. All BAL specimens should have flow cytometry measurements
of T-­cell markers (CD3, CD4, and CD8 at a minimum). The predominant phenotype of the lymphocytosis is CD3+/CD8+/CD56+/CD57+/
CD10−. In the normal circulation, lymphocytes with CD4 markers
predominate at a ratio of approximately 2:1 compared with CD8
lymphocytes. In HP, this ratio becomes approximately equal to or less
than 1 (CD4:CD8 ≤1) with either an increase in CD8 lymphocytes or a
decline in CD4 lymphocytes. Although this ratio helps the clinician in
making a diagnosis of HP, this BAL finding is not 100% diagnostic for
HP. Cryptogenic organizing pneumonia, a rare disease in children,
also may present with BAL, where the CD4:CD8 is ≤1, and may be
confused initially with HP. This is in sharp contrast to other lymphocytic granulomatous diseases, like sarcoidosis, where the CD4:CD8
is ≥2.

Lung Biopsy

Lung biopsy is necessary to confirm a diagnosis of HP when critical elements are not present, including antigen exposure, a medical
history classic for HP, characteristic physical exam findings, chest
HRCT findings, and CD8+ lymphocytes in the BAL. Open lung
biopsy is often the route of choice in young children because of the
difficulty in safely obtaining satisfactory amounts of tissue by transbronchial biopsy. Lack of positive serum precipitins to an offending antigen and lack of an exposure history are common reasons
for obtaining lung biopsies. It is crucial to inform the pathologist
about the suspicion of HP so that the findings can be interpreted
appropriately.
Histopathologic examination of nonfibrotic HP (purely inflammatory) demonstrates three primary features: (1) cellular interstitial
pneumonia, (2) chronic cellular bronchiolitis with a lymphocytic peribronchial infiltration, and (3) nonnecrotizing granulomas near respiratory or terminal bronchioles. Fibrotic HP (mixed inflammatory
plus fibrotic or purely fibrotic) is histologically characterized by (1)
chronic ﬁbrosing interstitial pneumonia, (2) airway-­centered ﬁbrosis,
and (3) poorly formed nonnecrotizing granulomas. Furthermore, there
is an absence of features in any biopsy site to suggest an alternative
diagnosis.
Of note, poorly formed noncaseating granulomas and multinucleated giant cells are seen in HP. This is in sharp contrast to the well-­
formed granulomas seen in sarcoidosis.

Antigen Challenge by Inhalation

Inhalation challenge can support the diagnosis of HP by demonstrating
a causal relationship between environmental exposure and symptoms.
Inhalation challenge can be performed by two methods: (1) reexposure
to the environment where the suspected antigen is present and (2) a
direct inhalation challenge at the hospital to material collected from
the suspected source of the antigen. As the second method has resulted
in severe exacerbation of disease in some individuals, performing this
challenge is discouraged.
Two abnormal response patterns may be seen. Most commonly,
where there is HP without asthma, symptoms occur 8-­12 hours after
direct challenge in the hospital or after reexposure to the source of the
antigen. The challenges replicate some or all of the symptoms observed
in the acute syndrome with fever, dyspnea, fatigue, and crackles on
lung auscultation. Blood drawn before challenge and then repeated
during these symptoms often demonstrates an increased neutrophil
count compared to baseline. Pulmonary function tests demonstrate a
fall in forced vital capacity (FVC) and often a concurrent fall in the

2615

forced expiratory volume at 1 second (FEV1), with a stable or increasing ratio of FEV1:FVC reflecting a restrictive defect. Hypoxemia may
accompany this decline in pulmonary function along with a fall in the
diffusion capacity of carbon monoxide (DLCO). To see the complete
effect, exercise during this period may show a considerable fall in oxygenation despite normal arterial blood gas oxygen tension and normal
pulse oximetry at rest. This finding denotes the onset of worsening
restrictive lung disease.
Where there is HP with concomitant allergic asthma, these patients
may experience a biphasic response to the inhalation challenge. These
patients may develop an early reduction in FEV1, followed by a second drop in FEV1 and FVC 4-­6 hours later. The patient may also have
accompanying fever and leukocytosis.

TREATMENT

The control of environmental exposure to the offending antigen is
key to curing HP and remains the ideal method of treatment and
prevention of recurrence. The clinical and pathologic manifestations of nonfibrotic (purely inflammatory) HP are reversible with
removal of the offending antigen. Counseling parents and children
about the risk of exposure to birds and feathered bedding or other
environmental antigens, biologic aerosols, or agricultural dusts that
are known to induce HP is important. Certainly, the source of the
antigen and type of antigen appear to affect the response to treatment and long-­term prognosis. Older individuals who contract
farmer’s lung are likely to recover with minimal permanent residual
effect, whereas individuals with bird fancier’s lungs from antigens
produced by pigeons have a worse prognosis, especially if fibrosis
is detected on lung biopsy. The pediatrician should advise—in the
strongest terms—removal of the antigen source from the affected
child’s environment. This may be an extraordinary challenge given
various children’s living circumstances and lack of independent
control of the environment in which they live.
In addition, pediatricians should be familiar with recommendations
about the maintenance of heating, ventilation, and air conditioning
systems, in addition to humidifiers and vaporizers. Daily drainage,
cleansing of residue, and routine cleaning with hydrogen peroxide or
bleach help rid humidifiers and vaporizers of harmful pathogens such
as thermophiles that cause HP.
Removal of the antigen alone is sufficient to normalize lung function in most patients, but symptoms and pulmonary functions return
to normal faster with the use of glucocorticoids. Among those with
nonfibrotic HP, glucocorticoids at a dose of 0.5 mg/kg/day of prednisone or equivalent (up to a maximum dose of 30 mg prednisone
daily) will reduce the immune inflammatory response in the lungs.
Comparative trials in adults demonstrate that the use of 4 weeks of
therapy is as effective as 12 weeks of therapy. Because of the rapid
reversal of symptoms, successful abatement of the environment is
sometimes compromised when the family sees improvement before
the antigen source removal.
As with nonfibrotic HP, removal of the offending antigen is also
recommended for fibrotic HP. However, there is a paucity of clinical
trial data outlining the best immunomodulatory strategies for fibrotic
HP. Among those patients with fibrotic HP with inflammatory features
present, a trial of glucocorticoids may be pursued at a dose of 0.5 mg/
kg per day (up to 30 mg per day) for 4-­8 weeks, followed by tapering
for 3 months. For patients who have not responded to both antigen
removal and corticosteroid treatment, azathioprine and mycophenolate mofetil have been used, but their efficacy has not been tested in
clinical trials. Case reports have also reported the use of rituximab for
HP treatment because of its ability to reduce immune cell complexes.
Results have reported mixed clinical efficacy. Antifibrotic drugs that
are used for IPF such as nintedanib or pirfenidone are being tested in
clinical trials.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2616 Part XVII u The Respiratory System

448.2 Occupational and Environmental Lung
Disease
Michelle L. Hernandez and Stephanie D. Davis
Although occupational and environmental lung diseases include occupational asthma, irritant-­induced asthma, HP, hard metal inhalation
lung disease, berylliosis, and air pollution, this chapter focuses on occupational asthma and irritant-­induced asthma. Berylliosis has a propensity to form granulomas (see Chapter 448.3). Although some diseases
will be seen with regularity, the important role that a workplace, school,
daycare, neighbors’ housing, multiple family housing, and indoor and
outdoor environments may have in the causation of signs and symptoms in the patient is often not considered by the clinician.
Occupational asthma differs from work-­exacerbated asthma. Individuals with occupational asthma develop asthma after exposure to
immunologic or nonimmunologic stimuli found in the workplace,
whereas those with work-­exacerbated asthma already have asthma that
worsens in the workplace because of a myriad of exposures.
The vast array of exposures that may cause disease of the lungs is
daunting, such as the inhalation of baking flour or household cleaning fluids causing asthma, microwave popcorn that uses diacetyl flavoring resulting in bronchiolitis obliterans, and exposure to thermophilic
organisms or mold resulting in HP. The acute eosinophilic pneumonias
associated with the new onset of smoking and chemical inhalation of
1,1,1-­trichloroethane (Scotchgard) require a high index of suspicion and
unique lines of questioning. The same antigen encountered in a work,
school, home, or outdoor environment may result in different disease
presentations among patients because of host factors, dose exposure,
and genetic susceptibility. One of the most prominent examples is an
investigation of workers who inhaled metal working fluid. Despite similar exposures, some developed HP, others developed asthma, and some
displayed no symptoms at all. Immunologic evaluation in some exposures has shown similar immune responses in different individuals, but
a wide range of disease provocation. When high molecular weight proteins cause asthma, symptoms of rhinoconjunctivitis frequently precede
the onset of pulmonary symptoms. The medical history in occupational
and environmental lung diseases has used an expanded construct with
a simple acronym, WHACOS (Table 448.4).

CLASSIFICATION AND PATHOGENESIS

Occupational and environmental lung diseases include numerous syndromes of human lung disease such as occupational asthma, irritant-­
induced asthma, reactive upper airway disease syndrome, HP (see
Chapter 448.1), air pollution–induced disease, hard metal inhalation
lung disease, berylliosis, occupation-­induced lung cancer (e.g., mesothelioma from asbestosis), and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Most of these diseases are not problematic for children, but adolescents may be at risk to develop lung disease through exposure through
part-­or full-time work or by single exposures, as seen in some types of
irritant-­induced asthma.
Table 448.4  A Construct (WHACOS) that Has Been
Used in Medical Interviewing of Patients,
Coworkers, and Family Members when
Environmental or Occupational Lung Disease
Is Being Considered
W

What do you do?

H

How do you do what you do?

A

Are symptoms Acute or are they Chronic?

C

Do any Coworkers, family, classmates, or friends have the
same symptoms?

O

Do you have any hobbies, travel, or animal/pet exposures
Outside of school or work?

S

Are you Satisfied with work or school?

Occupational and Environmental Asthma

It is important to remember that in patients with occupational-­or
environmental-­induced disease, the onset of symptoms has a lag time
between exposure and symptoms. In occupational asthma, there may
be an immediate response within 30 minutes to 2 hours of exposure,
demonstrated as a decline in pulmonary function, specifically the
FEV1. Usually, lung function returns to normal spontaneously unless
persistent exposure occurs. Some patients demonstrate no immediate
reduction in lung function, but rather experience a delayed response of
4-­6 hours after the exposure. Treating physicians can take advantage of
this physiology by using spirometry before and after work or school or
using peak flow measurements hourly during exposure and after leaving the exposure. Because workers and school children have prolonged
periods of exposure followed by a number of days without exposure,
the use of pulmonary function plus nonspecific bronchial responsiveness (e.g., methacholine) testing is helpful. For example, pulmonary
function tests before starting work or school on a Monday of a typical
week may be normal. By Friday of this typical work or school week, the
baseline pulmonary function indices may have fallen, and nonspecific
bronchial responsiveness may have become more sensitive to a lower
concentration of histamine, methacholine, or mannitol. By Monday,
the tests may have returned to normal or near normal with no change
other than reduced exposure.
High molecular weight causes of occupational and environmental asthma can be characterized as allergens, which are normally proteins and enzymes, inhaled from multiple sources (Table 448.5). These
include various animals, shellfish, fish, enzymes (e.g., Bacillus subtilis
in laundry detergent), and flour or cereals. Occupational and environmental asthma is also caused by a number of low molecular weight
agents, including reactive chemicals, transition metals, and wood dusts
(Table 448.6). These low molecular weight agents are sufficient to
induce an immune response, but often not by an IgE-­mediated mechanism. These low molecular weight chemicals appear to act as haptens
that bind directly to human proteins, causing an immune response in
the human host.
The pathogenesis of asthma in patients exposed to high molecular
weight antigens follows the experience of nonoccupational asthma in
patients where atopy, sex, genetics, concentration of antigen, duration
of exposure, and other individual factors all contribute to the development of disease. Most individuals require a concentration and duration
of exposure sufficient to cause IgE antibody sensitization to the offending allergen with development of bronchial hyperresponsiveness and
airway inflammatory disease upon reexposure. If the allergen exposure is sufficient, these proteins can drive the immune response to a
T-­lymphocyte type 2 phenotype (Th2), even in patients without prior
atopic disposition. This occurred in the case of latex allergy, where
many nonatopic individuals and patients exposed to allergen in their
personal healthcare environment developed occupational allergy to
multiple proteins from natural rubber latex. Atopic individuals are at
the highest risk of developing latex allergy. A longitudinal study demonstrated that powdered latex gloves with high allergen content were
the reason for the epidemic of latex allergy and occupational asthma.
Unfortunately, despite primary removal of the offending sensitizing
agent, symptoms caused by asthma and bronchial hyperresponsiveness
continue in roughly 70% of individuals.

Diagnosis of Occupational Asthma

Occupational asthma should be assessed with a full history, physical
examination and objective confirmation of an asthma diagnosis using
spirometry, and nonspecific bronchial responsiveness. The negative
predictive value of methacholine challenge while the patient is still in
the workplace is high (98%): a negative methacholine challenge makes
the diagnosis of occupational asthma very unlikely in a patient who
is continuously exposed to the suspected causative agent. In addition
to comparing measures of nonspecific bronchial responsiveness while
on and off work, induced sputum and fractional exhaled nitric oxide
(FeNO) can increase the diagnostic sensitivity to 94% through identifying the presence of eosinophilic inflammation. Specific IgE testing

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 448.5  High Molecular Weight Antigens Known to Induce Occupational or Environmental Asthma
OCCUPATION OR
ENVIRONMENT

SOURCE

OCCUPATION OR
ENVIRONMENT

SOURCE

ANIMAL-­DERIVED ANTIGENS
Agricultural worker
Cow dander

Flight crew

Screw worm fly (Cochliomyia
hominivorax)

Bakery

Lactalbumin

Honey processors

Honeybee

Butcher

Cow bone dust, pig, goat dander

Laboratory worker

Cook

Raw beef

Cricket, fruit fly, grasshopper (Locusta
migratoria), locust

Dairy industry

Lactoserum, lactalbumin

Mechanic in a rye plant

Confused flour beetle (Tribolium
confusum)

Egg producer

Egg protein

Museum curator

Beetles (Coleoptera)

Farmer

Deer dander, mink urine

Seed house

Frog catcher

Frog

Mexican bean weevil (Zabrotes
subfasciatus)

Hairdresser

Sericin

Sericulture

Silkworm, larva of silkworm

Ivory worker

Ivory dust

Sewage plant worker

Sewer fly (Psychoda alternata)

Laboratory technician

Bovine serum albumin, laboratory
animal, monkey dander

Technician

Nacre buttons

Nacre dust

Arthropods (Chrysoperla carnea,
Leptinotarsa decemlineata, Ostrinia
nubilalis, and Ephestia kuehniella),
sheep blowfly (Lucilia cuprina)

Pharmacist

Endocrine glands

Wool worker

Dermestidae spp.

Pork producer

Pig gut (vapor from soaking water)

Poultry worker

Chicken

ACARIANS
Apple grower

Tanner

Casein (cow’s milk)

Citrus farmer

Citrus red mite (Panonychus citri)

Various

Bat guano

Farmer

Veterinarian

Goat dander

Barn mite, two-­spotted spider mite
(Tetranychus urticae), grain mite

Zookeeper

Birds

Flour handler

Mites and parasites

CRUSTACEANS, SEAFOOD, FISH
Canning factory
Octopus

Grain-­store worker

Grain mite

Horticulturist

Amblyseius cucumeris

Diet product

Shark cartilage

Poultry worker

Fowl mite

Fish food factory

Gammarus shrimp

Vine grower

Fish processor

Clam, shrimp, crab, prawn, salmon,
trout, lobster, turbot, various fishes

McDaniel spider mite (Tetranychus
mcdanieli)

Fisherman

Red soft coral, cuttlefish

MOLDS
Agriculture

Plasmopara viticola

Jewelry polisher

Cuttlefish bone

Baker

Alternaria, Aspergillus (unspecified)

Laboratory grinder

Marine sponge

Beet sugar worker

Aspergillus (unspecified)

Oyster farm

Hoya (oyster farm prawn or sea-­squirt)

Coal miner

Rhizopus nigricans

Restaurant seafood handler

Scallop and shrimp

Coffee maker

Chrysonilia sitophila

Scallop plant processor

King scallop and queen scallop

Laborer

Technician

Shrimp meal (Artemia salina)

Sooty molds (Ascomycetes,
deuteromycetes)

ARTHROPODS
Agronomist

Logging worker

Chrysonilia sitophila

Bruchus lentis

Plywood factory worker

Neurospora

Bottling

Ground bug

Sausage processing

Penicillium nalgiovense

Chicken breeder

Herring worm (Anisakis simplex)

Sawmill worker

Trichoderma koningii

Engineer at electric power
plant

Caddis flies (Phryganeidae)

Stucco worker

Mucor spp. (contaminating esparto
fibers)

Entomologist

Lesser mealworm (Alphitobius
diaperinus Panzer), moth, butterfly

Technician

Dictyostelium discoideum (mold),
Aspergillus niger

Farmer

Grain pests (Eurygaster and Pyrale)

Fish bait handler

Insect larvae (Galleria mellonella),
mealworm larvae (Tenebrio molitor),
green bottle fly larvae (Lucila caesar),
daphnia, fish-­feed Echinodorus larva
(Echinodorus plasmosus), Chiromids
midge (Chironomus thummi thummi)

Fish processing

Herring worm (Anisakis simplex)

MUSHROOMS
Agriculture

Fruit tree red spider mite (Panonychus
ulmi)

Agaricus bisporus (white mushroom)

Baker

Baker’s yeast (Saccharomyces
cerevisiae), Boletus edulis

Greenhouse worker

Sweet pea (Lathyrus odoratus)

Hotel manager

Boletus edulis

Mushroom producer

Pleurotus cornucopiae

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2618 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Table 448.5  High Molecular Weight Antigens Known to Induce Occupational or Environmental Asthma—cont’d
OCCUPATION OR
ENVIRONMENT

SOURCE

OCCUPATION OR
ENVIRONMENT

SOURCE

Mushroom soup processor

Mushroom unspecified

Hairdresser

Henna (unspecified)

Office worker

Boletus edulis

Herbal tea processor

Seller

Pleurotus ostreatus (spores of white
spongy rot)

Herbal tea, sarsaparilla root, sanyak
(Dioscorea batatas), Korean ginseng
(Panax ginseng), tea plant dust
(Camellia sinensis), chamomile
(unspecified)

Herbalist

Licorice roots (Glycyrrhiza spp.), wonji
(Polygala tenuifolia), herb material

Horticulture

Freesia (Freesia hybrida), paprika
(Capsicum annuum), Brazil ginseng
(Pfaffia paniculata)

ALGAE
Pharmacist

Chlorella

Thalassotherapist

Algae (species unspecified)

FLOURS
Animal fodder

Marigold flour (Tagetes erecta)

Baker

Wheat, rye, soya, and buckwheat
flour; Konjac flour; white pea flour
(Lathyrus sativus)

Laborer

Citrus food handling (dl-­limonene,
l-­citronellol, and dichlorophen)

Food processing

White Lupin flour (Lupinus albus)

Oil industry

Castor bean, olive oil cake

POLLENS
Florist

Pharmaceutical
Cyclamen, rose

Rose hip, passion flower (Passiflora
alata), cascara sagrada (Rhamnus
purshiana)

Powder

Lycopodium powder

Sewer

Kapok

Sheller

Almond shell dust

Stucco handler

Esparto (Stipa tenacissima and
Lygeum spartum)

Tobacco manufacturer

Tobacco leaf

Gardener

Canary island date palm (Phoenix
canariensis), bell of Ireland
(Moluccella laevis), bell pepper,
chrysanthemum, eggplant (Solanum
melongena), Brassica oleracea
(cauliflower and broccoli)

Laboratory worker

Sunflower (Helianthus spp.), thale cress
(Arabidopsis thaliana)

Olive farmers

White mustard (Sinapis alba)

Processing worker

Helianthus annuus

PLANTS
Brewery chemist

Hops

Brush-­makers

Tampico fiber in agave leaves

Butcher

Aromatic herb

Chemist

Linseed oilcake, Voacanga africana
seed dust

Cosmetics

Dusts from seeds of sacha inchi
(Plukenetia volubilis), chamomile
(unspecified)

Decorator

Cacoon seed (Entage gigas)

Floral worker

Decorative flower, safflower
(Carthamus tinctorius) and yarrow
(Achillea millefolium), spathe flower,
statice (Limonium tataricum), baby’s
breath (Gypsophila paniculata), ivy
(Hedera helix), flower (various), sea
lavender (Limonium sinuatum)

Food industry

Gardener

Aniseed, fenugreek, peach, garlic dust,
asparagus, coffee bean, sesame seed,
grain dust, carrot (Daucus carota L.),
green bean (Phaseolus multiflorus),
lima bean (Phaseolus lunatus), onion,
potato, Swiss chard (Beta vulgaris
L.), courgette, carob bean, spinach
powder, cauliflower, cabbage, chicory,
fennel seed, onion seeds (Allium
cepa, red onion), rice, saffron (Crocus
sativus), spices, grain dust
Copperleaf (Acalypha wilkesiana),
grass juice, weeping fig (Ficus
benjamina), umbrella tree (Schefflera
spp.), amaryllis (Hippeastrum spp.),
Madagascar jasmine sap (Stephanotis
floribunda), vetch (Vicia sativa)

PLANT-­DERIVED NATURAL PRODUCTS
Baker
Gluten, soybean lecithin
Candy maker

Pectin

Glove manufacturer

Latex

Health professional

Latex

Rose extraction

Rose oil

BIOLOGIC ENZYMES
Baker

Fungal amylase, fungal
amyloglucosidase and
hemicellulase

Cheese producer

Various enzymes in rennet production
(proteases, pepsine, chymosins)

Detergent industry

Esterase, Bacillus subtilis

Factory worker

Bacillus subtilis

Fruit processor

Pectinase and glucanase

Hospital personnel

Empynase (pronase B)

Laboratory worker

Xylanase, phytase from Aspergillus
niger

Pharmaceutical

Bromelin, flaviastase, lactase,
pancreatin, papain, pepsin, serratia
peptidase, and lysozyme chloride;
egg lysozyme, trypsin

Plastic

Trypsin

VEGETABLE GUMS
Carpet manufacturing

Guar

Dental hygienist

Gutta-­percha

Gum importer

Tragacanth

Hairdresser

Karaya

Printer

Acacia

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 448 u Immune and Inflammatory Lung Disease
Table 448.6   Low Molecular Weight Chemicals Known
to Induce Occupational or Environmental
Asthma
OCCUPATION OR
ENVIRONMENT SOURCE

CHEMICALS
Diisocyanates
• Diphenylmethane
• Hexamethylene
• Naphthalene
• Toluene

• Polyurethane
• Roofing materials
• Insulations
• Paint

Anhydrides

Manufacturers or users

• Trimellitic
• Phthalic

• Paint
• Plastics
• Epoxy resins

Dyes

Personal or business use of dyes

• Anthraquinone
• Carmine
• Henna
• Persulfate

• Hair dye
• Fur dye
• Fabric dye

Glue or resin

Plastic

• Methacrylate
• Acrylates
• Epoxy

• Manufacturers
• Healthcare professionals
• Orthopedic specialists

Metals

Metal work

• Chromic acid
• Potassium dichromate
• Nickel sulfate
• Vanadium
• Platinum salts

• Plating
• Welding

Drugs

Exposure to drugs in
environment

• β-­Lactams
• Opioids
• Other

• Pharmaceutical workers
• Farmers
• Healthcare workers

Chemicals

Exposure in the healthcare field

• Formaldehyde
• Glutaraldehyde
• Ethylene oxide

• Laboratory work
• Healthcare professionals

Wood dust

Workers/hobbyists

• Western red cedar (plicatic
acid)
• Exotic woods
• Maple
• Oak

• Sawmill
• Carpentry
• Woodworking

(via percutaneous skin testing or serum IgE) to the causative agent is
often impractical given the lack of commercial extracts to the over 300
known causative agents for occupational asthma (see Table 448.5).

Treatment of Occupational Asthma

The management of occupational asthma is centered on exposure
reduction and optimized pharmacotherapy with inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) following the National Asthma Education and Prevention Program (NAEPP) and the Global Initiative for Asthma
(GINA) guidelines (reviewed in Chapter 185). Ideally, patients would
be completely removed from the exposure for the best outcomes.
However, in cases where this is not feasible, respiratory protection
devices and work accommodations to reduce the exposure should be
pursued under the guidance of an occupational hygienist. Because
of a lack of commercially available extracts for the causative agent,

2619

allergen-­specific immunotherapy has limited applicability for the
treatment of occupational asthma for patients who cannot avoid the
exposure. For these reasons, omalizumab therapy has been successfully used in small case series to attenuate the IgE response, resulting
in reduced exacerbations and systemic and/or inhaled corticosteroid
requirements.

Irritant-­Induced Asthma and Reactive Airways
Disease Syndrome

Irritant-­induced asthma is also a form of work-­related asthma and
has both acute and subacute phenotypes. As opposed to occupational asthma, irritant-­induced asthma results from nonimmunologic provocation of bronchial hyperresponsiveness with airflow
obstruction.
The most well-­characterized presentation of acute irritant-­induced
asthma is reactive airways dysfunction syndrome (RADS), where
patients present with acute respiratory symptoms within minutes or
hours after a single inhalation of an elevated concentration of irritant
aerosol, gas, or smoke. Many of these exposures are accidental in
nature. The clinical manifestations and pathophysiology of RADS have
been studied through experimental design or epidemiology studies
involving exposure to chlorine gas, acetic acid, dimethylaminoethanol,
chlorofluorocarbons, epichlorohydrin, and diisocyanates. Patients with
RADS typically can pinpoint the exact time of onset of symptoms and
the exact number of hours post exposure. The symptoms are so severe
that nearly 80% of subjects in one study presented to an emergency
department for care. The lower airway symptoms of cough, dyspnea,
chest tightness, and wheezing are prominent features in RADS, with
cough being most prevalent. Because of the toxic nature of the inhaled
chemical, it is predictable that an upper airway syndrome of throat and
nose burning will often accompany the lower airway symptoms. This
part of the complex has been referred to as respiratory upper airway
dysfunction syndrome.
Predisposing factors for the development of RADS are not well
characterized. Cigarette smoking may increase the risk of developing RADS when exposure through inhalation of irritant chemicals
occurs. In addition to host factors, the type of chemical appears
to be important. Higher concentrations of chemicals, the type of
chemical (vapor or wet aerosols), and bleaching agents are the
most offending agents to cause RADS. Dry particle aerosols are less
likely to cause RADS. Analysis of the World Trade Center firefighters indicates that the presence of bronchial hyperresponsiveness
before this catastrophe did not increase the risk for an individual
to develop RADS.
The pathogenesis of RADS follows a typical pattern, driven by the
initial injury to the airway epithelium. Initial histology demonstrates
rapid mucosal denudation accompanied by a submucosal fibrinous,
hemorrhagic exudate. Subepithelial edema subsequently occurs with
epithelial layer regeneration, basal and parabasal cells increase, and
eventually areas of fibrosis form. The desquamation, fibrosis, basement
membrane thickening, and basal cell regeneration are more characteristic of RADS than occupational asthma. This may explain the limited
response to bronchodilator therapy in this syndrome compared to
asthma.
In contrast to the acute onset of symptoms after exposure seen with
RADS, individuals with subacute irritant-­induced asthma present
with a more insidious onset of symptoms. Because of the recurrent
nature of the low concentration of the chemical exposure, patients
may initially not be able to identify the underlying trigger. Subacute
irritant-­induced asthma has been described through epidemiologic
studies and characterized by (1) the insidious onset of symptoms occurring after multiple high exposures to irritants (such as what occurred
among some rescue workers at the World Trade Center) or (2) single or
multiple exposures to irritant chemicals in low concentrations. Similar
to allergic rhinitis, patients may describe nasal congestion, rhinorrhea,
sneezing, postnasal drip, ocular irritation, and conjunctival injection. Pulmonary symptoms include those typically seen with asthma
exacerbations.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2620 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Table 448.7  Criteria for Reactive Airways Disease
(Dysfunction) Syndrome
• Documented absence of preceding respiratory symptoms
• Onset after single specific high-­level exposure incident
• Exposure to very high concentration of gas, smoke, fumes, or
vapors with irritant properties
• Onset of symptoms within 24 hours after exposure with
persistence for ≥3 months
• Symptoms similar to asthma with cough, wheeze, and dyspnea
• Presence of airflow obstruction on pulmonary function ±
nonspecific bronchial (methacholine) hyper-­responsiveness
• Other pulmonary disease excluded
Data from Varney VA, Evans J, Bansal. Successful treatment of reactive airways
dysfunction syndrome by high-­dose vitamin D. J Asthma Allergy. 2011;4:87–91.

Diagnosis of Irritant-­Induced Asthma

Initial evaluation of the patient with acute (RADS) or subacute irritant-­
induced asthma usually includes the medical history, physical examination, and pulse oximetry. Because of the acute nature of RADS, a
chest radiograph is obtained in order to rule out other acute causes of
dyspnea, including pneumonia or pulmonary edema. In patients with
both acute and subacute irritant-­induced asthma, the chest radiograph
is frequently normal or may reveal hyperinflation. Ideally, if the patient
is not in significant distress, complete pulmonary function testing with
spirometry, assessment of bronchodilator reversibility, and nonspecific bronchial provocation with methacholine are helpful in the initial
evaluation.
Table 448.7 lists the criteria for a diagnosis of RADS. Asthma-­like
symptoms and airway hyperresponsiveness occur and often persist for
prolonged periods. Unlike typical asthma, RADS is often not reversible
after administration of a bronchodilator. This is probably a consequence
of the direct injury to the epithelium and subsequent submucosal
fibrosis.

Treatment of RADS and Irritant-­Induced Asthma

Treatment of acute (RADS) and subacute irritant-­induced asthma
focuses on prevention of exposure. Because the exposure in RADS
is often associated with a single known exposure, this task is readily
accomplished. The low, persistent exposures associated with subacute
irritant-­induced asthma are more challenging to identify and remove.
Implementing treatment guidelines for asthma is recommended
when intervention is required beyond antigen removal. Managing an
acute presentation of RADS is exactly the same as managing an acute
asthma exacerbation. Short-­acting β-­agonist treatment may not be
effective; a trial of inhaled ipratropium may add benefit in the short
term. For moderate to severe symptoms and FEV1 values that are less
than 70% of predicted, administration of systemic glucocorticoids (2
mg/kg prednisone equivalent, up to 60 mg daily) can be beneficial
based on some clinical case studies and animal studies. Unlike the
typical 5-­day courses of systemic glucocorticoids for asthma exacerbations, many patients remain symptomatic beyond 5 days as a result
of the extent of the airway epithelial injury. Steroid treatment may
be prolonged up to 10-­15 days after the onset of symptoms; a slow
taper of corticosteroids may be implemented after the 10-­15 days.
High-­dose ICS therapy with or without long-­acting β-­agonists may
be added while the systemic steroids are being tapered. The initial
high-­dose ICS regimens are based on the NAEPP and the GINA
guidelines. For patients whose initial symptoms are not as severe
and/or spirometry demonstrates milder airway obstruction (FEV1
greater than or equal to 70% of predicted), high-­dose ICS therapy
alone can be started without requiring systemic corticosteroid treatment. Once patients’ asthma symptoms are improved, ICS doses can
be tapered by increments of 25–50% over a period of up to 6 months
in some case series based on patient symptoms. However, prolonged
ICS treatment beyond 6 months has also been noted.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

448.3 Granulomatous Lung Disease
Timothy J. Vece, Eveline Y. Wu, and Stephanie D. Davis

GRANULOMATOSIS WITH POLYANGIITIS

Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA), formerly Wegener granulomatosis, is a disease that involves both the lower and upper respiratory
tracts with granulomatous inflammation of small-­to medium-­sized
vessels (see Chapter 210). Pulmonary disease is frequently associated
with glomerulonephritis. The simultaneous presence of pulmonary and
renal disease should immediately raise the suspicion for GPA, microscopic polyangiitis, or anti–glomerular basement membrane (anti-­
GBM) disease (see Chapter 448.5).

Epidemiology

The prevalence of GPA during childhood is rare, but epidemiologic
data suggest an increase in cases in the last 2 decades. The median age
at diagnosis is 10-­14 years, and there is a female predominance of 3-­4:1.
Improved clinical recognition, disease classification, and tests, such as
antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCAs), have helped in the
diagnosis of this rare disorder.

Etiology and Pathogenesis

In GPA, the development of both upper and lower airway disease with
granulomas implies that exposure to antigens in the airways of an
endogenous or exogenous source is involved with aberrant innate and
adaptive immune responses. Neutrophils are a key effector cell. There
is also a predominantly T-­lymphocyte type 1 response with overexpression of interferon-­γ (IFN-­γ) and tumor necrosis factor (TNF). In vitro
studies demonstrate a skewed T-­lymphocyte type 17 response by blood
CD4+ T cells in GPA, suggesting there is an immune regulatory defect
that leads to excessive production of T-­lymphocyte type 1 and type 17
cytokines (interleukin [IL]-­17, TNF, and IFN-­γ). Such an inflammatory
response may be sufficient to induce and sustain granuloma formation.
ANCAs are autoantibodies reactive against proteins in the cytoplasmic
granules of neutrophils and monocytes and are found in 90% of patients
with GPA. The most common ANCAs in GPA have a cytoplasmic fluorescence pattern (c-­ANCA) and usually indicate antibodies against
proteinase-­3 (PR3-­ANCA). Perinuclear fluorescence (p-­ANCA) usually indicate antibodies directed toward myeloperoxidase (MPO-­
ANCA), which are less common in GPA. Approximately 5–10%
of children develop the clinical phenotype of GPA in the absence of
detectable ANCA.

Clinical Manifestations

Children with GPA present with respiratory complaints accompanied
by fever, loss of energy, and vague joint symptoms. Some may present
with severe nasal disease manifested as ulceration, septal perforation,
pain, sinusitis, and/or epistaxis. The septal perforation may lead to
deformation of the nasal bridge from erosion of the underlying cartilage, but this is more common in adults. Sinusitis may be present,
and pulmonary disease occurs in the majority of patients. Symptoms
range from cough, hemoptysis (seen in less than 50% of pediatric
patients), dyspnea, and chest discomfort to asymptomatic infiltrates
on chest radiography. Occasionally, patients with GPA will present
with hemoptysis or recurrent fleeting infiltrates from pulmonary hemorrhage. The pathology is confusing because granulomatous disease
may be difficult to demonstrate, and pulmonary capillaritis, the other
main component seen on histology, can be seen in other disorders,
including anti-­
GBM disease, microscopic polyangiitis, idiopathic
pulmonary capillaritis, and IgA vasculitis (Henoch-­Schönlein purpura). Distinguishing GPA from other pulmonary-­renal syndromes
is easiest when there are classical symptoms of upper airway disease
(nasal/sinus), lower airway disease with necrosis and granulomas on
lung biopsy along with vasculitis, and renal disease consistent with
glomerulonephritis.
As many as 20% of patients with GPA will present with subglottic
or endobronchial stenosis from scarring and inflammatory changes.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 448 u Immune and Inflammatory Lung Disease

2621

Although it may be the presenting symptom, it often occurs in conjunction with other disease manifestations. Dyspnea and voice changes
are common complaints from patients.
Skin, ocular (uveitis), and joint symptoms are common in GPA and
have been found to accompany the lung and renal disease up to 50%
of the time. Biopsy of the skin may show nonspecific leukocytoclastic
vasculitis, venulitis, or capillaritis.

Laboratory and Pathology

PR3-­ANCA are found in 70–90% of children with GPA, and in the
correct clinical situation are sufficient for the diagnosis of ANCA-­
associated vasculitis, although it may be difficult to differentiate GPA
from MPA. In unusual or uncertain cases, tissue diagnosis is required.
In lung tissue, the usual pathology demonstrates multiple parenchymal
nodules that may be located in either the bronchial, vascular, or interstitial tissues (Fig. 448.1). The granulomatous inflammation is often
found in areas of necrosis and/or vasculitis.
Renal biopsy rarely demonstrates granulomas or vasculitis. Rather,
kidney tissues may show focal, segmental, or necrotizing glomerulonephritis without deposits of immune complexes. Kidney biopsy is preferred when a histopathologic diagnosis is required, as kidney biopsy
has a lower morbidity and mortality than lung biopsy. When the tissues fail to demonstrate classical findings, a variety of diseases (e.g.,
tuberculosis, sarcoid, microscopic polyangiitis, malignancy, and other
autoimmune disorders) must be considered in the evaluation.

A

Radiology

Chest imaging findings are quite variable in GPA. Chest radiography
may reveal multiple infiltrates, nodules, cavitary lesions, or ILD. Fleeting infiltrates may be seen when recurrent hemorrhage is a clinical
manifestation. HRCT of the chest often demonstrates more extensive
lung disease and the cavitation associated with the necrotizing nature
of the disease (Fig. 448.2).

Treatment

Rapidly progressive, debilitating disease may occur if there is a failure to diagnose GPA. One early series of patients reported that death
occurred in 90% of patients within 2 years of diagnosis. Glucocorticoid
therapy alone resulted in relapses and inadequate control of disease in
many subjects.
Therapy is divided into induction and maintenance phases. Systemic
corticosteroids, while ineffective as monotherapy, are a mainstay of
therapy in conjunction with other immune-­suppressive agents. Prednisone can be given orally. Alternatively, intravenous methylprednisolone may be used at a dosage of 10-­30 mg/kg (max 1 g) administered
weekly or for 3 consecutive days monthly. Combination therapy traditionally includes cyclophosphamide given either orally at 2 mg/kg/day
or intravenous dosing at 15 mg/kg monthly. Rituximab, an anti-­CD20
antibody, is as effective as cyclophosphamide in inducing remission of
GPA. Rituximab dosing is either 350 mg/m2 given weekly for the first
4 weeks or 750 mg/m2 given on initiation of therapy and 2 weeks after
initiation. A second dose of 500 mg/m2 is often given 6 months after
the first course of rituximab. Induction therapy should be continued
for 3-­6 months.
Continued therapy is required past the initial induction phase to
maintain remission. Because of the toxicity of cyclophosphamide,
other immune-­suppressive agents are preferred. Methotrexate and
azathioprine have been shown to be noninferior to cyclophosphamide in maintaining remission, whereas mycophenolate mofetil has
higher relapse rates than azathioprine. Rituximab is also used for
maintenance remission and is associated with lower risk of major
relapse compared with azathioprine, particularly for patients with
GPA and PR3-­ANCA. Systemic steroid dosages should be progressively weaned at the beginning of the maintenance phase of therapy
to a dosage of 5-­10 mg/day. Maintenance therapy should be continued for an additional 1.5-­2 years.
Adjuvant therapy with plasma exchange may be considered when
life-­threatening GPA disease presents. This is advocated on the premise that ANCAs are inducing disease and will be removed from the

B
Fig. 448.1 A, Low-­power view of granulomatous inflammation and

geographic necrosis (arrow) in a lung biopsy from a patient with GPA.
B, Granulomatous vasculitis involving a small pulmonary artery in the
lung of a patient with GPA. The vessel wall is markedly thickened with
an inflammatory infiltrate that includes multinucleated giant cells. (From
Sneller MC, Fontana JR, Shelhamer JH. Immunologic nonasthmatic diseases of the lung. In Adkinson NF Jr, Bochner BS, Burks AW, et al.,
eds. Middleton’s Allergy Principles and Practice, 8th ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier; 2014: Fig. 62.1B and C.)

Fig. 448.2 Chest CT scan of a patient with granulomatosis with
polyangiitis shows typical nodular lung infiltrate with cavitation. (From
Sneller MC, Fontana JR, Shelhamer JH. Immunologic nonasthmatic diseases of the lung. In Adkinson NF Jr, Bochner BS, Burks AW, et al.,
eds. Middleton’s Allergy Principles and Practice, 8th ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier; 2014: Fig. 62.1A.)

circulation with this intervention; its use has been favorably evaluated
in GPA-­induced renal disease. Adjuvant plasma exchange has been
studied mainly in patients with severe renal vasculitis, but there are
also reports of success in severe pulmonary hemorrhage. The results

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2622 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
of a meta-­analysis of patients with renal vasculitis in nine trials suggest that adjuvant plasma exchange may be associated with improved
renal outcome. Other adjuvant therapy includes high-­dose intravenous
immunoglobulin (IVIG) in recalcitrant disease, which acts to cross-­
link IgG and likely decrease circulating ANCA antibodies.
Recurrent disease remains a major problem, with relapse rates of up to
50% reported in most studies. ANCA levels do not always correlate with
disease activity or severity. Patients with isolated disease of the sinuses
and nose may not require such toxic therapy. Therapy with topical corticosteroid and antibiotics for infection appear to be warranted. If unsuccessful, steroids with methotrexate appear to be an effective therapy.
The development of subglottic stenosis requires specific treatment.
Use of cyclophosphamide with oral corticosteroid may only partially
treat the airway disease or not treat the airway disease at all. Local
injection of a prolonged-­acting corticosteroid may reduce the inflammation and prevent further scarring. If this complication is found at
presentation, simultaneous airway intervention with induction of corticosteroid and cyclophosphamide is warranted and encouraged.

SARCOIDOSIS

Sarcoidosis is an idiopathic multisystem inflammatory disease with
a characteristic histology of noncaseating granulomas (see Chapter
209). It has been postulated that sarcoidosis represents an exaggerated
immune response to a yet-­to-­be-­identified agent from the environment that is likely inhaled in a susceptible host. Sarcoidosis remains
a diagnosis of exclusion from other diseases, with granuloma formation noted on histology, such as chronic granulomatous disease (CGD),
granulomatous lymphocytic interstitial lung disease (GLILD) associated with common variable immune deficiency (CVID), HP associated with some drugs and inhalation agents, GPA, typical and atypical
Mycobacterium, Pneumocystis jiroveci, and malignancy.

Epidemiology and Pathogenesis

The Black population is disproportionately affected by sarcoidosis; however, it can present in any group. Because an asymptomatic
sarcoid-­like distribution of noncaseating granulomas may be found
at autopsy, the contribution of the granulomas to the disease is not
clear. In countries that perform chest radiograph screening, up to 50%
of people diagnosed with sarcoidosis are asymptomatic. The mortality and severity of sarcoidosis are poorer among Black patients; this is
likely multifactorial, with racism and healthcare inequities playing a
significant role. Sarcoidosis is more endemic in the Southeastern and
South Central United States. There have been clusters of disease in families, and genetic testing suggests that the MHC linkage on the short
arm of chromosome 6 is most likely to be observed.
Unrecognized infection or inhalation of an immune response–
inducing antigen continues to be at the forefront of consideration as a
cause of the disease. Clusters of sarcoidosis in small populations, variable prevalence by geography and race, the transfer of disease by organ
transplant, and the reproducible noncaseating granuloma formation
only noted in patients with sarcoidosis in the skin when homogenized
lymph node tissue from patients with sarcoid is injected intradermally
(Kveim-­Siltzbach test) have supported this hypothesis.

Clinical Manifestations

Sarcoidosis is rarely found in young children. Skin rash, uveitis, and
arthritis are seen most often in younger children without pulmonary
symptoms. In older children, the presentation is similar to adults, with
multisystem disease being the most common. In Northern Europe,
erythema nodosum with the ocular involvement of iridocyclitis is seen
most frequently. Despite the lack of symptoms, chest radiography may
be abnormal in approximately 90% of children. The pulmonary disease
can be less progressive compared with adults, and patients can recover
spontaneously without corticosteroids. Rarely, pulmonary disease may
progress to fibrosis. Ocular disease is more likely to be progressive and
warrant intervention, as the inflammatory response may lead to blindness from complications of iritis.
Patients may present with malaise, fever, and weight loss. Those with
lung disease are more likely to be asymptomatic as the presentation.
When symptomatic, patients demonstrate shortness of breath, cough,

and dyspnea. Younger children are more likely to manifest the disease
as iridocyclitis, skin rash, and arthritis. Black children appear to have
more frequent lymph node involvement, nonspecific elevations of
gamma globulin, erythema nodosum, and hypercalcemia.
Physical exam may reveal only an elevated respiratory rate without
crackles or rales by auscultation. Pleural involvement has been seen but
is uncommon. When present, a lymphocytic predominant exudate may
be observed in the pleural fluid. Unusual but reported findings include
cases of pneumothorax, hemothorax, and chylothorax. One specific
syndrome, Lofgren syndrome, with hilar lymphadenopathy, erythema
nodosum, and migratory polyarthralgias, is almost exclusively seen in
females. This syndrome has a strong association with HLA-­DQB1*0201
and polymorphisms in the C-­C chemokine receptor 2 (CCR2); these
genetic markers are a predictor of a good outcome.
Although almost 90% of patients with sarcoidosis demonstrate
parenchymal or mediastinal disease on chest radiography, there are
many who have minimal to no symptoms. Approximately 40% of
adults with stage 1 disease have endobronchial involvement found at
bronchoscopy. The higher the staging level of the disease, the more
likely patients are to have airway involvement.

Diagnostic Laboratory Testing

The most common but nonspecific findings are hypergammaglobulinemia, elevated acute-­phase reactants, hypercalciuria, hypercalcemia, elevated alkaline phosphatase when liver disease is present, and,
occasionally, anemia of chronic disease. Serum angiotensin-­converting
enzyme may be elevated in 75% of patients with untreated sarcoidosis.
False-­positive tests occur from other diseases, so it is not considered a
diagnostic test but may be used for monitoring disease activity.
Pulmonary function tests can be performed accurately in most
children older than the age of 4 years. There are no specific diagnostic findings of spirometry, lung volumes, or diffusion capacity in
sarcoidosis. Restrictive lung disease has been reported, but obstruction may be present because of an airway granuloma or lymph node
compression. A decline in diffusion capacity when alveolitis is present in hypersensitivity pneumonitis could help diagnostically when
attempting to differentiate sarcoidosis from HP before biopsy.
BAL is of great help when differentiating other diseases from sarcoidosis. BAL in sarcoidosis shows a marked predominance of CD4+
T cells. A lymphocyte percentage >16% on BAL, a CD4:CD8 ratio >4:1,
and noncaseating granulomas on bronchial biopsy in the presence of
abnormal angiotensin-­converting enzyme levels are nearly completely
diagnostic for sarcoidosis. In addition, T cells are activated on BAL
in sarcoidosis. BAL in HP shows a significant change in the balance
of CD4+ to CD8+ T cells, with the two cell types being nearly equal
compared with the normal mild predominance of CD4+ T cells in the
circulation. A ratio of CD4:CD8 of <1 predicts 100% of patients with
BAL lymphocytosis to not have sarcoidosis. Neutrophil counts >2%
and/or eosinophil counts >1% exclude the diagnosis of sarcoidosis.
The analysis of D-­dimers in BAL fluid from subjects with sarcoidosis
demonstrates an elevation in 80% of patients compared with no detectable D-­dimers in unaffected controls.

Histopathology

The characteristic feature of sarcoidosis is the noncaseating granuloma formation in the lung (Fig. 448.3). These granulomas are found
in the bronchial walls, alveolar septa, and vascular walls of pulmonary arteries and veins. The formation of noncaseating granulomas
is likely preceded by alveolitis involving the interstitium more than
the alveolar spaces. There is an accumulation of inflammatory cells,
including monocytes, macrophages, and lymphocytes, that accompanies the granulomas. Multinucleated giant cells are frequently found
among the epithelioid cells within the granuloma follicle. These may
show cytoplasmic inclusions (e.g., asteroid bodies and Schaumann
bodies) and some birefringent crystalline particles made of calcium
oxalate and other calcium salts. These are most often identified in
the upper lobes of the lungs, which may lead to confusion with diseases such as HP, eosinophilic granuloma, collagen vascular disease,
pneumoconiosis, and infectious disease such as tuberculosis or
histoplasmosis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 448 u Immune and Inflammatory Lung Disease

2623

Fig. 448.3 Transbronchial biopsy specimen showing a sarcoid granuloma. A, The granulomas are located below the bronchiolar epithelial layer

that appears at the top of the frame. B, A higher-­power view of the same biopsy specimen. The epithelioid granuloma is tightly packed and contains
multiple multinucleated giant cells. There is no caseous necrosis. Special stains for acid-­fast bacilli and fungi were negative. (From Sneller MC, Fontana JR, Shelhamer JH. Immunologic nonasthmatic diseases of the lung. In Adkinson NF Jr, Bochner BS, Burks AW, et al., eds. Middleton’s Allergy
Principles and Practice, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2014: Fig. 62.6.)

Radiology

Pulmonary imaging in sarcoidosis has included plain chest radiography,
HRCT of the chest, positron emission tomography using fluorine-­18-­
fluorodeoxyglucose, or radiotracer using gallium-­67. The staging of sarcoidosis is performed using plain radiography and is outlined as follows:
• Stage I—Bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy accompanied by right paratracheal lymphadenopathy.
• Stage II—Bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy accompanied by reticular
opacities. If symptomatic, patients have cough and dyspnea. Occasional fever and fatigue accompany the respiratory symptoms.
• Stage III—Reticular opacities are found predominantly in the upper
lobes with regression of hilar lymphadenopathy.
• Stage IV—Reticular opacities start to coalesce and lead to volume loss in
the lung fields and traction bronchiectasis from conglomeration of the
inflamed tissues. Extensive calcium deposits may be seen at this stage.
HRCT of the chest may be helpful in further staging of the disease and
in revealing abnormalities not appreciated on chest radiography. Findings
in patients with sarcoidosis by HRCT of the chest include hilar lymphadenopathy, paratracheal nodules, middle to upper lung parenchymal
ground-­glass appearance, bronchial wall thickening, bronchiectasis, cystic
changes, and fibrosis. The ground-­glass appearance suggests that alveolitis,
as seen in hypersensitivity pneumonitis, may be present. Biopsy has usually shown granuloma formation as the predominant histologic finding.

Treatment

Because pulmonary sarcoidosis spontaneously resolves without therapy in almost 75% of patients, clear guidelines for treatment focused
on minimizing therapeutic side effects is imperative. Glucocorticosteroids (GCSs) have long been the mainstay of therapy in sarcoidosis and
are often used because of extrapulmonary disease. When pulmonary
disease is progressive, GCS therapy is aimed at the prevention of fibrosis, honeycombing, and irreversible lung disease. Assuring that disseminated infections, heart failure, thromboembolism, or pulmonary
hypertension are not present is important. In addition to HRCT of the
chest, performance of pulmonary function tests, electrocardiogram,
and echocardiogram should be considered before starting GCS therapy.
GCS therapy is often not started in the asymptomatic patient with
stage I or II disease. This scrutiny of the benefit of therapy was highlighted when a prospective evaluation of GCS therapy for pulmonary
disease found that nearly 50% of patients receiving GCSs had active
or relapsing disease 2 years later. In contrast, 90% of patients who did
not receive GCSs had spontaneous remission of disease, with the other
10% needing intervention 2 years later. Absolute indications include
progressive stage III disease with symptoms of shortness of breath,
cough, or other chest symptoms such as pain. Progressive restriction
shown on pulmonary function testing is an indication for therapy. Specific pulmonary function changes where lung capacity declines a total

of 10% or greater, FVC declines 15% or more, or diffusion capacity degradation is noted to be ≥20% are all indications for GCS intervention.
Initially, patients are treated with oral prednisone depending on the
severity of symptoms. Stability is usually achieved within 6-­8 weeks,
after which slow, progressive tapering of GCS may occur every 4-­8
weeks. Many favor the use of alternate-­day steroids to reduce the side
effects of GCSs, but little data exist to show efficacy.
For patients who do not tolerate GCSs or develop progressive disease, alternative immunosuppressive agents may add benefit to the regimen. Progressive disease also is a reminder for the clinician to reassess
the diagnosis of sarcoidosis and review the possibility that beryllium or
an infection may be the underlying reason for the progressive disease.

BERYLLIOSIS

Chronic berylliosis disease (CBD), a rare disease, is caused almost
exclusively by environmental, and specifically occupational, exposure
to beryllium. Examples of these high-­risk industries include beryllium
and beryllium alloy production, nuclear weapon development, the dental industry, and aircraft/automotive manufacturing. CBD is similar in
appearance and pathogenesis to sarcoidosis; however, patients have had a
previous exposure to beryllium. Although uncommon in pediatrics, CBD
is important to consider in adolescents who work in high-­risk industries.

Diagnosis

The most important step in the diagnosis of CBD is establishing a
beryllium exposure by performing a thorough history. Special attention should be given to the patient’s work history, and in younger children, the work history of the parents, as there are reports of secondary
exposure to beryllium causing CBD in at-­risk patients. Symptom history is nonspecific, with the most common being dry cough, shortness
of breath particularly on exertion, and weight loss. Workplace screening for beryllium sensitization is now implemented in high-­risk professions. Given this, the majority of patients are often asymptomatic at the
time of diagnosis. The physical exam is also nonspecific in CBD, with
most patients having a normal examination; however, crackles and
digital clubbing may develop as the disease progresses.
Laboratory testing is a critical step in establishing a diagnosis. Beryllium sensitization is established by performing a beryllium lymphocyte
proliferation test (BeLPT). This test is performed by isolating mononuclear cells from patients (either through blood or bronchoalveolar
lavage fluid [BALF]) and culturing these cells in different concentrations of beryllium salts. Results are reported as a ratio of stimulated
lymphocytes in the beryllium culture versus a control. A BeLPT is considered positive if two or more of the six stimulation indices exceed
normal. A diagnosis of beryllium sensitization is confirmed by two
positive blood BeLPT tests or one positive BALF BeLPT test. BeLPT
screening is performed for employees in high-­risk occupations.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2624 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Radiography is often obtained but may be nonspecific. Chest x-­rays
are often not sensitive enough to diagnose CBD. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest reveals a pattern similar to sarcoidosis, with nodules following a bronchovascular distribution. Hilar lymphadenopathy
is less common in CBD compared to sarcoidosis. In later stages of the
disease, evidence of fibrosis may be seen on the CT scan of the chest.
Pulmonary function testing (PFT) is also commonly performed in
the evaluation of CBD. As a result of increased screening with BeLPT,
most patients with CBD are now diagnosed before PFT abnormalities
become apparent. If PFT abnormalities are noted, these changes are variable, demonstrating an obstructive, restrictive, or mixed pattern. Diffusion capacity for carbon monoxide is often low, especially in advanced
disease. Finally, exercise stress testing is also abnormal in advanced CBD.
Bronchoscopy and BAL are important in the evaluation of CBD. BALF
often reveals lymphocyte counts above 20%. Furthermore, BeLPT can
be performed on BALF, which can confirm beryllium sensitivity. In conjunction with a positive BeLPT and a history of beryllium exposure, lung
biopsy is needed to establish a definitive diagnosis of CBD. Biopsy can be
obtained either through transbronchial biopsies or surgical lung biopsy.
Unlike most pediatric ILDs, transbronchial biopsies are acceptable because
of the bronchovascular distribution of CBD. Biopsies reveal noncaseating
granulomas with a core of epithelial histiocytes surrounded by a rim of
CD4+ lymphocytes. Although lung biopsy is essential for diagnosis, a presumptive diagnosis of CBD can be made with a combination of a history of
symptoms consistent with CBD, beryllium exposure, beryllium sensitization, PFT abnormalities, radiography changes, and BALF abnormalities.

Treatment

Treatment is not well studied in CBD. Most physicians do not treat
asymptomatic patients with normal lung function indices. If lung
function declines, first-­line therapy is often systemic corticosteroids.
Although some patients can stop corticosteroids over time, many will
continue to progress without systemic treatment. In patients with persistent disease despite corticosteroids or in those patients who require
ongoing treatment and would benefit from steroid-­sparing therapy,
other medications have been used such as azathioprine, methotrexate,
mycophenolate, infliximab, or cyclophosphamide.

GRANULOMATOUS LUNG DISEASE IN PRIMARY
IMMUNE DEFICIENCY

Primary immune deficiency (PID) often presents with recurrent or persistent pulmonary symptoms. Patients may experience recurrent infections,
pneumonia, bronchiectasis, and ILD with or without fibrosis. Immune
dysregulation occurs in many of the PIDs and may manifest with development of granulomatous lung disease and an autoimmune response. Most
effort is focused on identifying the infectious pathogens in the PID that
may be leading to the pulmonary symptoms; however, immune dysregulation may be the primary problem. This requires counterintuitive therapies
with suppression of the immune system concurrently with immune deficiency therapy such as IVIG. The two most prominent PIDs associated
with granulomatous lung disease are chronic granulomatous disease (see
Chapter 170) and common variable immune deficiency (see Chapter
166.2).
The classic organism causing granuloma formation in the lung is
Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Nontuberculous mycobacterial infections
also can cause granulomas in the presence of a specific PID. These infections have been seen in patients with defective IL-­12, IL-­23, and IFN-­γ
signaling or when there are autoantibodies to IFN-­γ. Defective regulation of nuclear factor-­kappa B (nuclear factor-­kappa B essential modifier
defects) have also been reported in patients with nontuberculous mycobacteria. The clinician must be certain that this low-­virulence organism
is not causing disease before therapy for immune dysregulation is considered. Another PID associated with granulomatous disease involves
defects in the INF-­γ pathway. These disorders are grouped under the
name Mendelian susceptibility to mycobacterial disease.

Pathogenesis

In CGD, there are defects in the phagocytic nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase system. These defects lead to impairment in

the respiratory burst capacity to generate reactive oxygen species (see
Chapter 170).
Patients with CVID have abnormalities in B lymphocytes and hypogammaglobulinemia. Pulmonary manifestations of CVID include
organizing pneumonia, ILD, mucosa-­
associated lymphoid tissue
lymphoma, and noncaseating granulomas in granulomatous and
lymphocytic interstitial lung disease (GLILD) (see Chapter 166.2).
Elevated levels of TNF from polymorphisms have been implicated as a
possible mechanism. GLILD is becoming recognized more frequently
in CVID and other immune disorders. It is defined by the presence of
a granulomatous and a lymphocytic proliferative pattern in the lung.
Granulomas may be found in other organs, including the bone marrow,
spleen, gastrointestinal tract, skin, and liver in GLILD.
The etiology of GLILD is unknown. In a case cohort study, a majority of subjects with pathology diagnostic of GLILD were found to have
human herpesvirus-­8 infection of the lung. These findings in this subgroup of patients with GLILD may point to a mechanism underlying
the development of pulmonary granulomas.
GLILD is sometimes misdiagnosed as sarcoidosis initially because
both involve pulmonary granuloma, often accompanied by hilar and/
or mediastinal lymphadenopathy. Sarcoidosis has several features that
distinguish it from GLILD, such as normal or elevated serum immunoglobulin levels and frequent spontaneous remissions.

Clinical Manifestations of Granulomatous Lung
Disease in Primary Immune Deficiency

Chronic respiratory disease as a result of recurrent infections is common
in CGD. This is accompanied by clubbing in some patients and additional
organ manifestations in the skin, liver, and genitourinary and gastrointestinal tracts. Granulomas are especially problematic in the gastrointestinal
and genitourinary tracts. The inhalation of fungal spores and hyphae has
led to acute pneumonia in CGD with rapid progression to respiratory
failure, with hypoxemia, dyspnea, and fever. This entity, characterized as
mulch pneumonia, appears to be best treated with antifungal medications
and corticosteroids. Patients with GLILD present with progressive exercise
intolerance and hypoxemia.

Radiography

Hilar and/or mediastinal lymphadenopathy occur with granulomatous
lung involvement. These may manifest as parenchymal nodules and/
or ground-­glass abnormalities and can be seen commonly in CVID
and CGD. Differentiating infectious causes of pulmonary infiltration
in PID is often difficult on chest radiography; HRCT of the chest is
often mandatory in the initial evaluation of the patients with CVID as
a result of nonspecific findings on chest radiograph.

Laboratory and Pulmonary Function Testing

A definitive diagnosis of GLILD is made by lung biopsy with granulomatous disease. Transbronchial biopsy in children is often insufficient,
and lung biopsy by video-­assisted thoracoscopy or open biopsy is preferred. Unless the patient’s underlying immune deficiency is unknown,
other laboratory testing (except testing for infectious organisms) does
not contribute significantly to the diagnosis of GLILD. When the child
is old enough, complete PFT with spirometry, lung volumes, and diffusion capacity should be obtained at baseline and then followed serially
to assess therapeutic response or progression of disease.

Therapy

The presence of GLILD in CVID can be associated with significant
morbidity and possibly death. Without therapy, progressive pulmonary
fibrosis and respiratory failure may occur in GLILD. The parenchymal
disease may not always be controlled or relieved by glucocorticoid
treatment. Other treatments include TNF antagonists, cyclosporine, or
a combination therapy with rituximab and azathioprine. Response to
therapy is monitored clinically and by interval HRCT of the chest and
PFT, including spirometry, lung volumes, and diffusing capacity.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 448 u Immune and Inflammatory Lung Disease

448.4 Eosinophilic Lung Disease
Timothy J. Vece and Stephanie D. Davis
The eosinophilic lung diseases are a group of heterogeneous pulmonary disorders with a predominant diffuse infiltration of eosinophils
in the alveolar spaces or interstitial pulmonary spaces. Collectively, the
disorders are often referred to as pulmonary infiltrates with eosinophilia
and include acute eosinophilic pneumonia, chronic eosinophilic pneumonia, simple eosinophilic pneumonia (also known as Loeffler eosinophilic pneumonia), and eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis
(previously Churg-­Strauss). The lung architecture is well preserved
throughout the inflammatory response, often with complete reversal of
the inflammation without long-­term sequelae in the majority of cases.
The peripheral white blood cell count often (but not always) reveals
elevated eosinophils, and BALF shows an elevation in eosinophils.
Prompt recognition of these diseases allows for lifesaving interventions in idiopathic acute eosinophilic pneumonia (AEP) syndrome
or resolution of persistent symptoms in patients with chronic disease.

ETIOLOGY

Eosinophilic lung diseases are often classified under two subheadings:
idiopathic disease and known causation (Tables 448.8-­448.10). They are
frequently further subdivided into acute and chronic or infectious and
noninfectious. The division of acute or chronic is arbitrary based on the
length of symptoms present but is relevant to the clinician in determining the etiology of the symptoms (Table 448.11). Loeffler eosinophilic
pneumonia, induced by Ascaris lumbricoides, Strongyloides, and other
ascarids, produces transient symptoms that self-­resolve and is classified
as neither acute nor chronic.

PATHOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS

Eosinophilic lung disease, regardless of the stage of disease or etiology,
shows mixed cellular infiltration of the alveoli and interstitial spaces
with a predominance of eosinophils when open lung biopsy is performed. This may be accompanied by a fibrinous exudate with intact
lung architecture. Other findings include eosinophilic microabscesses,
a nonnecrotizing nongranulomatous vasculitis, and occasional multinucleated giant cells, again without granuloma formation. BAL is the
diagnostic procedure of choice, especially with the acute types of eosinophilic pneumonia, where peripheral eosinophilia is often absent; the
differential cell count on the BAL is ≥20% eosinophils and is often more
than 40%. This highly sensitive and specific test has allowed clinicians
to forego lung biopsy.
Eosinophils are filled with numerous toxic granules. Evidence of
eosinophil degranulation may be found by electron microscopy, biopsy,
urine excretion, and BALF. Most commonly, eosinophil-­derived neurotoxin, leukotriene E4, and other granule proteins, such as major basic
protein, Charcot Leyden crystals, or proinflammatory cytokines, are
identified and support the evidence that eosinophils are not only present but contributing to the disease process.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Specific eosinophilic lung diseases present with a variable clinical picture; however, there are some common findings across many of the
eosinophilic diseases. Dyspnea is the most common and prevalent
symptom in patients with acute or chronic eosinophilic pneumonia
and is accompanied by cough in the majority of patients (90%). Rhinitis and sinusitis symptoms are of lower prevalence with wide variability
in children with eosinophilic pulmonary disease. Acute eosinophilic
pneumonia often presents with respiratory failure and the requirement
for mechanical ventilation at high levels of positive end expiratory
pressure and high concentrations of oxygen, whereas chronic eosinophilic pneumonia has a more indolent presentation (see Table 448.11).
Although malignancy (e.g., eosinophilic leukemia) and organizing
pneumonia may present with a need for mechanical ventilation, this
is uncommon. A history of asthma is common in the chronic eosinophilic pneumonias and in allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis
(ABPA); it often precedes the diagnosis of these two conditions.

2625

Table 448.8  Key Elements in the Medical History,
Laboratory Findings, and Physical Exam to
Raise Clinical Suspicion for Diagnostic Testing
to Confirm Eosinophilic Lung Disease
MEDICAL HISTORY AND EXAMINATION
• Drug exposure (especially antibiotics, NSAIDs, antiepileptics,
antileukotriene modifiers in EGPA)
• Environmental inhalation exposures to dust or inhaled chemicals
• New onset of smoking cigarettes
• Travel or immigration status from areas endemic with various
parasites or coccidioidomycosis
• Asthma (may be severe or poorly controlled with ABPA, CSS, or is
relatively new in onset with IAEP)
• ABPA concurrent in 7–15% of patients with cystic fibrosis
• Extrapulmonary symptoms suggestive of vasculitis, neuropathy,
heart failure, or neoplasm
• Rash (creeping eruption in visceral larval migrans disease or
ulceration in EGPA)
DIAGNOSTIC IMAGING AND TESTING
• Radiography helpful in AEP, CEP, and ABPA
• Radiography not diagnostic in EGPA or drug-­induced
eosinophilic disease of the lung
• Simple chest radiography findings
• Nonlobar infiltrate
• Classic description as mirror image of pulmonary edema with
peripheral infiltrates
• Bilateral pleural effusion in AEP
• Central bronchiectasis in ABPA
• High-­resolution computed tomography of the chest
• Middle and upper lobe nonlobar infiltrates with areas of
ground-­glass appearance
• Mucus plugging in ABPA
• Central bronchiectasis in ABPA (confused with cystic fibrosis)
• Blood eosinophil count
• Elevated in many eosinophilic lung diseases
• Magnitude of eosinophil blood count does not distinguish
different pulmonary diseases
• Not elevated in AEP
• May occasionally not be elevated in CEP or after use of
corticosteroids
• Total serum IgE elevated in ABPA but not always in patients with
cystic fibrosis with ABPA
• Serology for helminthic infections or parasites may be diagnostic
but are usually not available acutely
• P-­ANCA (MPO ANCA) is positive in 40–70% of EGPA (CSS)
• BAL eosinophil percentage
• ≥25% eosinophils diagnostic in AEP
• ≥40% eosinophils diagnostic in CEP or tropical pulmonary
eosinophilia
• Eosinophil percentages below these criteria may require lung
biopsy
• <25% eosinophils seen in connective tissue disease, sarcoid,
drug-­induced disease, histiocytosis X of pulmonary Langerhans
cells, and interstitial pulmonary fibrosis
ABPA, Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis; AEP, acute eosinophilic pneumonia;
BAL, bronchoalveolar lavage; CEP, chronic eosinophilic pneumonia; CSS,
Churg-­Strauss syndrome; EGPA, eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis;
IAEP, idiopathic acute eosinophilic pneumonia; MPO ANCA, myeloperoxidase
antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody; NSAID, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug;
P-­ANCA, perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody.

Other symptoms of fever, myalgia, fatigue, weight loss, poor appetite, and night sweats may accompany the acute or chronic eosinophilic pneumonias. When abnormalities of the liver are detected, or if
arthralgia, skin changes, pericardial effusion, or peripheral neuropathy accompany the disease presentation, a diagnosis of eosinophilic
granulomatosis with polyangiitis (EGPA) (formerly known as Churg-­
Strauss syndrome) or hypereosinophilic syndrome (HES) should be
aggressively investigated.

Chest Imaging

The chest radiograph is one of the most helpful tests for evaluating
the child with dyspnea. The characteristic feature of fluffy alveolar

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2626 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Table 448.9  Classification of the Eosinophilic Pneumonias
in Clinical Practice
Eosinophilic Pneumonias of Unknown Cause
Solitary idiopathic eosinophilic pneumonias
Idiopathic chronic eosinophilic pneumonia
Idiopathic acute eosinophilic pneumonia
Eosinophilic pneumonia in systemic syndromes
Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis
Idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndromes (lymphocytic or
myeloproliferative variant)
Eosinophilic Pneumonias of Known Cause
Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis and related syndromes
(including bronchocentric granulomatosis)
Eosinophilic pneumonias of parasitic origin
Eosinophilic pneumonias of other infectious causes
Drug-­induced eosinophilic pneumonias
Eosinophilic Airways Diseases
Idiopathic hypereosinophilic constrictive bronchitis
Other Pulmonary Syndromes with Possible (Usually Mild) Eosinophilia
Organizing pneumonia, asthma, idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis,
Langerhans cell histiocytosis, malignancies, and so forth
From Cottin V. Eosinophilic lung diseases. Clin Chest Med. 2016;37:535–556, Box 1,
p. 536.

Table 448.10  Drugs Commonly Causing Eosinophilic
Pneumonia
Antiinflammatory drugs and related drugs: acetylsalicylic acid,
diclofenac, ibuprofen, naproxen, phenylbutazone, piroxicam,
sulindac, and tolfenamic acid
Antibiotics: ethambutol, fenbufen, minocycline, nitrofurantoin,
penicillins, pyrimethamine, sulfamides, sulfonamides, and
trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole
Other drugs: captopril, carbamazepine, and GM-­CSF
A more extensive list of drugs reported to cause eosinophilic
pneumonia may be found at www.pneumotox.com.
From Cottin V, Cordier JF. Eosinophilic lung diseases. Immunol Allergy Clin North Am.
2012;32(4):557–586, Box 6, p. 575.

Table 448.11   Diagnostic Criteria for Idiopathic Chronic
Eosinophilic Pneumonia and for Idiopathic
Acute Eosinophilic Pneumonia
IDIOPATHIC CHRONIC EOSINOPHILIC PNEUMONIA
1.	Diffuse pulmonary alveolar consolidation with air bronchogram
and/or ground-­glass opacities at chest imaging, especially with
peripheral predominance.
2.	Eosinophilia at bronchoalveolar lavage differential cell count
≥40% (or peripheral blood eosinophils ≥1,000/mm3).
3.	Respiratory symptoms present for at least 2-­4 wk.
4.	Absence of other known causes of eosinophilic lung disease
(especially exposure to drug susceptible to induce pulmonary
eosinophilia).
IDIOPATHIC ACUTE EOSINOPHILIC PNEUMONIA
1.	Acute onset with febrile respiratory manifestations (≤1 mo, and
especially ≤7 days duration before medical examination).
2.	Bilateral diffuse infiltrates on imaging.
3.	Pao2 on room air ≤60 mm Hg (8 kPa), or Pao2/Fio2 ≤300 mm Hg
(40 kPa), or oxygen saturation on room air <90%.
4.	Lung eosinophilia, with ≥25% eosinophils at BAL differential cell
count (or eosinophilic pneumonia at lung biopsy when done).
5.	Absence of determined cause of acute eosinophilic pneumonia
(including infection or exposure to drugs known to induce
pulmonary eosinophilia). Recent onset of tobacco smoking or
exposure to inhaled dusts may be present.
BAL, Bronchoalveolar lavage.
From Cottin V. Eosinophilic lung diseases. Clin Chest Med. 2016;37:535–556, Box 2, p.
538.

infiltrates in the peripheral lung field is classic (Fig. 448.4). The images
may be easily recognizable by astute clinicians who have identified the
etiology of the disease without elevated blood eosinophil counts or
BAL.
HRCT of the chest is the best advanced imaging modality for
eosinophilic lung disease. Spontaneous migration of lung opacities
is commonly seen in the chronic pneumonias. Most often HRCT of
the chest shows simultaneous evidence of bilateral alveolar infiltrates
with both confluent consolidations and ground-­glass appearance. The
most prominent areas of abnormality are visualized in the upper lobes
and subpleural regions. Specific diseases have unique findings, such as
proximal bronchiectasis in ABPA and pleural effusion in acute eosinophilic pneumonia. HRCT of the chest is most sensitive in identifying
the correct etiology of the disease when chest radiographic findings are
nonspecific.

LOEFFLER SYNDROME

The transient pulmonary infiltrates with eosinophilia syndrome that
is most often seen in children (formerly known as Loeffler syndrome)
is characterized by migrating pulmonary infiltrates with peripheral
blood eosinophilia. This syndrome is caused by helminthic infections.
A. lumbricoides or roundworm is the most common parasite causing
this disease in the United States. When a fertilized egg is ingested from
contaminated food from areas with poor sanitation, it becomes a larval worm that can penetrate the duodenum of the small intestine and
migrate in the circulation to the liver, heart, and lungs. In the pulmonary venous circulation, the larvae can break through the interstitial
space to the alveoli. The juvenile larva may subsequently migrate to the
trachea, where they are expectorated and swallowed. Other nematodes
cannot mature in the intestinal tract, so their disease is limited to a
single passage into the lungs.
Visceral larva migrans from multiple nematodes may cause
eosinophilic lung disease. The most common etiologies are the dog
roundworm, Toxocara canis, but Toxocara cati, Strongyloides stercoralis, Baylisascaris procyonis, and Lagochilascaris minor can all produce
visceral larva migrans. Outside the United States, the common lung
fluke, Paragonimus westermani, may cause a similar pulmonary disease in older children and adolescents. Western Africa, Central and
South America, and East Asia are regions where paragonimiasis may
be found, especially in those who eat raw crabs or crawfish. Many other
parasites may have a transient pulmonary syndrome, but their manifestations are most commonly in other organs.
The pulmonary syndrome is classic with cough, dyspnea, migratory
peripheral pulmonary infiltrates, and blood eosinophilia that is self-­
limited. Young children most often have a history of pica and eating
dirt that is contaminated with the eggs. Because the larva can migrate to
other organs and multiply in the intestinal and biliary tract, symptoms
of abdominal pain, vomiting, rarely obstruction, cholecystitis, and pancreatitis may be found. Diagnosis is frequently made by examination of
the stool, where the eggs may be detected microscopically. Treatment is
aimed at the intestinal disease and not the pulmonary disease per se. It
is possible that anthelminthic treatment of other organ disease during
the pulmonary phase will increase the inflammatory response in the
lung, leading to the need for treatment with corticosteroids.

ACUTE EOSINOPHILIC PNEUMONIA

A unique and dramatic presentation of the eosinophilic pneumonias
is AEP (see Table 448.11). AEP mimics infectious pneumonia or acute
respiratory distress syndrome with its rapid onset and marked hypoxemia. This disease most frequently occurs in the teenage and young
adult populations. Essentially all patients present within 7 days of
symptom onset with dyspnea, fever, and cough, and more than 50%
have chest pain. Myalgia and abdominal pain also frequently accompany this disease. Rarely, patients have presented up to 4-­5 weeks after
the onset of symptoms. Physical exam demonstrates tachypnea, tachycardia, and crackles in the lung fields. Many patients rapidly deteriorate
and require mechanical ventilation.
There is an absence of circulating eosinophilia, which contrasts with
the dramatic number of eosinophils seen in the BAL representing at

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 448 u Immune and Inflammatory Lung Disease

A

B

2627

Fig. 448.4 A, Acute eosinophilic pneumonia demonstrating the
mirror image pulmonary edema
with a right pleural effusion on
admission. B, Complete clearing
upon discharge from the hospital
after corticosteroid usage.
Arterial blood gases will also show a significant increase in the alveolar-­
arterial gradient.
The criteria for diagnosis include the acute onset of disease, bilateral
pulmonary infiltrates, reduced oxygen saturation or Pao2 ≤60 mm Hg,
BAL of ≥25% eosinophils, and absence of a determined cause of eosinophilia (see Table 448.11). The recent onset of tobacco exposure, dust, or
chemical inhalation are supporting factors in confirming a diagnosis.
Treatment has uniformly been the use of a corticosteroid (e.g.,
methylprednisolone 1-­
2 mg/kg/day) either intravenously or orally.
A minimum or maximum treatment time has not been determined.
Rare fatalities have been reported. Complete recovery has been seen
in days, with resolution of pleural effusions within 4 weeks of treatment. Most important, relapse and persistent symptoms are rare, which
sharply contrasts with the idiopathic chronic eosinophilic pneumonias.
Follow-­up testing of pulmonary function is usually normal, which supports the contention that lung parenchyma heals without evidence of
compromise or fibrosis.

Fig. 448.5 Light microscopy of eosinophils in bronchoalveolar lavage
fluid.

least 20% of the inflammatory cells (often 40–55%) (Fig. 448.5). This
feature helps distinguish it from the chronic pulmonary disease of
eosinophilic origin.
Although this disease has been labeled as idiopathic, there have
been identifiable exposures (e.g., 1,1,1-­trichloroethane or Scotchgard). Numerous reports link the onset of smoking tobacco, change
in smoking frequency, reinitiation of smoking in young male adolescents or adults, and even massive secondary smoke exposure as
critical associations with the onset of AEP. World Trade Center dust is
associated with development of AEP. A single smoke challenge study
is associated with recurrence. Some medications are also linked to
the onset of AEP. The most complete and current resource for medications linked to pulmonary disease is “The Drug-­Induced Respiratory Disease Website” (http://www.pneumotox.com). When AEP is
identified in a patient, the pediatrician should educate the patient and
family about the link to smoking exposure and the risk of AEP upon
reexposure.
In addition to smoke exposure, AEP has been reported after smoking cocaine; typically, within hours to days after use. Whether this is a
unique eosinophilic response to cocaine that represents one manifestation of crack lung or is a separate disease is unknown. Crack lung refers
to diffuse alveolitis with pulmonary hemorrhage from an unknown
mechanism that occurs within 48 hours of cocaine smoke inhalation.
Lung function has not been measured frequently in the disease
because the patients have proceeded rapidly to the intensive care unit
(ICU) for mechanical ventilation. When measured, a restrictive pattern
of lung disease and reduced diffusion capacity are the usual findings.

CHRONIC EOSINOPHILIC PNEUMONIA

Chronic eosinophilic pneumonia is another idiopathic pulmonary condition without a known exposure to toxin, dust, or chemical inhalation.
Eosinophils infiltrate the lung parenchyma resulting in dyspnea, cough,
fever, and weight loss. It is primarily a problem for adults, with a female
predominance (2:1 female:male) and usually in patients who are nonsmokers. Chest examination reveals tachypnea, crackles, and wheezing; a diagnosis of asthma is a common finding. The classic finding on
chest x-­ray of the radiographic negative of pulmonary edema is found
in these patients: central clear lung fields but fluffy, patchy peripheral
infiltrates; however, this is not seen in all cases.
When compared to AEP, the onset of disease is indolent and subtle, but the accompanying fever and weight loss may lead the clinician toward a concern for an underlying malignancy before the chest
radiograph and laboratory investigation. Peripheral blood eosinophilia
is commonly as high as 5,000/mm3 or greater, accompanied by BAL
eosinophilia >40% on the differential count (see Table 448.11). The
peripheral eosinophilia sharply contrasts with the lack of eosinophils
seen in the blood in AEP. HRCT scan of the chest contrasts with the
AEP, with pleural effusion as a rare finding, as well as rare cavitation.
In contrast to AEP, PFT shows a mixed obstructive and restrictive
pattern, especially given that asthma often occurs concurrently with
this disease.
Inflammatory markers associated with migration and activation
of eosinophils are predictably found in BAL and the urine. These
include the T-­lymphocyte type 2 cytokines of IL-­4, IL-­5, IL-­6, IL-­10,
IL-­13, and IL-­18. However, T-­lymphocyte type 1 cytokines of IL-­2
and IL-­12 are also present with many of the potent eosinophilic chemoattractants such as CCL5 (RANTES [regulated upon activation,
normal T-­cell expressed and secreted]) and CCL11 (eotaxin-­1).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2628 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Toxic granule proteins of major basic protein, eosinophil-­derived
neurotoxin, and eosinophil cationic protein are frequently present.
Unfortunately, these important molecules help confirm the eosinophilic nature of the disease, but their presence adds no additional
sensitivity or specificity over the presence of eosinophils on BAL.
Treatment is similar to most eosinophilic lung syndromes, where
corticosteroids (oral) are the mainstay of treatment. The minimum
dose of steroid needed to induce remission is not known, but most
clinicians recommend prednisone (or equivalent) at 0.5 mg/kg/day
for 2 weeks. The dose is reduced to half (0.025 mg/kg/day) for an
additional 2 weeks if symptoms have abated. The remaining dose
of steroid may need to be weaned over 6 months. Alternatively, IV
methylprednisolone is used, starting with 10-­30 mg/kg/dose (maximum 1 g) given either 3 consecutive days per month or 1 day per
week. Symptoms and pulmonary infiltrates rapidly disappear after
initiation of this treatment but frequently recur with tapering of the
steroid. Asthma that occurs concurrently in patients with chronic
eosinophilic pneumonia represents a phenotype of the disease that
appears to have lower relapse risk, yet up to 50% of all identified
patients with chronic eosinophilic pneumonia relapse during or
after corticosteroid taper.
Many believe that this disease is a precursor to the development
of EGPA (formerly Churg-­Strauss syndrome). The utility of ICS in
chronic eosinophilic pneumonia is unknown but is warranted for the
persistent asthma phenotype of the disease. A subset of patients develops permanent lower airway obstruction without reversibility, which
requires patients with this disease to have close follow-­up and monitoring of pulmonary function tests.

EOSINOPHILIC GRANULOMATOSIS WITH
POLYANGIITIS (CHURG-­STRAUSS SYNDROME)

EGPA syndrome is a systemic disease involving multiple organs but
most prominently the lung. Patients present with difficult-­to-­control
asthma, allergic rhinitis, and peripheral eosinophilia (>10% or
>1,500 cells/μL) in the blood. Evidence of vasculitis must be present
in at least two organs. The polyangiitis appears later in the disease
process, with asthma being the precursor symptom in more than
90% of the cases reported. EGPA affects multiple organs, including
the skin, heart, gastrointestinal tract, kidneys, and central nervous
system (Table 448.12). Rhinitis and upper airway disease are present
in 75% of the patients but are not specific. Symptoms of fever, weight
loss, fatigue, arthralgia, and myalgia may be seen in approximately
two thirds of patients. Cardiac and renal involvement is insidious
in onset, and screening should occur for these manifestations. The
multiple organ involvement results in the morbidity and mortality of
this disease. The typical progression of the disease is in three phases:
rhinitis and asthma first, tissue eosinophilia second, and, finally, systemic vasculitis of small and medium vessels.

The pathogenesis of EGPA is still unknown but several factors
are suspected to contribute to the development of the disease. The
possible link between leukotriene-­receptor antagonists (zafirlukast,
montelukast, or pranlukast) is controversial but still considered
possible. It is suspected that use of this class of adjunctive medications in severe asthma allows for the reduction in the use of corticosteroids leading to the full-­blown (unmasking) manifestation of
EGPA. Many refrain from use of leukotriene-­receptor antagonists
when EGPA syndrome has been diagnosed.
Clinical and laboratory findings pinpoint the diagnosis with high
specificity (99.7%) and sensitivity (85%) when at least four of six
criteria developed by the American College of Rheumatology are
met (asthma, eosinophilia >10%, mononeuropathy or polyneuropathy, nonfixed pulmonary infiltrates, paranasal sinus abnormalities,
and biopsy findings of extravascular eosinophil infiltrates). In contrast to GPA, the rhinitis is not destructive, and nasal septal perforation does not occur in EGPA.
Radiography of the chest or HRCT of the chest demonstrates
migratory, peripheral predominant opacities, ground-­
glass appearance, nodules, bronchiectasis, and bronchial wall thickening. Pleural
effusion should raise suspicion for the presence of heart failure from
cardiomyopathy.
Laboratory findings include striking eosinophilia, with values generally between 5,000 and 20,000/mm3 at the time of diagnosis. These
counts often parallel vasculitis activity. The BAL shows striking eosinophilia with differential counts often >60%. Biopsies of other organ systems reflect the activity of eosinophils and are not specific for the EGPA
diagnosis.
ANCAs may be present in EGPA syndrome. The perinuclear-­
ANCA targeting myeloperoxidase is specifically found in EGPA in
approximately 40% of the patients; the absence of myeloperoxidase-­
ANCA does not exclude the diagnosis. Those patients with eosinophilic pneumonia, fever, and cardiac involvement are less likely to
have myeloperoxidase-­ANCA detected. Those with peripheral neuropathy, renal glomerular disease, and skin purpura usually have
detectable myeloperoxidase-­ANCAs (see Table 448.12).
Pulmonary function tests show an obstructive pattern caused by the
asthma component. The pulmonary obstruction is responsive to oral
corticosteroid use, but often mild obstruction persists.
Treatment of EGPA with systemic oral corticosteroids remains
the mainstay of therapy at a starting dose of 0.5 to 1 mg/kg/day.
This therapy is often required for up to 12 months or longer, with
a steady taper in dosage over that time. EGPA resistant to corticosteroids has responded to cyclophosphamide, IFN-­α, cyclosporine,
IVIG, and plasmapheresis. The use of anti–IL-­5 (mepolizumab) has
been encouraging and may be used as a steroid-­sparing agent in the
future.

Table 448.12  Eosinophilic Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis
VASCULITIC PHENOTYPE

EOSINOPHILIC TISSULAR DISEASE
PHENOTYPE

Respective frequency

∼40%

∼60%

ANCA

Present (mostly perinuclear-­ANCA with anti-­
MPO specificity)

Absent

Predominant manifestations

Glomerular renal disease
Peripheral neuropathy
Purpura
Biopsy-­proven vasculitis

Cardiac involvement (eosinophilic myocarditis)
Eosinophilic pneumonia
Fever

ANCA, Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody; MPO, myeloperoxidase.
Data from Sablé-­Fourtassou R, Cohen P, Mahr A, et al. Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies and the Churg-­Strauss syndrome. Ann Intern Med. 2005;143:632–638; and Sinico RA, Di
Toma L, Maggiore U, et al. Prevalence and clinical significance of antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies in Churg-­Strauss syndrome. Arthritis Rheum. 2005;52:2926–2935.
From Cottin V, Cordier JF. Eosinophilic lung diseases. Immunol Allergy Clin North Am. 2012;32(4):557–586, Table 2, p. 569.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 448 u Immune and Inflammatory Lung Disease
ALLERGIC BRONCHOPULMONARY ASPERGILLOSIS

ABPA is a complex hypersensitivity reaction that occurs in the lungs
and bronchi in response to exposure and colonization of Aspergillus species (usually Aspergillus fumigatus; see Chapter 283). This
disease occurs in patients with preexisting asthma and up to 15%
of patients with cystic fibrosis (see Chapter 454). The quantity of
Aspergillus exposure does not correlate with the severity of disease.
The clinical pattern of disease (Table 448.13) is remarkably similar with a presentation of difficult-­to-­treat asthma. The patient suffers from periods of acute obstructive lung disease with bronchial
mucous plugs, elevated total IgE antibody, elevated specific IgE and
IgG anti-­Aspergillus antibodies, skin prick test reactions to Aspergillus species, precipitating antibodies to Aspergillus species, and proximal bronchiectasis. Other clinical manifestations include dyspnea,
cough, shortness of breath, and peripheral eosinophilia, along with
pulmonary eosinophilia seen on BAL with infiltration of the parenchyma. The use of systemic corticosteroids may lower the total IgE
antibody levels such that a diagnosis may be in question when the
initial tests are conducted.
ABPA should be considered in patients with cystic fibrosis when
clinical deterioration occurs without evidence of an identifiable cause.
Symptoms heralding such deterioration include increasing cough,
wheezing, loss of exercise tolerance, worsening exercise-­
induced
asthma, reduction of pulmonary function, or increased sputum production without another discernible reason. Clinical findings of elevated total IgE antibody, anti-­Aspergillus IgE antibodies, precipitating
antibodies to A. fumigatus, and/or new abnormalities on chest radiography that fail to clear with antibiotics should alert the clinician to the
possibility of ABPA.

Table 448.13  Criteria for the Diagnosis of Allergic
Bronchopulmonary Aspergillosis
ALLERGIC BRONCHOPULMONARY ASPERGILLOSIS–CENTRAL
BRONCHIECTASIS
• Medical history of asthma*
• Immediate skin prick test reaction to Aspergillus antigens*
• Precipitating (IgG) serum antibodies to Aspergillus fumigatus*
• Total IgE concentration >500 IU/mL (>1,000 ng/mL)*
• Central bronchiectasis on chest CT*
• Peripheral blood eosinophilia >500/mm3
• Lung infiltrates on chest x-­ray or chest HRCT
• Elevated specific serum IgE and IgG to A. fumigatus
ALLERGIC BRONCHOPULMONARY ASPERGILLOSIS
SEROPOSITIVE†
• Medical history of asthma†
• Immediate skin prick test reaction to A. fumigatus antigens†
• Precipitating (IgG) serum antibodies to A. fumigatus†
• Total IgE concentration >417 IU/mL (>1,000 ng/mL)†
*The criteria required for a diagnosis of ABPA with central bronchiectasis.
†The first four criteria are required for a diagnosis of seropositive ABPA.
ABPA, Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis; CSD, corticosteroid dependent; HRCT,
high-­resolution computed tomography.

2629

When evaluating a child with asthma symptoms, the clinician
must distinguish asthma from ABPA. If the diagnosis is suspected,
skin prick test for evidence of IgE-­specific antibody directed against
A. fumigatus is essential. Intradermal skin testing, when the skin
prick test is negative, although not routinely performed because of
poor specificity, may be conducted. The absence of a positive skin
prick test and intradermal test to A. fumigatus excludes the diagnosis of ABPA. The prevalence of ABPA in patients with an existing diagnosis of asthma and an abnormal immediate skin prick test
response to A. fumigatus has been evaluated. Between 2% and 32%
of patients with asthma with concurrent skin prick test–positive
reactions to Aspergillus have evidence of ABPA.
Patients with cystic fibrosis who are less than 6 years of age rarely
develop ABPA. When the total IgE antibody in patients with cystic
fibrosis exceeds 500 IU/mL (1,200 ng/mL), a strong clinical suspicion
of ABPA is necessary.
ABPA pathology has characteristic findings of mucoid bronchi
impaction, eosinophilic pneumonia, and granulomas. Histologic features characteristic of asthma are also present. Septated hyphae are
often found in the mucus-­impacted bronchial tree. However, the fungi
are not invasive in this unique disease. Aspergillus may be cultured
from sputum in more than 60% of patients. Interestingly, hyphae may
not be detected on microscopy.
Staging of the disease (Table 448.14) represents distinct phases; however, progression does not necessary occur in sequence from stage 1
to stage 5. Staging of ABPA is important for treatment considerations.
In many hypersensitivity diseases where IgE antibody contributes to
the pathogenesis (e.g., asthma), total IgE is often used to screen for an
atopic state but is not a test that helps the clinician with serial measures.
In sharp contrast, the measurement of IgE during acute exacerbations,
remission, and recurrent ABPA disease is helpful in identifying the
activity of disease and may herald the recurrence. During stage 1 disease, the level of IgE antibody is often very high. During stage 2 remission, a fall in the levels may be as much as 35% or more. Recurrence
of activity may result in a marked rise of total IgE with a doubling of
the baseline level seen during remission. During the use of glucocorticoid therapy, monthly or bimonthly levels of IgE are followed serially to
assist the clinician in tapering therapy. Because exacerbations of ABPA
are not accompanied by changes in symptoms in approximately 25% of
the recurrences, serial IgE accompanied by chest radiography is helpful
to the clinician to guide therapy.

Radiography

Plain chest x-­ray shows evidence of infiltrates, especially in the
upper lobes and the classic findings of bronchiectasis (Fig. 448.6).
HRCT of the chest demonstrates central bronchiectasis (Fig. 448.7)
and mucus impaction of the airways (finger-­in-­glove appearance).
HRCT may add value for the patient with a positive skin prick test
and normal chest radiograph to detect characteristic abnormalities
of ABPA.

Treatment

The mainstay of therapy for ABPA has been systemic glucocorticoids with adjunct therapy including antifungal medications and
anti-­IgE therapy with omalizumab. Exacerbations in stages 1 and 3

Table 448.14  Staging of Allergic Bronchopulmonary Aspergillosis
Stage 1

Acute

Upper and middle lobe infiltration

High IgE

Stage 2

Remission

No infiltrate off steroids >6 mo

Normal to high IgE

Stage 3

Exacerbation

Upper and middle lobe infiltration

High IgE

Stage 4

CSD asthma

Minimal infiltrate

Normal to high IgE

Stage 5

End stage

Fibrosis and/or bullae

Normal

CSD, Corticosteroid dependent.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2630 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
may be treated for 14 days with 0.5-­1 mg/kg of glucocorticoids followed by every-­other-­day usage and tapering over 3 months or as long
as 6 months. Stage 2 remission phase and stage 5 where fibrosis has
occurred do not require glucocorticoid therapy. Stage 4 denotes a state
where glucocorticoid weaning has not been successful and continued
long-­term therapy is required.
Antifungal therapy with a 16-­week course of itraconazole improves
the response rate during exacerbations, allowing the reduction of glucocorticoid dosage by 50% and resulting in a reduction of total serum
IgE of 25% or more. The proposed mechanisms of action have been to
either reduce the antigen load driving the immune response or possibly
raising the corticosteroid serum levels by slowing the metabolism of
the steroid. This latter mechanism would be true for prednisone, which
is methylated in the liver, but not for methylprednisolone, which does
not require methylation.
The adult dosage recommendation for itraconazole is 200 mg 3 times
per day for 3 days followed by 200 mg twice daily for the remainder of
the 16 weeks. Children should receive 5 mg/kg/day in a single dose. If
the proper calculated dose exceeds 200 mg, then the total dose should
be divided equally and given twice daily. Serum levels of itraconazole
are necessary to ensure proper drug absorption when in capsule form.

The liquid form is more readily absorbed and has achieved substantially higher levels. The use of proton pump inhibitors and histamine
2 antagonists may reduce absorption of itraconazole. Voriconazole
has been used as a substitute antifungal medication. Proper dosing
has been established for invasive Aspergillus disease but not for ABPA.
Hepatotoxicity may occur with these drugs so liver function must be
monitored.
Omalizumab, an anti-­
IgE humanized monoclonal antibody, has
been used in a case series of patients with cystic fibrosis and ABPA
and in a small cohort of adults without cystic fibrosis but with ABPA.
Both case series demonstrated significant reductions in asthma exacerbations, ABPA exacerbations, and glucocorticoid usage. The dose prescribed has been 300-­375 mg every 2 weeks by subcutaneous injection.

HYPEREOSINOPHILIC SYNDROME

See Chapter 169.
HES is a descriptive name of a group of disorders that are characterized by the persistent overproduction of eosinophils accompanied
by eosinophil infiltration in multiple organs with end-­organ damage
from mediator release. The term HES should only be used when there
is eosinophilia with end-­organ damage from the eosinophils and
not from another cause. The discovery of underlying genetic, biochemical, or neoplastic reasons for HES has led to the classification
of primary, secondary, and idiopathic HES (Table 448.15). Specific

Table 448.15  Hypereosinophilic Syndrome Variants

Fig. 448.6 Transitory opacities (white arrows) and lobar collapse

(black arrow) in patient with allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis.
(From Douglass JA, Sandrini A, Holgate ST, O’Hehir RE. Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis and hypersensitivity pneumonitis. In Adkinson NF Jr, Bochner BS, Burks AW, et al., eds. Middleton’s Allergy
Principles and Practice, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2014: Fig. 61.2.)

Myeloproliferative

Nonclonal
Clonal–F1P1L1/PDGFRA-­positive chronic
eosinophilic leukemia

Lymphocytic

Nonclonal T cells
Clonal T-­cell expansion with T-­cell activation

Overlap

Organ restricted

Familial

Family history of eosinophilia without known
cause

Associated

Eosinophilia in chronic disease like
inflammatory bowel disease or EGPA (Churg-­
Strauss syndrome)

Undefined

Asymptomatic
Cyclic angioedema with eosinophilia (Gleich
syndrome)
Symptomatic without myeloproliferation or
lymphocytic form

EGPA, Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis; PDGFRA, platelet-­derived growth
factor receptor-­α.

Fig. 448.7 A, Central bron-

A

B

chiectasis in patient with ABPA
(arrows). B, Central bronchiectasis in the upper lobes (arrows).
(From Douglass JA, Sandrini A,
Holgate ST, O’Hehir RE. Allergic
bronchopulmonary aspergillosis
and hypersensitivity pneumonitis.
In Adkinson NF Jr, Bochner BS,
Burks AW, et al., eds. Middleton’s
Allergy Principles and Practice,
8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2014: Fig. 61.3.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 448 u Immune and Inflammatory Lung Disease

2631

Hypereosinophilic syndromes (HESs)

Myeloproliferative
forms

Lymphocytic
forms
Populations of T
cells secreting
eosinophil
hematopoietins

Myeloproliferative
HES
Features of
myeloprolliferative
disease without
proof of clonality

CEL
Clonal
eosinophilia,
including
FIP1L1/
PDGFRA
positive CEL

Overlap

Undefined

Organ restricted
eosinophilic
disorders

Clonal
T cells

No T cell
clone

T cells often
exhibit an
abnormal
immunophenotype

Aberrant
immunophenotype
evidence of
marked T cell
activation

Associated

Familial

Eosinophilia in
association with a
defined diagnosis,
such as IBD or
CSS

Family
history of
documented
persistent
eosinophilia
of unknown
cause

Benign

Episodic

Other

Asymptomatic
with no
evidence of
organ
involvement

Cyclic
angioedema
and
eosinophilia

Symptomatic
without features of
myeloproliferative
or lymphocytic
forms

Fig. 448.8 A revised classification of hypereosinophilic syndrome (HES). Changes from the previous classification are indicated in red type. Dashed

arrows identify HES forms in some patients who have T-­cell–driven disease. Classification of myeloproliferative forms has been simplified, and patients with HES and eosinophil hematopoietin-­producing T cells in the absence of a T-­cell clone are included in the lymphocytic forms of HES. CSS,
Churg-­Strauss syndrome; IBD, inflammatory bowel disease. (From Simon H, Rothenberg ME, Bochner BS, et al. Refining the definition of hypereosinophilic syndrome. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2010;126:45–49, Fig. 1.)

syndromes such as EGPA have eosinophilia, but the contribution of
eosinophils to the organ damage is incompletely understood.
Some variants of HES have pathogenic variants in tyrosine kinase
receptor platelet-­derived growth factor receptor-­α (PDGFRA); males
are almost exclusively affected. PDGFRA can also form a fusion gene
with FIP1L1 in some patients with HES. Patients with PDGFRA-­
PIP1L1 are more likely to be responsive to imatinib, a tyrosine kinase
inhibitor. Otherwise, HES appears to be distributed equally among
females and males.
Hypereosinophilia is defined as an absolute eosinophil number in
the blood that exceeds 1.5 × 109 eosinophils on two separate occasions
separated by at least 1 month and/or a tissue diagnosis of hypereosinophilia. Tissues are abnormal when more than 20% of nucleated cells
in the bone marrow are of eosinophil origin, a pathologist determines
the presence of eosinophilia, or the presence of extensive eosinophilic
granule proteins are determined on biopsy to be deposited in large
quantities. These disorders can be subclassified into primary (neoplastic), secondary (reactive), and idiopathic (Fig. 448.8).
Clinical manifestations of HES include organ involvement of the
heart (5%), gastrointestinal tract (14%), skin (37%), and respiratory
system (25–63%). HES is complicated by thrombosis and/or neurologic disease in many patients, although the exact prevalence of this
problem is incompletely categorized. Peripheral neuropathy, encephalopathy, transverse sinus thrombosis, or cerebral emboli are the most
common neurologic complications. The exact mechanism of the manifestations is unclear, especially in major artery thrombosis such as the
femoral artery.
The most frequent pulmonary symptoms include cough and
dyspnea. Many patients have obstructive lung disease with clinical
wheezing. Evidence of pulmonary fibrosis and pulmonary emboli
are seen with regularity. Because biopsy shows eosinophilic infiltrates similar to other pulmonary eosinophilic diseases of the lung,
it is the constellation of other organ involvement or thromboembolic phenomena that leads the clinician to a high index of suspicion for HES.

Laboratory evaluation should include evaluation of liver enzymes,
kidney function tests, creatine kinase, and troponin. The extent of
cardiac involvement should be evaluated by electrocardiogram and
echocardiogram. Some unique biomarkers may be tested when
evaluating the myeloproliferative and T-­lymphocyte HES diagnoses. Vitamin B12 and serum tryptase may be elevated, especially the
latter, when the myeloproliferative disease is accompanied by mastocytosis. These two biomarkers are most frequently elevated when
the FIP1L1-­PDGFRA fusion pathogenic variant is present.
Because of the extensive pulmonary disease that is seen in HES, pulmonary function tests (spirometry, lung volumes) should be performed
at diagnosis. Dead space ventilation may be significantly elevated in
patients with pulmonary emboli. Pulse oximetry may be helpful in the
evaluation as well.
Chest radiography and CT of the chest are helpful in the evaluation.
Spiral chest CT should also be performed when pulmonary emboli are
being considered. In one series of patients, nearly half of the patients
with HES had evidence of pulmonary abnormalities, including ground-­
glass–appearing infiltrates, pulmonary emboli, mediastinal lymphadenopathy, and/or pleural effusion.
Treatment of HES depends on the type of variant (myeloproliferative, lymphocytic forms, undefined, associated with systemic
diseases such as EGPA, or familial). Rarely, some patients present
with marked eosinophilia, where the total count exceeds 100,000
cells/μL, and vascular insufficiency symptoms. Prednisone is indicated to acutely reduce the eosinophil count after diagnostic tests
are performed and when safe. If the patient is unstable, the glucocorticoid should be administered to prevent progression of symptoms. Other acute therapies aimed at reduction of eosinophil counts
include vincristine, imatinib mesylate, or even leukapheresis.
Imatinib is especially used in patients found to have the FIP1L1-­
PDGFRA fusion variant.
When eosinophil counts are not as dramatically elevated, therapy
begins with glucocorticoids at 1 mg/kg for patients who do not have
the FIP1L1-­PDGFRA variant. Patients with this variant are resistant

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2632 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
to glucocorticoids, and initial treatment should begin with imatinib,
a tyrosine kinase inhibitor. In cases where genetic testing for FIP1L1-­
PDGFRA is not readily available, surrogate markers for the presence
of this variant are vitamin B12 levels >2,000 pg/mL or serum tryptase
>11.5 ng/mL. These findings denote the presence of resistant disease
that should initially be treated with imatinib. The goal of therapy is to
reduce and maintain eosinophil counts below 1.5 × 109 at the lowest
dose of prednisone possible to reduce or avoid corticosteroid-­related
side effects. If corticosteroid doses cannot be lowered below 10 mg/
day, then imatinib can be added as combination therapy in order to
spare the dose of steroid. Caution must be used in the presence of
cardiac disease, as introduction of imatinib has precipitated left ventricular failure.
Additional or alternative adjunct therapies that have shown promise
include hydroxyurea, IFN-­α, anti–IL-­5 monoclonal antibody therapy,
and a monoclonal antibody directed against CD52. Failure of these
modalities may signal a need for hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. This therapy has been successful in some patients.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

448.5 Interstitial Lung Disease
Timothy J. Vece and Stephanie D. Davis
Interstitial lung disease in children (chILD) is caused by a large
group of rare, heterogeneous, familial, or sporadic diseases that
involve the pulmonary parenchyma and cause significant impairment of gas exchange (Tables 448.16-­448.18). Although there are
some shared diseases, childhood ILD is often different from ILD in
adults, especially notable for the absence of IPF in children. Furthermore, certain ILDs only occur in children (e.g., neuroendocrine cell
hyperplasia of infancy, pulmonary interstitial glycogenosis). Despite
wide variations in cause, these disorders are classified together
because of the similar clinical, physiologic, radiographic, and pathologic processes involving disruption of the alveolar interstitium and/
or airways. Prevalence estimates vary widely with a range of 0.13-­
16.2 cases/100,000 children. This large range in prevalence is likely a
result of the lack of standardization of the diseases that are included
in the definition of ILD in children. The pathophysiology is more
complex than that of adult disease because pulmonary injury occurs
during the process of lung growth and differentiation. In ILD, the
initial injury causes damage to the alveolar epithelium and capillary endothelium. Genetic causes of ILD are becoming increasingly
important, especially the disorders of surfactant metabolism (DSM)
and immune dysregulatory disorders.

CLASSIFICATION AND PATHOLOGY

Through the work of the children’s ILD research network in the
United States and the children’s ILD-­European Union group, consensus on a classification scheme has been reached. The classification is broken down based on histologic pattern and by age, with 2
years of age serving as a cutoff. The classification scheme was first
applied to biopsies from children less than 2 years of age and was
later extended to children greater than 2 years of age (see Tables
448.16 and 448.17). Growth disorders such as alveolar simplification, unique diseases of infancy such as neuroendocrine cell hyperplasia of infancy (NEHI), and disorders of surfactant metabolism
(DSM) are common in children less than 2 years of age. In contrast,
disorders of the immunocompromised host, such as ILD related
to immune deficiency, and disorders of systemic diseases such as
the collagen vascular disorders, are much more common in older
children.

Neuroendocrine Cell Hyperplasia of Infancy
See Chapter 448.6.

Table 448.16  The Pediatric Interstitial Lung Diseases in
Children Under 2 Years of Age
AGE-­RELATED INTERSTITIAL LUNG DISEASES IN INFANCY AND
EARLY CHILDHOOD
Diffuse developmental disorders
Acinar dysplasia
Congenital alveolar dysplasia
Alveolar capillary dysplasia with misalignment of pulmonary veins
(some caused by FOXF1 pathogenic variants)
Growth abnormalities reflecting deficient alveolarization
Pulmonary hypoplasia
Chronic neonatal lung disease
Chromosomal disorders
Congenital heart disease
Neuroendocrine cell hyperplasia of infancy
Pulmonary interstitial glycogenosis (infantile cellular interstitial
pneumonia)
Surfactant dysfunction disorders (pulmonary alveolar proteinosis)
Surfactant protein B variant
Surfactant protein C variant
ABCA3 variant
Granulocyte-­macrophage colony-­stimulating factor receptor
(CSF2RA) variant
NKX2.1 (transcription factor for SP-­B, SPC, ABCA3)
INTERSTITIAL LUNG DISEASE DISORDERS WITH KNOWN CAUSES
Infectious/postinfectious processes
Adenovirus viruses
Influenza viruses
Chlamydia pneumoniae
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
Environmental agents
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis
Toxic inhalation
Aspiration syndromes
PULMONARY DISEASES ASSOCIATED WITH PRIMARY AND
SECONDARY IMMUNE DEFICIENCY
Opportunistic infections
Granulomatous lymphocytic interstitial lung disease associated with
common variable immunodeficiency syndrome
Lymphoid intestinal pneumonia (HIV infection)
Therapeutic interventions: chemotherapy, radiation, transplantation,
and rejection
IDIOPATHIC INTERSTITIAL LUNG DISEASES
Desquamative interstitial pneumonitis
Lymphocytic interstitial pneumonitis and related disorders
Nonspecific interstitial pneumonitis (cellular/fibrotic)
Eosinophilic pneumonia
Bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome
Pulmonary hemosiderosis and acute idiopathic pulmonary
hemorrhage of infancy
Pulmonary vascular disorders
Pulmonary lymphatic disorders
Pulmonary microlithiasis
SYSTEMIC DISORDERS WITH PULMONARY MANIFESTATIONS
Anti-­GBM disease
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis
Microscopic polyangiitis
Idiopathic pulmonary capillaritis
Gaucher disease and other storage diseases
Malignant infiltrates
Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis
Langerhans cell histiocytosis
Sarcoidosis
Systemic sclerosis
Polymyositis/dermatomyositis
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Rheumatoid arthritis
Lymphangioleiomyomatosis
Pulmonary hemangiomatosis
Neurocutaneous syndromes
Hermansky-­Pudlak syndrome
Modified from Deutsch GH, Young LR, Deterding RR, et al. Diffuse lung disease in
young children: application of a novel classification scheme. Am J Respir Crit Care
Med. 2007;176:1120–1128.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 448 u Immune and Inflammatory Lung Disease
Table 448.17  The Pediatric Interstitial Lung Diseases in
Children over 2 Years of Age
DISORDERS OF THE IMMUNOCOMPETENT HOST
Disorders of Infancy
Growth abnormalities
NEHI
Disorders of surfactant metabolism
Systemic Disease
Immune-­mediated disorders
• Connective tissue disease related lung disease
• Pulmonary hemorrhage syndromes
Storage diseases
Sarcoidosis
DISORDERS OF THE IMMUNOCOMPROMISED HOST
Opportunistic infections
Related to treatment
• Chemotherapy
• Radiation
Drug hypersensitivity
Related to transplantation
• Rejection
• GVHD
• PTLD
Lymphoid Infiltrates
GVHD, Graft-­versus-­host disease; NEHI, neuroendocrine cell hyperplasia of infancy;
PTLD, posttransplant lymphoproliferative disease.
Modified from Fan LL, Dishop MK, Galambos C, et al. Diffuse lung disease in biopsied
children 2 to 18 years of age. Application of the chILD Classification Scheme. Ann Am
Thorac Soc. 2015;12(10):1498–1505.

Disorders of Surfactant Metabolism

One of the more important groups of disorders in childhood ILD is
the DSM (Table 448.19). These disorders likely account for previously unknown cases of neonatal respiratory distress in full-­term
infants. Surfactant protein B deficiency, caused by pathogenic
variants in the surfactant protein B gene, leads to severe neonatal
respiratory distress. Chest CT imaging often reveals a pattern of
diffuse ground-­
glass opacities with septal thickening. Histopathology reveals alveolar proteinosis with interstitial widening, and
electron microscopy shows disorganized lamellar bodies. Most children die within the first 2 months of life without a lung transplant.
Surfactant protein C deficiency can cause disease in older infants,
children, or adults. Chest CT imaging reveals diffuse ground-­glass
opacities with septal thickening early in the disease or significant
fibrosis and honeycombing with cyst formation in more advanced
disease. Histopathologic findings vary with age, with alveolar proteinosis and interstitial widening seen in young children, and fibrosis seen in older children and adults. Electron microscopy reveals
normal lamellar bodies. ABCA3 variants cause variable lung disease
in children, with some having severe disease similar to surfactant
protein B deficiency, whereas others have less severe disease similar to surfactant protein C. Chest CT imaging most often reveals
diffuse ground-­glass opacities with septal thickening early in the
disease (Fig. 448.9). Histopathology depends on the age of the child;
however, electron microscopy shows characteristic changes in the
lamellar bodies with an eccentric electron dense body without the
characteristic concentric circles, the so-­called fried egg appearance.
DSM caused by pathogenic variants in the gene NKX2.1 has also
been described. NKX2.1 encodes for thyroid transcription factor
1 (TTF-­1), which is a major regulator of surfactant protein transcription. Pathogenic variants in NKX2.1 cause variable disease
in the lungs, brain, and thyroid (brain-­lung-­thyroid syndrome)
(see Table 448.19). Lung disease is variable and can present similar
to surfactant protein B deficiency, similar to surfactant protein C

2633

deficiency, or as recurrent pulmonary infections. Finally, variants
in the α and β subunits of the granulocyte-­macrophage colony-­
stimulating factor (GM-­CSF) receptor leads to alterations in surfactant catabolism. Alveolar macrophages are critical for surfactant
recycling and are unable to perform this function effectively in
patients with these variants. The inability to recycle surfactant leads
to subsequent accumulation of proteinaceous material and pulmonary alveolar proteinosis.

Interstitial Lung Disease Due to Systemic Disease

ILD due to systemic disease is more common in older children with
diffuse lung disease. The most common lung disease seen on biopsy
is nonspecific interstitial pneumonia; however, other patterns are
seen depending on the underlying disorder. For example, lymphocytic interstitial pneumonia may be seen in Sjögren syndrome or
cryptogenic organizing pneumonia in dermatomyositis. Findings
on chest CT scans depend on the underlying ILD, with nonspecific
interstitial pneumonia revealing areas of ground-­glass opacities
and septal thickening in the early cellular phase of the disease (Fig.
448.10) and progressing to diffuse fibrosis with traction bronchiectasis and peripheral cysts in the later fibrotic stage of the disease.
The exact mechanism for disease is unknown but likely is caused by
autoantibodies to respiratory tissue.
Pulmonary vasculitis, either caused by granulomatosis with polyangiitis, microscopic polyangiitis, idiopathic pulmonary capillaritis,
or anti-­GBM syndrome (formerly Goodpasture disease), is another
common manifestation of systemic diseases. The disease is likely
the result of autoantibody stimulation of lymphocytes with resultant inflammation of pulmonary endothelium causing interstitial
changes and pulmonary hemorrhage. Histopathology reveals diffuse
alveolar hemorrhage, interstitial widening, and with the exception
of anti-­GBM disease, neutrophilic inflammation of the pulmonary
vasculature.
Genetic causes of immune dysregulation may also be responsible for ILD in children. Pathogenic variants in both STAT3b and
LRBA have been shown to cause lymphocytic interstitial pneumonia
and lymphoproliferative disease. Pathogenic variants in coatomer-­
associated protein-­alpha (COPA), a protein involved in endoplasmic
reticulum to Golgi transport, cause familial pulmonary hemorrhage
and/or ILD.
Persistent pulmonary symptoms can occur after respiratory
infections caused by adenoviruses, influenza viruses, Chlamydia
pneumoniae, and Mycoplasma pneumoniae. The resultant pulmonary disease is called bronchiolitis obliterans and is characterized
by obstructive lung disease and obliteration or constriction of the
bronchioles on lung biopsy. There is a characteristic appearance
on HRCT of the chest with mosaicism, vascular attenuation, and
central bronchiectasis, which if present, can obviate the need for
lung biopsy (Fig. 448.11). Aspiration is a frequent cause of chronic
lung disease in childhood and can mimic ILD. Children with developmental delay or neuromuscular weakness are at an increased
risk for aspiration of food, saliva, or foreign matter secondary to
swallowing dysfunction and/or gastroesophageal reflux (GER). An
undiagnosed tracheoesophageal fistula can also result in pulmonary complications related to aspiration of gastric contents leading
to interstitial pneumonia.
Children experiencing an exaggerated immunologic response to
organic dust, molds, or bird antigens may demonstrate hypersensitivity
pneumonitis. Children with malignancies may have ILD related to the
primary malignancy, an opportunistic infection, or related to chemotherapy or radiation treatment.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

A detailed history is needed to assess the severity of symptoms and
the possibility of an underlying systemic disease in a patient with
suspected ILD. One should also ask about any family history of lung
disease. Identification of precipitating factors, such as exposure to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2634 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Table 448.18  Pathogenic Variants Associated with Children’s Interstitial and Diffuse Lung Disease
DISORDER (GENE)

INHERITANCE

CLINICAL PRESENTATION

TREATMENT APPROACH

ABCA3 deficiency (ABCA3)

Autosomal recessive

Loss of functional protein causes severe
respiratory failure in newborn babies
or gradual development of respiratory
symptoms in older children and adults

Reported responses to
immune suppression
with hydroxychloroquine;
azithromycin; lung
transplantation considered

COPA syndrome (COPA)

Autosomal dominant

Autoimmune interstitial lung, joint, and
kidney disease arising in the first 2
decades of life

Janus kinase inhibitors; lung
transplantation considered

Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis
(colony stimulating factor 2
receptor α [CSF2RA])

X-­linked

Primary PAP; dyspnea and cough in early
childhood

Whole lung lavage

Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis
(colony-­stimulating factor 2
receptor β [CSF2RB])

Autosomal recessive

Primary PAP; dyspnea and cough in early
childhood

Whole lung lavage

Filamin A syndrome (FLNA)

X-­linked recessive

Dyspnea in infancy

Symptomatic; lung
transplantation considered

Alveolar capillary dysplasia with
misalignment of the pulmonary
veins (FOXF1)

Autosomal dominant
(usually with paternal
imprinting)

Acute respiratory distress within first few
hr of birth; without transplant few survive
to 1 yr

Lung transplantation considered

Immunodeficiency 21: profound
deficiency with pulmonary
alveolar proteinosis (GATA2)

PAP form is autosomal
dominant

Profound B-­cell loss with normal T-­cell
numbers leads to opportunistic infection
and PAP

Hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation

Interstitial lung and liver disease
(MARS [methionyl-­tRNA
synthetase])

Autosomal recessive

Failure to thrive, hypotonia, intermittent
lactic acidosis, severe cirrhosis,
respiratory failure (PAP), and interstitial
lung disease in infancy or early
childhood

Symptomatic; whole lung lavage
considered

Brain-­lung-­thyroid syndrome
(NKX2-­1)

Autosomal dominant

Infant respiratory distress and recurrent
pulmonary infection with associated
hypothyroidism and neurologic
impairment

Symptomatic; lung
transplantation considered

Lung disease, immunodeficiency,
and chromosome breakage
syndrome (NSMCE3)

Autosomal recessive

Failure to thrive in infancy with
immunodeficiency and viral-­induced
fatal lung disease

Hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation

Infantile-­onset pulmonary alveolar
proteinosis (OAS1)

Autosomal dominant

Onset of dyspnea and respiratory
distress often associated with a viral
infection; hypogammaglobulinemia and
splenomegaly

Hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation

Surfactant protein B deficiency
(SFTPB)

Autosomal recessive

Acute neonatal fatal respiratory distress;
some reports of dyspnea in older
children

Symptomatic; lung
transplantation considered

Surfactant protein C mutation
(SFTPC)

Autosomal dominant

Acute neonatal respiratory distress, but
also presents in older children and
adults

Consider corticosteroids and
hydroxychloroquine; lung
transplantation considered in
severe or progressive cases

Lysinuric protein intolerance
(SLC7A7)

Autosomal recessive

Short stature, hepatosplenomegaly;
recurrent infection; early childhood
respiratory failure in some (PAP);
pulmonary fibrosis in a third in later life

Poor response to GMCSF;
low-­protein diet and citrulline
supplementation

Acinar dysplasia (TBX4)

Autosomal dominant

Acute fatal neonatal respiratory
insufficiency; patellar aplasia or
hypoplasia syndrome; pulmonary arterial
hypertension

Lung transplantation considered

STING associated vasculopathy
with onset in infancy (TMEM173)

Autosomal dominant

Infant-­onset systemic inflammation
with skin lesions, vasculopathy, and
pulmonary fibrosis

Janus kinase inhibitors

PAP, Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis; GMCSF, granulocyte-­macrophage colony-­stimulating factor.
From Cunningham S, Jaffe A, Young LR. Children’s interstitial and diffuse lung disease. Lancet Child Adolesc. 2019;3:568–577.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 448 u Immune and Inflammatory Lung Disease

2635

Table 448.19  Clinical Features, Age, and Onset of
Surfactant Protein Dysfunction Syndromes
(SPDS)
SPDS

CLINICAL FEATURES

AGE AND ONSET

SFTPB

Neonatal
• Respiratory distress

Neonate, acute

ABCA3

Neonatal
• Respiratory distress
Infancy
• Cough
• Tachypnoea, hypoxemia
• Failure to thrive
Childhood
• Wheeze, crackles
• Exercise intolerance
• Dyspnea
• Retractions, crackles,
digital clubbing
• Low body weight

Neonate, acute
Infancy and childhood,
subacute
Late childhood and
adulthood, chronic

SFTPC

Neonatal
• Respiratory distress
Childhood
• Cough
• Tachypnea, hypoxemia

Neonate, acute
(infrequent)
Infancy and childhood,
subacute
Late childhood and
adulthood, chronic

NKX2.1

Respiratory
• Neonatal respiratory
distress
• Recurrent infections
• Chronic interstitial lung
disease
Neurologic
• Chorea
• Ataxia
• Developmental delay
• Hypotonia
• Hypothyroidism

Any age
Acute or chronic

GMCSFR

Infancy
Respiratory distress
Cough

Infancy
Chronic

Anti-­
GMCSF
antibodies

Respiratory
Cough
Exercise intolerance
Hypoxemia

Teenage years
Chronic

Fig. 448.9 Chest CT from a 2-­year-­old with a disorder of surfactant

ABCA3, ATP binding cassette number A3.
From Gupta A, Zheng SL. Genetic disorders of surfactant protein dysfunction: when to
consider and how to investigate. Arch Dis Child. 2017;102:84–90, Table 2, p. 86.

metabolism from pathogenic variants in ABCA3. Note the ground-­glass
opacities (white arrow), septal thickening (circle), and early cyst formation (black arrow). (Courtesy R. Paul Guillerman, MD.)

Fig. 448.10 Chest CT from an 11-­yr-­old patient with systemic scle-

rosis and cellular nonspecific interstitial pneumonia. Note the areas of
ground-­glass opacities in the periphery (arrows). (Courtesy R. Paul Guillerman, MD.)

DIAGNOSIS
Radiography
molds or birds and a severe lower respiratory infection, is important in establishing the diagnosis and instituting potential avoidance measures. Patients may develop hypoxia and hypercarbia.
Tachypnea, crackles on auscultation, retractions, and digital clubbing may be noted on physical examination in children with ILD.
However, chest physical examination findings can be normal. Failure to thrive, likely because of increased work of breathing leading
to high caloric needs, is also common in ILD. Wheeze and fever are
less common but have been noted in childhood ILD, especially in
bronchiolitis obliterans. Cyanosis accompanied by a prominent P2
heart sound is indicative of severe disease with the development
of secondary pulmonary hypertension. Anemia or hemoptysis suggests a pulmonary vascular disease or pulmonary hemosiderosis.
Rashes or joint complaints are consistent with an underlying connective tissue disease.

Chest radiographic abnormalities can be classified as interstitial, reticular, nodular, reticulonodular, or honeycombed. The chest radiographic
appearance may also be normal despite significant clinical impairment
and may correlate poorly with the extent of disease. HRCT of the chest
better defines the extent and distribution of disease and can provide
specific information for selection of a biopsy site. Chest CT imaging may reveal air trapping, ground-­glass patterns, mosaic patterns
of attenuation, hyperinflation, bronchiectasis, cysts, and/or nodular
opacities. Serial HRCT scans have been beneficial in monitoring disease progression and severity.

Pulmonary Function Tests

Pulmonary function tests are important in defining the degree of
respiratory dysfunction and in following the response to treatment.
In ILD, pulmonary function abnormalities demonstrate a restrictive ventilatory deficit with decreased lung volumes and reduced

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2636 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
are not recommended for the evaluation of ILD in children. Evaluation
for possible systemic disease may also be necessary.

Molecular Diagnosis

For those genetic-­
based disorders, gene panels or whole exome
sequencing may yield a rapid diagnosis (see Table 448.18).

TREATMENT

A

B
Fig. 448.11 Chest CT from an 11-­yr-­old patient with bronchiolitis
obliterans after Stevens-­Johnson syndrome. A, Volumetric scan at full
inspiration shows central bronchiectasis (arrow) and mosaic attenuation.
B, High-­resolution image taken in exhalation better highlights the mosaic attenuation and vascular attenuation (circle).

lung compliance. However, obstructive impairment may be seen in
some forms of ILD such as bronchiolitis obliterans. The functional
residual capacity is often reduced but is usually less affected than
vital capacity and total lung capacity (TLC). The residual volume
(RV) is usually maintained; therefore ratios of functional residual
capacity:total lung capacity and RV:TLC are increased. Diffusion
capacity of the lung is often reduced. Exercise testing may detect
pulmonary dysfunction, even in the early stage of ILD, with a
decline in oxygen saturation.

Bronchoalveolar Lavage

BAL may provide helpful information regarding secondary infection,
bleeding, and aspiration and allows cytology and molecular analyses.
Evaluation of cell counts, differential, and lymphocyte markers may
be helpful in determining the presence of hypersensitivity pneumonitis or sarcoid. Although BAL does not usually determine the exact
diagnosis, it can be diagnostic for disorders such as pulmonary alveolar
proteinosis.

Lung Biopsy

Lung biopsy for histopathology by conventional thoracotomy or video-­
assisted thoracoscopy is sometimes the final step and is often necessary for a diagnosis. Biopsy yields a diagnosis in greater than 80% of
patients. Because of the low diagnostic yield, transbronchial biopsies

Supportive care of patients with ILD is essential and includes supplemental oxygen for hypoxia and adequate nutrition for growth
failure. Antimicrobial treatment may be necessary for secondary
infections. Some children may receive symptomatic relief from the
use of bronchodilators. Antiinflammatory treatment with corticosteroids remains the initial treatment of choice for many forms of
childhood ILD. Controlled trials in children are lacking, however,
and the clinical responses reported in case studies are variable. The
usual dose of prednisone is 1-­2 mg/kg/24 hr or 10-­30 mg/kg of IV
methylprednisolone given either weekly or for 3 consecutive days
per month. Treatment length varies but is often initially given for
3-­6 months with tapering of dosage dictated by clinical response.
Alternative but not adequately evaluated agents include hydroxychloroquine, azathioprine, cyclophosphamide, cyclosporine, methotrexate, and IVIG. Investigational approaches involve specific
agents directed against the action of cytokines, growth factors, or
oxidants. In severe, progressive, or end-­stage ILD, lung transplantation is an option, and outcomes are similar to other end-­stage lung
diseases in children. Appropriate treatment for underlying systemic
disease or aspiration syndrome is indicated. Preventive measures
include avoidance of all inhalation irritants, such as tobacco smoke
and, when appropriate, molds and bird antigens. Supervised pulmonary rehabilitation programs may be helpful.
For those disorders with fibrotic ILD, antifibrotic therapy may be
another option. The greatest experience with antifibrotic therapy has
been in adults with IPF. Other indications for antifibrotic therapy
include fibrosing ILD, autoimmune ILD, hypersensitivity pneumonitis,
and nonspecific ILD. Nintedanib and pirfenidone have been approved
for patients ≥18 years; both have demonstrated efficacy in slowing the
decline in pulmonary function.

Genetic Counseling

A high incidence of ILD in some families suggests a genetic predisposition to either development of the disease or severity of the disorder.
Genetic counseling may be beneficial if a positive familial history is
obtained.

PROGNOSIS

The overall mortality of ILD is variable and depends on the specific
diagnosis. Some children recover spontaneously without treatment, but
other children steadily progress to death. Pulmonary hypertension and
severe fibrosis are considered poor prognostic indicators.

ANTI–GLOMERULAR BASEMENT MEMBRANE
DISEASE (ANTI-­GBM DISEASE)

Anti-­GBM disease, formerly known as Goodpasture disease, is
the prototypical immunologic-­mediated ILD (see Chapter 560.4).
Because of the concurrent presentation of renal (glomerulonephritis)
and pulmonary (alveolar hemorrhage) disease, the differential diagnosis focuses on distinguishing anti-­GBM disease from vasculitis,
infection, and other syndromes such as GPA, microscopic polyangiitis, Henoch-­Schönlein purpura, and idiopathic pulmonary hemorrhage syndromes.

Pathophysiology
Immunology Factors

The development of anti-­GBM antibodies against antigens that are
present on the basement membranes of the glomerulus and alveolar
directly correlates with the development of pulmonary and renal

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 448 u Immune and Inflammatory Lung Disease
disease. Removal of such antibodies by plasmapheresis results in
improvement of the disease process in some patients but not in all.

Genetic Factors

Genetics appears to contribute strongly to the development of this disease, with the presence of MHC class II alleles DR15, DR4, DRB1*1501,
DRB1*04, and DRB1*03 predisposing to disease. The disease is triggered by environmental factors in those with a genetic predisposition.
There may be other genetic factors as well, and our understanding of
the genetics involved in anti-­GBM disease is evolving.

Environmental Factors

Exposure to cigarette smoke appears to be a strong factor in the development anti-­GBM disease. Whether smoking alters the ultrastructure of the basement membrane or exogenous particles or noxious
substances in smoke alter the type IV collagen is unknown. Smokers
are more likely to develop pulmonary hemorrhage than nonsmokers who have anti-­GBM disease. Other injuries to the alveoli from
infection, hydrocarbon inhalation, or cocaine inhalation have been
reported as associated events before the development of anti-­GBM
disease.

Clinical Manifestations

The majority of patients present with many days or weeks of cough,
dyspnea, and fatigue, and up to 60% present with hemoptysis. Young
children tend to swallow small amounts of blood from hemoptysis and
may present with vomiting blood. Occasionally, the hemoptysis is large
and resultant anemia is a consequence of large quantities of blood loss.
Younger patients tend to present with both the pulmonary and renal
syndrome concurrently. Adults are less likely to develop pulmonary
disease.

Laboratory

Serologic detection of anti-­GBM antibodies is positive in more than
90% of patients with anti-­GBM disease. A complete blood count may
show anemia that is normocytic and normochromic, as seen in chronic
inflammatory disease. Urinalysis may reveal hematuria and proteinuria, and blood tests demonstrate renal compromise with elevated
blood urea nitrogen and creatinine. Studies for ANCAs should also be
performed and are positive in approximately 25–30% of patients concurrently with anti-­GBM antibodies. The ANCA that is often positive
is anti–myeloperoxidase ANCA.

2637

cases. The cytology from the BAL may reveal hemosiderin-­laden
macrophages through Prussian blue staining. These macrophages
would have engulfed and broken down the red blood cells, leaving
iron in these cells.

Tissue Histopathology

The most common tissue obtained for diagnosis is a kidney biopsy. Kidney biopsies most commonly reveal crescentic glomerulonephritis with
positive anti-­GBM. Staining for IgG and complement is found by immunofluorescence along the basement membrane in a linear pattern. This
antibody deposition pattern led to the investigation of endogenous antigens in the basement membrane. Although less likely to be performed
in anti-­GBM disease, lung biopsy in patients with active disease reveals
capillaritis from neutrophils, hemosiderin-­laden macrophages, type II
pneumocyte hyperplasia, and interstitial thickening at the level of the
alveolus.

Treatment

More than half of patients with anti-­GBM disease who forego treatment die within 2 years from either respiratory failure, renal failure,
or both. After a diagnosis is made, therapy with corticosteroids coupled with oral cyclophosphamide is initiated. The addition of daily
plasmapheresis may accelerate improvement. Alternative therapies
are rituximab or mycophenolate. Anti-­GBM antibodies are monitored during treatment. Survival is affected by the need for ongoing
dialysis. Kidney transplant is an option for those with significant
renal impairment. Patients who do not require persistent dialysis
have a survival rate at 1 year of 80% or more.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

448.6 Neuroendocrine Cell Hyperplasia of
Infancy
W. Adam Gower

Chest Radiography

Chest radiography in anti-­GBM disease will often show widely scattered patches of pulmonary infiltrates. If these infiltrates are in the
periphery of the lung, they may be difficult to distinguish from the
eosinophilic lung diseases. Interstitial patterns of thickening may be
found as well. HRCT of the chest reveals a diffuse ground-­glass pattern
or opacities.

NEHI is an idiopathic form of diffuse lung disease that typically
presents during the first year of life with persistent tachypnea,
retractions, hypoxemia, crackles, and failure to thrive. Initial
descriptions of NEHI used the term persistent tachypnea of infancy;
some authors now use this to refer to both NEHI and pulmonary
interstitial glycogenosis. Characteristic findings are seen on chest
imaging studies and lung histopathology. Pulmonary function
studies typically demonstrate an obstructive pattern with air trapping. There are no effective specific therapies for NEHI, and the usual
approach is supportive care. The natural course is typically one of
gradual improvement of symptoms, although exacerbations may
occur throughout childhood, and potentially into adulthood. The
long-­term consequences of this disorder are not well-­delineated.

Pulmonary Function Testing

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Spirometry may be suggestive of a restrictive defect with reduction
in FVC and FEV1. DLCO is a valuable test when pulmonary hemorrhage is a strong consideration. The intent of this test is to measure
the ability of the lung to transfer inhaled gas to the red blood cell in
the pulmonary capillary bed. This test takes advantage of hemoglobin’s high affinity to bind carbon monoxide. Current data suggest
that DLCO directly correlates with the volume of blood in the pulmonary capillary bed. In pulmonary hemorrhage syndromes, blood
in the alveoli plus the blood in the capillary bed increase the DLCO
significantly and should alert the clinician to the possibility of pulmonary hemorrhage.

Bronchoscopy and Bronchoalveolar Lavage

Defining pulmonary hemorrhage can often be best assessed through
bronchoscopy with BAL. The visual presence of blood during bronchoscopy will be obvious. Infections must be ruled out in many

The prevalence of NEHI is not known, but it is generally considered to be a rare lung disease. Some studies have noted a slight male
predominance. Otherwise, no other clear maternal or patient-­level
risk factors have been identified. Cases of NEHI have been reported
in the literature from North and South America, Europe, Asia, and
Australia.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

The primary clue to the pathophysiology of NEHI is increased
numbers of neuroendocrine cells (NECs) in the airways of affected
children. NECs are normally found in the airways, where they exist
as both as individual cells and innervated clusters known as neuroendocrine bodies (NEBs), and secrete factors such as gastrin releasing peptide (GRP) and serotonin (5-­HT). They are thought to be
involved in local oxygen sensing and may transmit signals to other
cells. Increases in NECs are seen in several respiratory disorders

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2638 Part XVII u The Respiratory System

A

B

Fig. 448.12 Neuroendocrine cell hyperplasia of infancy. A, A small
airway showing only minimal chronic inflammation on routine staining. B, Staining for bombesin shows increased numbers of neuroendocrine cells within the surface epithelium. (From Corrin B, Nicholson AG. Pathology of the Lungs, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Churchill
Livingstone; 2011: Fig. 2.19.)

of childhood, usually with other additional findings, where they
are thought to be reactive to other primary pathology. It is unclear
whether their presence in increased numbers in NEHI causes the
clinical picture or is the result of abnormal pulmonary physiology secondary to some other primary factor. Increased numbers of
NECs seem to be associated with increased small airway obstruction in those with NEHI.
Although most cases appear to be sporadic, familial NEHI has been
described, suggesting a possible inherited mechanism and/or shared
environmental factors between affected siblings. The association of
NEHI with heterozygosity for a variant in the gene Nkx2.1 has been
described in one kindred. Variants in this gene are also known to cause
a wide spectrum of disorders, including more severe forms of diffuse
lung disease (see Chapter 448.5).

CLINICAL PRESENTATION

The symptoms of NEHI characteristically appear during infancy,
although the diagnosis may be delayed until after the first year of
life. The typical presentation includes persistent tachypnea, hypoxemia, retractions, and poor weight gain in an otherwise healthy
infant. The exam reveals crackles or clear lung sounds, and cough,
wheezing, and digital clubbing are not typical.

A

B
Fig. 448.13 A, Neuroendocrine cell hyperplasia of infancy in a

15-­mo-­old. Chest radiograph demonstrates pulmonary hyperinflation
and parahilar opacities resembling reactive airways disease or bronchiolitis. B, Neuroendocrine cell hyperplasia of infancy. Axial expiratory
CT image shows characteristic geographic ground-­glass opacities involving the paramediastinal right middle lobe and lingula and the right
lower lobe. (From Zucker EJ, Lee EY. Diffuse lung disease. In Coley BD,
ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019: Figs. 56.7 and 56.8, p. 541.)

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of NEHI requires that other more common causes of
the presenting symptoms be ruled out. Strong consideration should
be given to consultation with a pediatric pulmonologist when possible. Although children with NEHI may have comorbid GER and/
or swallowing dysfunction, this is thought to be secondary to tachypnea and increased work of breathing rather than the cause of respiratory symptoms. Plain chest films may show hyperinflation. When
biopsy material from the lung is stained with immunohistochemical reagents highlighting bombesin, increased numbers of positive-­
staining cells are noted in the airways. In general, biopsies from
children with NEHI are remarkably void of fibrosis, inflammation,
or signs of injury (Fig. 448.12).
Although the pattern of NEC hyperplasia seen in histopathology has
classically been the gold standard for diagnosis of NEHI, HRCT of the
chest has a high specificity, such that biopsy may be avoided in most
cases. The classic pattern seen on chest CT is ground-­glass opacities

in the lingula, right middle lobe, and perihilar regions, with air trapping on expiratory images. The lungs otherwise appear normal (Fig.
448.13). If a patient with clinically diagnosed NEHI has a more severe
clinical course than expected, biopsy may be helpful to rule out other
pathology.
The diagnosis of NEHI is supported by an obstructive pattern that
does not reverse with bronchodilators, on either infant pulmonary
function testing (iPFT) or standard spirometry. Static lung volumes
may show air trapping with increased RV relative to the TLC. BAL
findings are notable for lack of inflammatory markers, as compared to
other pulmonary diseases of infancy.
Genetic testing may be useful to rule out disorders of surfactant
metabolism and other causes of infant diffuse lung disease. Targeted
testing for variants in Nkx2.1 can be considered, but as this association
has been found in only one kindred thus far, the diagnostic value of
such testing is limited.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 448 u Immune and Inflammatory Lung Disease
NATURAL COURSE AND TREATMENT

Because the symptoms of NEHI typically improve and eventually
largely resolve over the first few years of life, the standard approach to
treatment of NEHI is supportive. The time frame for clinical improvement in NEHI is variable. Symptoms with rest may improve, whereas
those on exertion or with sleep persist. Affected children may require
supplemental oxygen to maintain normal saturations, sometimes
only with sleep or illnesses, but often at all times. Clinicians should
have a low threshold to evaluate for sleep-­related breathing disorders,
and these should be treated accordingly. Inhaled or systemic corticosteroids are generally not thought to be helpful in treating the primary manifestations of NEHI.
Because they may expend more energy to breathe, children with
NEHI may have difficulty gaining weight and often require supplemental nutrition. This may be delivered by gastrostomy tube. Management
of GER and/or dysfunctional swallowing, when present, may be helpful. Mild abnormalities of the immune system may be seen in some
patients with NEHI and, when present, may be addressed with specific therapy such as prophylactic antibiotics and/or immunoglobulin
replacement.
When clinical symptoms improve, the need for supplemental
oxygen and/or nutritional support typically decreases, and patients
may be weaned as tolerated. Children with NEHI whose symptoms
have improved may experience exacerbations later in childhood.
These episodes may be associated with increased air trapping.
Although the symptoms of NEHI typically resolve during childhood, limited data suggest that some may persist into the adult years.
This may manifest as exercise intolerance or an asthma-­like picture.
Obstruction with air trapping may be seen on PFT, and persistent
abnormalities may be identified on chest imaging. No cases of respiratory failure, need for lung transplantation, or death caused by NEHI
have been reported.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

448.7 Fibrotic Lung Disease
Deborah R. Liptzin, Jason P. Weinman, and
Robin R. Deterding
Pulmonary fibrosis is scarring in the lung parenchyma (as opposed
to bronchiectasis, which is scarring of the airways). Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis is a common form of fibrotic lung disease in adults.
This presents with usual interstitial pneumonia (a pathologic finding with patchy interstitial fibrosis, fibroblastic foci, and honeycomb change) (see Chapter 448.5). Additional adult fibrotic lung
diseases include sarcoidosis, silicosis, coal worker’s pneumoconiosis, and hypersensitivity pneumonitis (e.g., farmer’s lung). In children, fibrotic lung disease is rare, and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
has not been described. The differential diagnosis of fibrotic lung
disease includes surfactant dysfunction pathogenic variants (see
Chapter 444); immunocompromised patients with opportunistic
infections, radiation-­induced fibrosis, or status-­post hematopoietic
stem cell transplantation; patients with systemic disease processes
that can lead to pulmonary fibrosis (systemic vasculitis, collagen
vascular disease, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, storage diseases,
Langerhans cell histiocytosis, sarcoidosis, systemic lupus erythematosus, systemic sclerosis, and nonspecific interstitial pneumonia);
and pleuropulmonary fibroelastosis. Airway fibrosis can be seen
in bronchiolitis obliterans (see Chapter 443.1) and aspiration (see
Chapter 446) (Tables 448.20-­448.22).

CLINICAL PRESENTATION

Pulmonary fibrosis classically presents with nonspecific respiratory
symptoms such as cough, crackles, wheezes, prolonged expiratory
phase, exercise intolerance, and hypoxemia, especially at nighttime.

2639

Table 448.20  Diseases Associated with Pulmonary Fibrosis
• Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis/nonspecific interstitial pneumonia
• Familial pulmonary fibrosis/familial interstitial pneumonia
• Hypersensitivity pneumonitis (many agents)
• Cryptogenic organizing pneumonia
• Adverse reaction to therapy (drugs, radiation)
• Pleuroparenchymal fibroelastosis
• Hermansky-­Pudlak syndrome
• Sarcoidosis
• Eosinophilic pneumonia (primary or parasitic)
• Langerhans cell histiocytosis
• Dyskeratosis congenita
• Tuberous sclerosis
• Neurofibromatosis
• Erdheim-­Chester disease
• Gaucher disease
• Niemann-­Pick disease
• Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia
• Lysinuric protein intolerance
• IgG4-­mediated immune disorder
• Myelodysplastic syndrome
• Progressive systemic sclerosis
• Other connective tissue diseases (SLE, dermatomyositis)
• Granulomatosis with polyangiitis
• Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis

Symptom onset can be insidious or rapid. In children, oxygen desaturation with activity may be the earliest sign of fibrotic lung disease, and
cough, crackles, and wheezes may be later findings. Children with surfactant dysfunction pathogenic variants can present with respiratory
failure in the neonatal period.

EVALUATION

Pulmonary function tests typically show restriction and reduced diffusion capacity. Air trapping can also be seen. Patients may desaturate
with exercise challenges such as 6-­minute walks, and this may be the
first indication of disease in children.
There are a variety of findings on CT scan that suggest pulmonary fibrosis, and these findings can evolve over time. In surfactant
dysfunction variants, ground-­glass opacities are prominent early
on with subsequent evolution to more typical findings of fibrosis
such as reticular abnormalities, honeycombing, architectural distortion, and/or traction bronchiectasis. Typical findings in pediatric nonspecific interstitial pneumonia include subpleural sparing,
ground-­glass opacities, cystic change, reticular abnormalities, and
bronchiectasis (Fig. 448.14). Novel measures of quantifying fibrosis have been described in the literature, and CT findings consistent with fibrosis are being used as criteria for study enrollment.
Of note, CT findings and pulmonary function tests can be discrepant with stable pulmonary function tests over time, whereas the CT
scan can evolve over the same period.
In certain disease processes such as surfactant deficiency (positive genetic testing) or genetic disorders of surfactant metabolism,
biopsy is not necessary for diagnosis of fibrosis. Cryobiopsy is
becoming popular in the adult pulmonary landscape but is in its
infancy in the pediatric pulmonary field. In the absence of a definitive diagnosis, a thoracoscopic wedge biopsy is necessary for diagnosis and to guide treatment. Transbronchial biopsies in pediatrics
are of limited utility because the small instruments typically obtain
inadequate tissue specimens; transbronchial biopsies in pediatrics
are limited to monitoring post–lung transplantation and for diagnosis of sarcoidosis. Pathologic findings in pulmonary fibrosis are
variable, depending on the duration and etiology of disease (see
Table 448.21), but typically include a component of interstitial
inflammation, interstitial expansion by dense collagen, and lobular

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2640 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Table 448.21  Pediatric Fibrotic Lung Diseases
ADDITIONAL
EVALUATION

DISEASES

CT FINDINGS

PATHOLOGY FINDINGS

Surfactant dysfunction

Early: Diffuse ground-­
glass opacities, septal
thickening (crazy paving)
Chronic: Decreased
ground-­glass opacities
with reticulation and
cystic lucencies

Variable: fibrosis, honeycomb
cysts at end stage, NSIP, CPI, few
globules of pulmonary alveolar
proteinosis, foamy macrophages
and cholesterol clefts
(endogenous lipoid pneumonia)

Genetic testing

TREATMENT
Supportive care
(nutrition, respiratory
support, vaccinations),
antifibrotic therapy plus
hydroxychloroquine,
azithromycin, high-­dose
intravenous steroids;
genetic counseling

Aspiration

Acute: Consolidation
and centrilobular (tree
in bud) nodules with a
dependent distribution
Chronic: bronchiectasis,
architectural distortion

Airway-­centered lesions/
bronchiolitis, food particles with
or without granulomas, foamy
macrophages (endogenous
lipoid pneumonia), organizing
pneumonia

Video
fluoroscopic
or fiberoptic
endoscopic
swallow
evaluation

Stop aspiration through
thickening feeds, gastric
feeds, cleft repair

Radiation fibrosis

Architectural distortion,
volume loss, traction
bronchiectasis; often with
geometric distribution
related to radiation field

Pleural, septal, and paraseptal
fibrosis; reactive atypia of alveolar
epithelium and endothelium

Bronchopulmonary
dysplasia

Hyperlucent regions, cystic
lucencies, architectural
distortion (linear and
subpleural triangular
opacities)

Alveolar simplification and
enlargement; patchy
hyperinflation; interstitial fibrosis,
with or without interlobular septal
fibrosis

Nonspecific interstitial
pneumonia (NSIP)

Basilar predominant
findings of ground-­glass
opacities (often with
subpleural sparing),
reticulation, architectural
distortion, and traction
bronchiectasis

Interstitial lymphocytic
inflammation and fibrosis with
homogenous distribution

Hypersensitivity
pneumonitis (chronic)

Patchy and often parahilar
reticulation, ground-­glass
opacities, centrilobular
nodules; honeycombing
(rare)

Airway-­centered small
noncaseating granulomas,
multinucleated giant cells,
lymphocytic bronchiolitis and
peribronchiolitis, airway fibrosis,
organizing pneumonia

Lymphocytosis in
bronchoalveolar
lavage,
precipitins to
specific antigen

Remove trigger,
intravenous steroids

Autoimmune connective
tissue disorders (collagen
vascular disease)

See NSIP; honeycombing
(rare)

NSIP; lymphoid hyperplasia; fibrosis
and cystic change; pleuritis and
pleural fibrosis (variable); chronic
vasculopathy (variable); airway
fibrosis (variable)

Serologic studies

Disease-­specific immune
modulation

Drug reactions

Peripheral predominant
consolidation or ground
glass opacities; reverse
halo sign; see NSIP;
honeycombing (rare)

Variable: organizing pneumonia,
NSIP, UIP, DAD, pulmonary
hemorrhage, eosinophilic
pneumonia

Drug avoidance

Infection

Acute: Consolidation and
centrilobular (tree in bud)
nodules; appearance
and distribution vary with
type of infection
Chronic: May progress
to IPF/UIP with
honeycombing

Acute: Neutrophilic alveolitis
(bacterial) or lymphocytic
bronchiolitis (viral)
Chronic: Variable airway fibrosis
(constrictive/obliterative
bronchiolitis) and interstitial
fibrosis

Antimicrobials

Immunodeficiency

Bronchiectasis,
consolidation,
centrilobular nodules

Follicular bronchiolitis or diffuse
lymphoid hyperplasia; NSIP; LIP;
GLILD

Immunologic and
genetic testing

Usual interstitial
pneumonia (UIP)

Honeycombing,
reticulation, traction
bronchiectasis, ground-­
glass opacities (less
prominent than NSIP)

Fibroblast foci; interstitial,
septal, and pleural fibrosis with
heterogenous distribution;
minimal to absent inflammation

Genetic testing

Steroids may help

Consider
evaluation for
pulmonary
hypertension
and/or
aspiration

Consider inhaled
corticosteroids, inhaled
steroids, diuretics

Consider steroids

Treat underlying
immunodeficiency

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 448 u Immune and Inflammatory Lung Disease

2641

Table 448.22  Genes Associated with Familial* or
Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis
GENE

GENE FUNCTION

IL1RN

Inhibitor of proinflammatory effect of IL-­1α and
IL-­1β

IL8

Proinflammatory cytokine

FAM13A

Signal transduction

TLR3

Pathogen recognition and activation of innate
immunity

TERT

Enzyme in telomerase complex maintaining
telomere length

HLA-­DRB1

Major histocompatibility complex—immune
system

DSP

Tightly links adjacent cells

OBFC1

Stimulates the activity of DNA polymerase-­α-­
primase

MUC5B

Influence on rheological properties of airway
mucus, mucociliary transport, and airway
defense

MUC2

Mucin production

TOLLIP

Regulator of innate immune responses
mediated by toll-­like receptor and the
transforming growth factor β signaling
pathway

ATP11A

Phospholipid translocation

MDGA2

Cell-­cell interaction

MAPT

Promotes microtubule assembly and stability

SPPL2C

Protein cleavage

globules of pulmonary alveolar proteinosis material in infancy
may indicate a genetic disorder of surfactant metabolism. Reactive lymphoid follicles suggest an immunologic process, such as
autoimmune disease or immunodeficiency. Organizing pneumonia
(polypoid aggregates of fibroblasts, Masson bodies) is a common
feature in hypersensitivity pneumonitis and autoimmune diseases.
The usual interstitial pneumonia pattern signaled by fibroblast foci
arising within a background of dense interstitial fibrosis is almost
never seen in children. Connective tissue stains, such as Masson
trichrome, elastic Verhoff von Giesen, and Movat pentachrome, aid
in determining the severity and distribution of collagen deposition.

DPP9

Cell-­cell adhesion

TREATMENT

TGFB1

Set of peptides that controls proliferation,
differentiation, and other functions in many
cell types

SFTPC†

Component of surfactant fluid

SFTPA2†

To modulate innate and adaptive immunity

ABCA3†

Transport of lipids across plasma membrane

TERC†

Template in telomerase complex

DKC1†

Stabilization of the template in telomerase
complex

TINF2†

Telomere maintenance

RTELI†

DNA helicase

PARN†

mRNA stability

*Also called familial interstitial pneumonia.
†Rarer variant.

Adapted from Kaur A, Mathai SK, Schwartz DA. Genetics in idiopathic pulmonary
fibrosis pathogenesis, prognosis, and treatment. Frontiers Med. 2017;4:154, Tables 1
and 2.

remodeling (parenchymal architectural distortion and honeycomb
cysts). Interlobular septal fibrosis, pleural fibrosis, and chronic
pulmonary arteriopathy are common associated findings. Dense

Fig. 448.14 Chest CT demonstrates typical CT findings in a pediatric pa-

tient with nonspecific interstitial pneumonia, including basilar-­predominant
ground-­glass opacities (blue arrows), reticulation (yellow arrows), mild cystic change (green arrows), and bronchiectasis (orange arrow).

Treatment varies based on disease process (see Tables 448.20-­448.22).
Because of the nature of rare disease, treatment regimens are largely
based on expert opinion, as controlled clinical trials are challenging
to perform. Antifibrotic agents approved in adults with fibrotic lung
disease include pirfenidone and nintedanib, and weight-based dosing
of nintedanib has been shown to have an acceptable safety profile in
children.
Monitoring may include evaluation of pulmonary function (spirometry, lung volumes, and diffusion capacity); functional evaluation
of exercise (6-­minute walk); and screening for comorbidities such as
pulmonary hypertension, aspiration, poor weight gain, and sleep-­
associated breathing disorders. Respiratory support varies depending
on each patient’s needs, from no support to oxygen via nasal cannula
and with ventilation (noninvasive or invasive); treatments may occur
only with exercise and/or sleep or may be all the time. Comorbidities
such as pulmonary hypertension or aspiration should be treated appropriately. Genetic counseling and recurrence risk should be provided
with genetic forms of fibrotic lung disease. Patients should be counseled about preventing further lung damage from infection (up-­to-­date
on vaccines, including pneumococcus, influenza, SARS-­CoV-­2, and
respiratory syncytial virus) or particulate matter (air pollution, wildfires, wood-­burning stoves, and environmental exposure to tobacco or
marijuana).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2642 Part XVII u The Respiratory System

Chapter 449

Community-­Acquired
Pneumonia
Matthew S. Kelly and Thomas J. Sandora
Pneumonia, defined as inflammation of the lung parenchyma, is the
leading infectious cause of death globally among children younger
than 5 years, accounting for an estimated 880,000 deaths in 2015 (Fig.
449.1). Pneumonia mortality is closely linked to poverty; more than
99% of child pneumonia deaths are in low-­and middle-­income countries, with the highest pneumonia mortality rate occurring in Africa
and South Asia.
In the United States, mortality from pneumonia in children declined
by 97% between 1939 and 1996. This decline can largely be attributed
to the development of antibiotics and vaccines and the expansion of
medical insurance coverage for children. Effective vaccines against
measles (see Chapter 293) and pertussis (see Chapter 243) contributed
to the decline in child pneumonia mortality during the 20th century.
Haemophilus influenzae type b (see Chapter 240) was also an important
cause of bacterial pneumonia in young children but became uncommon after licensure of a conjugate vaccine in 1987. The introduction
of pneumococcal conjugate vaccines (PCVs) (see Chapter 228) has
been an important contributor to the further reductions in pneumonia mortality achieved over the past 2 decades. Epidemics (influenza,
severe acute respiratory system coronavirus, Middle East respiratory
syndrome, respiratory syncytial virus [RSV]) and pandemics (COVID­19) contribute to the incidence, morbidity, and mortality in pediatric
patients with pneumonia. In addition, unexpected global increases in
group A streptococcus (GAS) infections have contributed to both morbidity and mortality in children with pneumonia.

ETIOLOGY

Although most cases of pneumonia are caused by microorganisms,
noninfectious causes include aspiration (of food or gastric acid, foreign
bodies, hydrocarbons, and lipoid substances), hypersensitivity reactions, and drug-­or radiation-­induced pneumonitis (see Chapter 448).
The cause of pneumonia in an individual patient is often difficult to
determine because direct sampling of lung tissue is invasive and rarely
performed. Bacterial cultures of sputum or upper respiratory tract
samples typically do not accurately reflect the cause of lower respiratory tract infection in children. Streptococcus pneumoniae (pneumococcus) is the most common bacterial pathogen in children 3 weeks to
Diarrhea 16%

Pneumonia 30%

5 years of age, whereas Mycoplasma pneumoniae and Chlamydophila
pneumoniae are the most frequent bacterial pathogens in children 5
years and older. In addition to pneumococcus, other bacterial causes of
pneumonia in previously healthy children in the United States include
GAS (Streptococcus pyogenes; see Chapter 229) and Staphylococcus
aureus (see Chapter 227.1) (Tables 449.1-­449.3). S. pneumoniae or S.
aureus pneumonia often complicates an illness caused by influenza
viruses.
S. pneumoniae, H. influenzae, GAS, and S. aureus are the major
causes of hospitalization and death from bacterial pneumonia among
children in developing countries, although in children with HIV infection, Mycobacterium tuberculosis (see Chapter 261), nontuberculous
mycobacteria (see Chapter 263), Salmonella (see Chapter 244), Escherichia coli (see Chapter 246), Pneumocystis jirovecii (see Chapter 290),
and cytomegalovirus (see Chapter 302) should also be considered. The
incidence of pneumonia caused by H. influenzae or S. pneumoniae has
been significantly reduced in areas where routine immunization has
been implemented.
Viral pathogens are the most common causes of lower respiratory
tract infections in infants and children older than 1 month but younger
than 5 years of age (see Table 449.2). Viruses can be detected in 40–80%
of children with pneumonia using molecular diagnostic methods (e.g.,
polymerase chain reaction [PCR]), with more than one respiratory
virus identified in up to 20% of cases. Of the respiratory viruses, RSV
(see Chapter 307) and rhinoviruses (see Chapter 310) are the most
commonly identified pathogens, especially in children younger than
2 years of age. However, the role of rhinoviruses in severe lower respiratory tract infection remains unclear, as these viruses are frequently
detected with co-infecting pathogens and among asymptomatic children. Other common viruses causing pneumonia include influenza
viruses (see Chapter 305), human metapneumovirus (see Chapter 308),
parainfluenza viruses (see Chapter 306), adenoviruses (see Chapter
309), enteroviruses (see Chapter 297), and coronaviruses (see Chapter 311), including severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
(SARS-­CoV-­2), the cause of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-­19; see
Chapter 449.1).
Lower respiratory tract viral infections are much more common in
the fall and winter in both the Northern and Southern Hemispheres in
relation to the seasonal epidemics of respiratory viruses that occur each
year. The typical pattern of these epidemics usually begins in the fall,
when parainfluenza virus infections appear and most often manifest as
croup. Later in winter, RSV, human metapneumovirus, and influenza
viruses cause widespread infection, including upper respiratory tract
infections, bronchiolitis, and pneumonia. RSV is particularly severe
among infants and young children, whereas influenza viruses cause
disease and excess hospitalization in all age groups. Knowledge of the
prevailing viruses circulating in the community may lead to a presumptive initial diagnosis for children with acute respiratory illnesses.
Immunization status is relevant because children fully immunized
against H. influenzae type b and S. pneumoniae are less likely to have
pneumonia caused by these pathogens. Children who are immunocompromised or who have certain medical comorbidities may be at
risk for specific pathogens, such as Pseudomonas spp. in patients with
cystic fibrosis (see Chapter 454).

PATHOGENESIS
HIV/AIDS 3%

Neonatal sepsis 13%

Measles 3%

Malaria 10%
Meningitis/encephalitis 5%

Other infections 21%

Fig. 449.1 Pneumonia is the leading infectious killer of children

worldwide, as shown by this illustration of global distribution of cause-­
specific infectious mortality among children younger than age 5 yr in
2017. Pneumonia causes nearly one third of all under-­5 deaths from
infection. (From World Health Organization Global Health Observatory
Data Repository, 2017 estimates.)

The lower respiratory tract possesses a number of defense mechanisms
against infection, including mucociliary clearance, macrophages and
secretory immunoglobulin A, and clearing of the airways by coughing. Previously, it was believed that the lower respiratory tract was—in
the absence of infection—kept sterile by these mechanisms, supported
primarily by culture-­based studies. However, recent use of culture-­
independent techniques, including high-­throughput sequencing methods, suggests that the lower respiratory tract contains diverse microbial
communities. These data have challenged the traditional model of
pneumonia pathogenesis that maintained that pneumonia was the
result of invasion of the sterile lower respiratory tract by a single pathogen. More recent conceptual models postulate that pneumonia results
from disruption of a complex lower respiratory ecosystem that is the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 449 u Community-­Acquired Pneumonia 2643
Table 449.1  Causes of Infectious Pneumonia
VIRAL

BACTERIAL
Common
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Group B streptococcus
Group A streptococcus
Staphylococcus aureus
Mycoplasma pneumoniae*
Chlamydophila pneumonie*
Chlamydia trachomatis
Mixed anaerobes
Gram-negative enterics

Consolidation, empyema
Neonates
Empyema
Pneumatoceles, empyema; infants;
nosocomial pneumonia
Adolescents; summer to fall
epidemics
Adolescents
Infants
Aspiration pneumonia
Nosocomial pneumonia

Uncommon
Haemophilus influenzae type b
Moraxella catarrhalis
Neisseria meningitidis
Francisella tularensis
Nocardia species
Chlamydophila psittaci*
Yersinia pestis (plague)
Legionella species*
Coxiella burnetii* (Q fever)

Unimmunized
Animal, tick, fly contact;
bioterrorism
Immunocompromised patients
Bird contact (especially
parakeets)
Rat contact; bioterrorism
Exposure to contaminated water;
nosocomial
Animal (goat, sheep, cattle)
exposure

Uncommon
Herpes simplex
Cytomegalovirus
Measles
Varicella
Hantavirus
Coronaviruses (SARS-CoV-1,
Middle East respiratory
syndrome [MERS])
FUNGAL
Histoplasma capsulatum
Blastomyces dermatitidis
Coccidioides immitis
Cryptococcus neoformans and
C. gattii
Aspergillus species
Mucormycosis
Pneumocystis jirovecii

VIRAL
Common
Respiratory syncytial virus
Parainfluenza types 1-4
Influenza A, B
Adenovirus
Human metapneumovirus
Severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2):COVID-19

Bronchiolitis
Croup
High fever; winter months
Can be severe; often occurs
between January and April
Similar to respiratory syncytial
virus
Global pandemic

Neonates, immunocompromised
persons
Infants; immunocompromised persons
(particularly HIV-infected infants)
Rash, coryza, conjunctivitis
Unimmunized; immunocompromised
persons
Southwestern United States, rodents
Asia, Arabian Peninsula

Ohio/Mississippi River valley; bird,
bat contact
Ohio/Mississippi River valley, upper
Midwest states
Southwestern United States, Great
Lakes states
Bird contact; immunocompromised;
Northwestern United States
(C. gattii)
Immunocompromised persons;
nodular lung infection
Immunocompromised persons
Immunocompromised persons
(particularly HIV-infected infants);
steroids

RICKETTSIAL
Rickettsia rickettsiae

Tick bite

MYCOBACTERIAL
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Mycobacterium avium complex
Other nontuberculous
mycobacteria

Travel to endemic region; exposure
to high-risk persons
Immunocompromised (particularly
HIV-infected) persons
Immunocompromised persons;
cystic fibrosis

PARASITIC

Uncommon
Rhinovirus
Enterovirus D68, others

Rhinorrhea
Neonates

Various parasites (e.g., Ascaris,
Strongyloides species)

Eosinophilic pneumonia

*Atypical pneumonia syndrome; may have extrapulmonary manifestations, low-grade fever, patchy diffuse infiltrates, and poor response to β-lactam antibiotics.
Adapted from Kliegman RM, Greenbaum LA, Lye PS, eds. Practical Strategies in Pediatric Diagnosis and Therapy, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2004: p. 29.

Table 449.2  Pneumonia Etiologies Grouped by Age of the Patient
AGE GROUP

FREQUENT PATHOGENS (IN ORDER OF FREQUENCY)

Neonates (<3 wk)

Group B streptococcus, Escherichia coli, other gram-­negative bacilli, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae
(type b,* nontypeable)

3 wk-­3 mo

Respiratory syncytial virus, other respiratory viruses (rhinoviruses, parainfluenza viruses, influenza viruses, human
metapneumovirus, adenovirus), enterovirus D68, S. pneumoniae, H. influenzae (type b,* nontypeable); if patient is afebrile,
consider Chlamydia trachomatis

4 mo-­4 yr

Respiratory syncytial virus, other respiratory viruses (rhinoviruses, parainfluenza viruses, influenza viruses, human
metapneumovirus, adenovirus), enterovirus D68, S. pneumoniae, H. influenzae (type b,* nontypeable), Mycoplasma
pneumoniae, group A streptococcus

≥5 yr

M. pneumoniae, S. pneumoniae, Chlamydophila pneumoniae, H. influenzae (type b,* nontypeable), influenza viruses,
adenovirus, COVID-­19, other respiratory viruses, Legionella pneumophila

*H. influenzae type b is uncommon with routine immunization.
Adapted from Kliegman RM, Marcdante KJ, Jenson HJ, et al., eds. Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics, 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2006: p. 507.

site of dynamic interactions between potential pneumonia pathogens,
resident microbial communities, and host immune defenses.
Viral pneumonia usually results from spread of infection along the
airways, accompanied by direct injury of the respiratory epithelium,

which results in airway obstruction from swelling, abnormal secretions, and cellular debris. The small caliber of airways in young infants
makes such patients particularly susceptible to severe infection. Atelectasis, interstitial edema, and hypoxemia from ventilation-­perfusion

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2644 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Table 449.3  Pneumonia: Etiology Suggested by Exposure
History
EXPOSURE HISTORY

INFECTIOUS AGENT

Exposure to concurrent illness in school
dormitory or household setting

Neisseria meningitidis,
Mycoplasma pneumoniae

Exposure to persons with known or
suspected COVID-­19

SARS-­CoV-­2

ENVIRONMENTAL EXPOSURES
Exposure to contaminated aerosols
Legionnaires’ disease
(e.g., air coolers, hospital water supply)
Exposure to goat hair, raw wool, animal
hides

Anthrax

Ingestion of unpasteurized milk

Brucellosis

Exposure to bat droppings (caving)
or dust from soil enriched with bird
droppings

Histoplasmosis

Exposure to water contaminated with
animal urine

Leptospirosis

Exposure to rodent droppings, urine,
saliva

Hantavirus

Potential bioterrorism exposure

Anthrax, plague,
tularemia

ZOONOTIC EXPOSURES
Employment as abattoir work or
veterinarian

Brucellosis

Exposure to cattle, goats, pigs

Anthrax, brucellosis

Exposure to ground squirrels,
Plague
chipmunks, rabbits, prairie dogs, rats
in Africa or southwestern United States
Hunting or exposure to rabbits, foxes,
squirrels

Tularemia

Bites from flies or ticks

Tularemia

Exposure to birds (parrots, budgerigars,
cockatoos, pigeons, turkeys)

Psittacosis

Exposure to infected dogs and cats

Pasteurella multocida, Q
fever (Coxiella burnetii)

Exposure to infected goats, cattle,
sheep, domestic animals, and their
secretions (milk, amniotic fluid,
placenta, feces)

Q fever (C. burnetii)

TRAVEL EXPOSURES
Residence in or travel to San
Joaquin Valley, southern California,
southwestern Texas, southern Arizona,
New Mexico

Coccidioidomycosis

Residence in or travel to Mississippi or
Ohio river valleys, Great Lakes States,
Caribbean, Central America, or Africa

Histoplasmosis,
blastomycosis

Residence in or travel to southern China

Avian influenza

Residence in or travel to Arabian
Peninsula

MERS-­CoV

Residence in or travel to Southeast Asia

Paragonimiasis,
melioidosis

Residence in or travel to West Indies,
Australia, or Guam

Melioidosis

MERS-­CoV, Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus; COVID-­19, coronavirus
disease 2019; SARS-­CoV-­2, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2.
From Ellison RT III, Donowitz GR. Acute pneumonia. In: Bennett JE, Blaser MJ, Dolin
R, et al., eds. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett’s Principles and Practice of Infectious
Diseases, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2015: Table 69.3, p. 828.

mismatch often accompany airway obstruction. Viral infection of the
respiratory tract can also predispose to secondary bacterial infection
by disturbing normal host defense mechanisms, altering secretions,
and disrupting the microbial communities that reside in the respiratory tract.
Bacterial pneumonia most often occurs when respiratory tract
organisms colonize the upper respiratory tract and subsequently
gain access to the lungs, but pneumonia may also result from direct
seeding of lung tissue in the setting of bacteremia. When bacterial infection is established in the lung parenchyma, the pathologic
process varies according to the invading organism. M. pneumoniae
(see Chapter 269) attaches to the respiratory epithelium, inhibits
ciliary action, and leads to cellular destruction and an inflammatory
response in the submucosa. When the infection progresses, sloughed
cellular debris, inflammatory cells, and mucus cause airway obstruction, with spread of infection occurring along the bronchial tree, as
is seen in viral pneumonia. S. pneumoniae produces local edema that
aids in the proliferation of organisms and their spread into adjacent
portions of the lung, often resulting in the characteristic lobar consolidation. Lower respiratory tract infection caused by GAS typically
results in more diffuse lung involvement with interstitial pneumonia.
The pathology includes necrosis of tracheobronchial mucosa; formation of large amounts of exudate, edema, and local hemorrhage, with
extension into the interalveolar septa; and involvement of lymphatic
vessels with frequent pleural involvement. S. aureus pneumonia
manifests as confluent bronchopneumonia, which is often bilateral
and characterized by the presence of extensive areas of hemorrhagic
necrosis and irregular areas of cavitation of the lung parenchyma,
resulting in pneumatoceles, empyema, and, at times, bronchopulmonary fistulas.
Recurrent pneumonia is defined as two or more episodes in a single
year or three or more episodes ever, with radiographic clearing between
occurrences. An underlying disorder should be considered if a child
experiences recurrent pneumonia (Table 449.4).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Pneumonia is frequently preceded by several days of symptoms of
an upper respiratory tract infection, typically rhinitis and cough. In
viral pneumonia, fever is usually present but temperatures are generally lower than in bacterial pneumonia. Tachypnea is the most consistent clinical manifestation of pneumonia. Increased work of breathing
manifested by intercostal, subcostal, and suprasternal retractions; nasal
flaring; and use of accessory muscles is also common. Severe infection
may be accompanied by cyanosis and lethargy, especially in infants.
Auscultation of the chest may reveal crackles and wheezing, but it is
often difficult to localize the source of these adventitious sounds in
young children with hyperresonant chests. It is often not possible to
distinguish viral pneumonia clinically from disease caused by Mycoplasma and other bacterial pathogens.
Bacterial pneumonia in adults and older children typically begins
suddenly with high fever, cough, and chest pain. Other symptoms that
may be seen include drowsiness with intermittent periods of restlessness; rapid respirations; anxiety; and, occasionally, delirium. In many
children, splinting on the affected side to minimize pleuritic pain and
improve ventilation is noted; such children may lie on one side with
the knees drawn up to the chest. Lower lobe pneumonia may cause
abdominal pain (but no tenderness), or the pain may be referred to the
ipsilateral shoulder.
Physical findings depend on the stage of pneumonia. Early in the
course of illness, diminished breath sounds, scattered crackles, and
rhonchi are commonly heard over the affected lung field. With the
development of increasing consolidation or complications of pneumonia such as pleural effusion or empyema, dullness on percussion
is noted and breath sounds may be diminished. A lag in respiratory
excursion often occurs on the affected side. Abdominal distention may
be prominent because of gastric dilation from swallowed air or ileus.
The liver may seem enlarged because of downward displacement of the
diaphragm secondary to hyperinflation of the lungs or superimposed
congestive heart failure.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 449 u Community-­Acquired Pneumonia 2645
Table 449.4  Differential Diagnosis of Recurrent Pneumonia
HEREDITARY DISORDERS
Cystic fibrosis
Sickle cell disease
DISORDERS OF IMMUNITY
HIV/AIDS
Bruton agammaglobulinemia
Selective immunoglobulin G subclass deficiencies
Common variable immunodeficiency syndrome
Severe combined immunodeficiency syndrome
Chronic granulomatous disease
Hyperimmunoglobulin E syndromes
Leukocyte adhesion defect
DISORDERS OF CILIA
Primary ciliary dyskinesia
Kartagener syndrome

A

ANATOMIC DISORDERS
Pulmonary sequestration
Lobar emphysema
Congenital pulmonary airway malformation
Gastroesophageal reflux
Foreign body
Tracheoesophageal fistula (H type)
Bronchiectasis
Aspiration (oropharyngeal incoordination)
Aberrant bronchus
Adapted from Kliegman RM, Marcdante KJ, Jenson HJ, et al., eds. Nelson Essentials of
Pediatrics, 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2006: p. 507.

Symptoms described in adults with pneumococcal pneumonia may
be noted in older children but are rarely observed in infants and young
children, in whom the clinical pattern is considerably more variable.
In infants, there may be a prodrome of upper respiratory tract infection and poor feeding, leading to the abrupt onset of fever, restlessness, apprehension, and respiratory distress. These infants typically
appear ill, with respiratory distress manifested as grunting; nasal flaring; retractions of the supraclavicular, intercostal, and subcostal areas;
tachypnea; tachycardia; air hunger; and often cyanosis. Auscultation
may be misleading, particularly in young infants, with meager findings disproportionate to the degree of tachypnea. Some infants with
bacterial pneumonia may have associated gastrointestinal disturbances
characterized by vomiting, anorexia, diarrhea, and abdominal distention secondary to a paralytic ileus. Rapid progression of symptoms is
characteristic in the most severe cases of bacterial pneumonia. Cyanosis often predicts multilobular involvement. Risk factors for severe
pneumonia include temperature >38.5°C, tachypnea, retractions, nasal
flaring, grunting, capillary refill >2 seconds, cyanosis, tachycardia, and
poor feeding.

DIAGNOSIS

In 2011, the Pediatric Infectious Diseases Society (PIDS) and the
Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) published clinical
practice guidelines for community-­acquired pneumonia in children older than 3 months of age. These evidence-­based guidelines
provide recommendations for diagnostic testing and treatment of
previously healthy children with pneumonia in both outpatient and
inpatient settings. With the advent of advanced technologies and
changing epidemiologic pathogens, these guidelines have required
modifications.
An infiltrate on chest radiograph (posteroanterior and lateral views)
supports the diagnosis of pneumonia; images may also identify a
complication such as a pleural effusion or empyema. Viral pneumonia is usually characterized by hyperinflation with bilateral interstitial infiltrates and peribronchial cuffing (Fig. 449.2). Confluent lobar
consolidation is typically seen with pneumococcal pneumonia (Fig.
449.3). The radiographic appearance alone does not accurately identify

B
Fig. 449.2 A, Radiographic findings characteristic of respiratory syn-

cytial virus pneumonia in a 6-mo-­old infant with rapid respirations and
fever. Anteroposterior radiograph of the chest shows hyperexpansion
of the lungs with bilateral fine air space disease and streaks of density, indicating the presence of both pneumonia and atelectasis. An
endotracheal tube is in place. B, One day later, the anteroposterior radiograph of the chest shows increased bilateral pneumonia.

A

B

Fig. 449.3 Radiographic findings characteristic of pneumococcal

pneumonia in a 14-yr-­old male with cough and fever. Posteroanterior
(A) and lateral (B) chest radiographs reveal consolidation in the right
lower lobe, strongly suggesting bacterial pneumonia.

pneumonia etiology, and other clinical features of the illness must be
considered. Repeat chest radiographs are not required for proof of
cure for patients with uncomplicated pneumonia. Moreover, current
PIDS-­IDSA guidelines do not recommend that a chest radiograph be
performed for children with suspected pneumonia (tachypnea, cough,
fever, localized crackles, or decreased breath sounds) who are well
enough to be managed as outpatients because imaging in this context
only rarely changes management.
Point-­
of-­
care use of portable or handheld ultrasonography is
highly sensitive and specific in diagnosing pneumonia in children by

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2646 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Table 449.5  Factors Suggesting Need for Hospitalization
of Children with Pneumonia

A

C

E

B

D

F

Fig. 449.4 Lung ultrasound patterns. A, Negative lung ultrasound

pattern with A-­line (arrow) and no other findings. Positive lung ultrasound patterns with (B) B-­lines (arrows); (C) large consolidation (>1
cm) with tissue-­like echo-­texture (circle) and ultrasonographic bronchograms (arrow); (D) small consolidation (<1 cm; circle); (E) pleural line
abnormality with thickening and irregularity (arrows); and (F) pleural effusion (arrow). (From Varshney T, Mok E, Shapiro AJ, et al. Point-­of-­care
lung ultrasound in young children with respiratory tract infections and
wheeze. Emerg Med J. 2016;33:603–610, Fig. 1.)

determining lung consolidations and air bronchograms or effusions
(Fig. 449.4). However, the reliability of this imaging modality for
pneumonia diagnosis is highly user-­dependent, which has limited
its widespread use.
The peripheral white blood cell (WBC) count can be useful in differentiating viral from bacterial pneumonia. In viral pneumonia, the
WBC count can be normal or elevated but is usually not higher than
20,000/mm3, with a lymphocyte predominance. Bacterial pneumonia
is often associated with an elevated WBC count, in the range of 15,000-­
40,000/mm3, and a predominance of polymorphonuclear leukocytes.
A large pleural effusion, lobar consolidation, and a high fever at the
onset of the illness are also suggestive of a bacterial etiology. Atypical pneumonia caused by C. pneumoniae or M. pneumoniae is difficult
to distinguish from pneumococcal pneumonia on the basis of radiographic and laboratory findings; although pneumococcal pneumonia
is associated with a higher WBC count, erythrocyte sedimentation
rate, procalcitonin, and C-­reactive protein level, there is considerable
overlap.
The definitive diagnosis of a viral infection rests on the detection
of the viral genome or antigen in respiratory tract secretions. Reliable
PCR assays are widely available for the rapid detection of many respiratory viruses, including RSV, parainfluenza, influenza, human metapneumovirus, adenovirus, enterovirus, rhinovirus, and SARS-­CoV-­2.
Serologic techniques can also be used to diagnose a recent respiratory
viral infection but generally require testing of acute and convalescent
serum samples for a rise in antibodies to a specific virus. This diagnostic technique is laborious, slow, and not generally clinically useful
because the infection usually has resolved by the time it is confirmed

Age <6 mo
Immunocompromised state
Toxic appearance
Moderate to severe respiratory distress (retractions, nasal flaring,
grunting)
Cyanosis/hypoxemia (oxygen saturation <90% breathing room air,
sea level)
Shock (tachycardia, hypotension, prolonged capillary refill time)
Complicated pneumonia*
Sickle cell anemia with acute chest syndrome
Vomiting or inability to tolerate oral fluids or medications
Severe dehydration
No response to appropriate oral antibiotic therapy
Social factors (e.g., inability of caregivers to administer medications
at home or follow up appropriately)
High-­risk pathogen
*Pleural effusion, empyema, abscess, bronchopleural fistula, necrotizing pneumonia,
acute respiratory distress syndrome, extrapulmonary infection (meningitis, arthritis,
pericarditis, osteomyelitis, endocarditis), hemolytic uremic syndrome, or sepsis.
Adapted from Baltimore RS. Pneumonia. In: Jenson HB, Baltimore RS, eds. Pediatric
Infectious Diseases: Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2002: p. 801.

serologically. Serologic testing may be valuable as an epidemiologic
tool to define the incidence and prevalence of various respiratory viral
pathogens.
The definitive diagnosis of a typical bacterial infection requires isolation of an organism from the blood, pleural fluid, or lung. Culture
of sputum is of little value in the diagnosis of pneumonia in young
children, and percutaneous lung aspiration is invasive and not routinely performed. Blood culture is positive in only 10% of children
with pneumococcal pneumonia (bacteremia is more common in
GAS and H. influenzae pneumonias) and is not recommended for
nontoxic-­appearing children treated as outpatients. Blood cultures
are recommended for children who fail to improve or have clinical
deterioration, have complicated pneumonia (Table 449.5), or require
hospitalization. Pertussis infection can be diagnosed by PCR or culture of a nasopharyngeal specimen; although culture is considered
the gold standard for pertussis diagnosis, it is less sensitive than the
available PCR assays. Acute infection caused by M. pneumoniae can
be diagnosed on the basis of a PCR test result from a respiratory
specimen or seroconversion in an immunoglobulin G assay. Cold
agglutinins at titers >1:64 are also found in the blood of roughly half
of patients with M. pneumoniae infections; however, cold agglutinins
are nonspecific because other pathogens such as influenza viruses
may also cause increases. Serologic evidence, such as antistreptolysin
O and anti-­DNase B titers, may also be useful in the diagnosis of GAS
pneumonia.
Noninvasive diagnostic tests may help differentiate children with
bacterial versus viral causes of pneumonia. Various biomarkers, including C-­reactive protein, procalcitonin, and ESR, have been evaluated for
their ability to differentiate these pneumonia etiologies. For many of
these biomarkers, values differ in children with bacterial compared
with viral causes of pneumonia (except adenovirus and influenza), but
the reliability of these tests is not sufficiently high to justify routine
clinical use. Cell-­free next-­generation sequencing of plasma or blood
has been helpful in identifying pathogens in patients suspected of having bacterial pneumonia; identified pathogens include S. pneumoniae,
S. aureus, and Fusobacterium nucleatum (blood cultures were negative
in most of these patients). In addition, culture and PCR analysis of
pleural fluid may also yield an organism.

TREATMENT

Treatment of suspected bacterial pneumonia is based on the presumptive cause and the age and clinical appearance of the child. For mildly
ill children who do not require hospitalization, amoxicillin is recommended. With the emergence of penicillin-­resistant pneumococci, high
doses of amoxicillin (90 mg/kg/day orally divided twice daily) should
be prescribed unless local data indicate a low prevalence of resistance.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 449 u Community-­Acquired Pneumonia 2647
Therapeutic alternatives include cefuroxime and amoxicillin/clavulanate. For school-­age children and adolescents or when infection with
M. pneumoniae or C. pneumoniae is suspected, a macrolide antibiotic
is an appropriate choice for outpatient management. Azithromycin is
generally preferred, but clarithromycin or doxycycline (for children 8
years or older) are alternatives. For adolescents, a respiratory fluoroquinolone (levofloxacin, moxifloxacin) may also be considered as an
alternative if there are contraindications to other agents.
The empiric treatment of suspected bacterial pneumonia in a hospitalized child requires an approach based on local epidemiology,
the immunization status of the child, and the clinical manifestations
at the time of presentation. In areas without substantial high-­level
penicillin resistance among S. pneumoniae, children who are fully
immunized against H. influenzae type b and S. pneumoniae and are
not severely ill should receive ampicillin or penicillin G. For children
who do not meet these criteria, ceftriaxone or cefotaxime may be
used. If infection with M. pneumoniae or C. pneumoniae is suspected,
a macrolide antibiotic should be included in the treatment regimen.
If clinical features suggest staphylococcal pneumonia (pneumatoceles, empyema), initial antimicrobial therapy should also include
vancomycin or clindamycin. For children with respiratory failure
in the setting of influenza–methicillin-­resistant S. aureus (MRSA)
co-infection, data from a multicenter study support combination
therapy with vancomycin and a second antibiotic with MRSA activity
(e.g., clindamycin).
If viral pneumonia is suspected, it is reasonable to withhold antibiotic
therapy, especially for preschool-­age patients who are mildly ill, have
clinical evidence suggesting viral infection, and are in no respiratory
distress. However, up to 30% of patients with known viral infection,
particularly influenza viruses, may have coexisting bacterial pathogens.
Therefore if the decision is made to withhold antibiotic therapy on the
basis of presumptive diagnosis of a viral infection, deterioration in
clinical status should signal the possibility of superimposed bacterial
infection, and antibiotic therapy should be initiated.
Table 449.5 notes the indications for admission to a hospital. Hospitalized children should receive supportive care and may require intravenous fluids; respiratory support, including supplemental oxygen,
continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP), or mechanical ventilation; or vasoactive medications for hypotension or sepsis physiology.
The optimal duration of antibiotic treatment for pneumonia has
not been well-­established in controlled studies. However, antibiotics
should generally be continued until the patient has been afebrile for
72 hours. Several studies suggest that shorter courses (5-­7 days) may
also be effective, particularly for children managed on an outpatient
basis. Available data do not support prolonged courses of treatment for
uncomplicated pneumonia. Some studies suggest that a reduction of
previously elevated serum procalcitonin levels to an absolute level (0.1-­
0.25 μg/L) may help determine when to stop treatment.
Despite substantial gains over the past 15 years, less than two thirds
of children with symptoms of pneumonia are taken to an appropriate
caregiver in low-­and middle-­income countries, and fewer than half
receive antibiotics. The World Health Organization and other international groups have developed systems to train mothers and local
healthcare providers in the recognition and appropriate antibiotic
treatment of pneumonia. In addition to antibiotics, oral zinc (10 mg/
day for <12 months, 20 mg/day for ≥12 months given for 7 days) may
reduce mortality among children in low-­and middle-­income countries with clinically defined severe pneumonia. Bubble CPAP improves
mortality from pneumonia with hypoxemia compared with standard
oxygen therapy in settings without access to ventilator-­derived CPAP
or mechanical ventilation.

with appropriate antibiotic therapy: (1) complications, such as pleural effusion or empyema (see Table 449.5); (2) bacterial resistance;
(3) nonbacterial etiologies such as viruses or fungi and aspiration of
foreign bodies or food; (4) bronchial obstruction from endobronchial
lesions, foreign body, or mucous plugs; (5) preexisting diseases such
as immunodeficiencies, ciliary dyskinesia, cystic fibrosis, pulmonary
sequestration, or congenital pulmonary airway malformation; and
(6) other noninfectious causes (including bronchiolitis obliterans,
hypersensitivity pneumonitis, eosinophilic pneumonia, and granulomatosis with polyangiitis, formerly called Wegener granulomatosis).
A chest radiograph is the first step in determining the reason for a
lack of response to initial treatment. Bronchoalveolar lavage may be
indicated in children with respiratory failure. High-­resolution CT
scans may better identify complications or an anatomic reason for a
poor response to therapy.
Mortality from community-­
acquired pneumonia in developed
countries is rare, and most children with pneumonia do not experience long-­term pulmonary sequelae. Some data suggest that up to 45%
of children have symptoms of asthma 5 years after hospitalization for
pneumonia; this finding may reflect either undiagnosed asthma at the
time of presentation or a propensity for development of asthma after
pneumonia.

COMPLICATIONS

Complications of pneumonia (see Table 449.5) are usually the result
of direct spread of bacterial infection within the thoracic cavity (pleural effusion, empyema, and pericarditis) or bacteremia and hematologic spread (Figs. 449.5-­449.7). Meningitis, endocarditis, suppurative
arthritis, and osteomyelitis are rare complications of hematologic
spread of pneumococcal or H. influenzae type b infection.
S. aureus, S. pneumoniae, and S. pyogenes (GAS) are the most common causes of parapneumonic effusions and empyema. Nonetheless
many effusions that complicate bacterial pneumonia are sterile. Analysis of pleural fluid parameters, including pH, glucose, protein, and
lactate dehydrogenase, can differentiate transudative from exudative
effusions (Table 449.6). However, current PIDS-­IDSA guidelines do
not recommend that these tests be performed because this distinction
rarely changes management. Pleural fluid should be sent for Gram stain
and bacterial culture, as this may identify the bacterial cause of pneumonia. Molecular methods, including bacterial species–specific PCR

PROGNOSIS

Typically, patients with uncomplicated community-­
acquired bacterial pneumonia show response to therapy, with improvement in
clinical symptoms (fever, cough, tachypnea, chest pain), within 48-­72
hours of initiation of antibiotics. Radiographic evidence of improvement lags substantially behind clinical improvement. A number of
possibilities must be considered when a patient does not improve

Fig. 449.5 Chest radiograph of large right-­sided pleural effusion
complicating community-­
acquired pneumonia. (From de Benedictis
FM, Kerem E, Chang AB, et al. Complicated pneumonia in children.
Lancet. 2010;396:786–798, Fig. 1, p. 789.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2648 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
assays, detect pathogens and can often determine the bacterial etiology
of the effusion if the culture is negative, particularly if the pleural fluid
sample was obtained after initiation of antibiotics. A pleural fluid WBC
count with differential may be helpful if there is suspicion for pulmonary tuberculosis or a noninfectious etiology for the pleural effusion,
such as malignancy.

Small (<1 cm on lateral decubitus radiograph), free-­flowing parapneumonic effusions often do not require drainage but respond to
appropriate antibiotic therapy. Larger effusions should typically be
drained, particularly if the effusion is purulent or associated with respiratory distress. Chest ultrasound, or alternatively CT, may be helpful in
determining whether loculations are present. The mainstays of therapy
include antibiotic therapy and drainage by tube thoracostomy with the
instillation of fibrinolytic agents (tissue plasminogen activator). Video-­
assisted thoracoscopy is a less often employed alternative that enables
debridement or lysis of adhesions and drainage of loculated areas of
pus. Early diagnosis and intervention, particularly with fibrinolysis or,
less often, video-­assisted thoracoscopy, may obviate the need for thoracotomy and open debridement.

PREVENTION

A

B

Fig. 449.6 Chest radiographs of lung abscess and necrotizing pneumonia. A, Lung abscess. A single thick walled, irregular cavity containing an air-­fluid level can be seen (arrow). B, Necrotizing pneumonia. A
completely opacified left hemithorax with multiple necrotic areas can
be seen (arrow). (From de Benedictis FM, Kerem E, Chang AB, et al.
Complicated pneumonia in children. Lancet. 2010;396:786–798, Fig.
2, p. 789.)

The introduction of PCVs resulted in a substantial reduction in the incidence of pneumonia hospitalizations among children. The annual rate of
all-­cause pneumonia hospitalization among children younger than 2 years
of age in the United States was 12.5 per 1,000 children during the period
from 1997 to 1999. In 2000, seven-­valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV7) was licensed and recommended. In 2006, the pneumonia
hospitalization rate in this age-­group was 8.1 per 1,000 children, a 35%
decrease from the prevaccine rate. In 2010, 13-­valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV13) was licensed in the United States; data indicate
that introduction of this vaccine resulted in a 16–27% further reduction in
pneumonia hospitalizations among children relative to the post-­PCV7 era.
Influenza vaccine may also prevent pneumonia hospitalizations
among children and should be administered to all children >6 months
of age. For infants <6 months of age, household contacts and other
primary caregivers should receive the influenza vaccine. Maintaining high rates of vaccination for H. influenzae type b, pertussis, and
measles remains important for the prevention of pneumonia from
these causes. Several RSV vaccines are currently under development;
introduction of an effective vaccine against RSV would be anticipated
to substantially reduce pneumonia incidence among children, particularly young infants. Several vaccines that are highly effective in preventing COVID-­19 have received Emergency Use Authorization by
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for use in children 6 months
of age or older (see Chapter 449.1); such vaccines are often updated
to cover emergence of new variants.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

449.1 COVID-­19

A

Matthew S. Kelly and Thomas J. Sandora

B
Fig. 449.7 Chest CT in complicated community-­acquired pneumo-

nia. A, Lung abscess. A large cavity containing an air-­fluid level can be
seen. B, Necrotizing pneumonia with cavitation. (From de Benedictis
FM, Kerem E, Chang AB, et al. Complicated pneumonia in children.
Lancet. 2010;396:786–798, Fig. 4, p. 790.)

See also Chapter 311.
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-­CoV-­2),
the etiologic agent of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-­19), has created a global pandemic. As of July 2023, SARS-­CoV-­2 caused more
than 767 million cases and 6.9 million deaths worldwide. SARS-­CoV-­2
is spread primarily through person-­to-­person respiratory transmission; viral particles in respiratory secretions that are released when an
infected individual coughs, sneezes, or talks can infect another person when inhaled or through contact with mucous membranes. Direct
person-­to-­person contact and fomites are believed to play minor roles
in SARS-­CoV-­2 transmission. The incubation period for the virus can
be up to 14 days after exposure, with most cases occurring within 4-­5
days. Public health measures such as face masks, physical distancing,
stay-­at-­home orders, and restrictions on public gatherings are highly
effective in interrupting SARS-­CoV-­2 transmission (see Chapter 214).
Several vaccines have been developed that are effective in preventing SARS-­CoV-­2 infection and severe COVID-19. SARS-­CoV-­2 has
undergone substantial genetic evolution since it was first identified;
several viral variants have emerged that are associated with different
clinical symptoms along with increased transmissibility and reduced
vaccine effectiveness.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 449 u Community-­Acquired Pneumonia 2649
Table 449.6  Features Differentiating Exudative from Transudative Pleural Effusion
FEATURE

TRANSUDATE

EXUDATE

Appearance

Serous

Cloudy

Leukocyte count

<10,000/mm3

>50,000/mm3

pH

>7.2

<7.2

Protein

<3.0 g/dL

>3.0 g/dL

Ratio of pleural fluid protein to serum

<0.5

>0.5

LDH

<200 IU/L

>200 IU/L

Ratio of pleural fluid LDH to serum

<0.6

>0.6

Glucose

≥60 mg/dL

<60 mg/dL

LDH, Lactate dehydrogenase.
From Septimus EJ. Pleural effusion and empyema. In: Bennett JE, Blaser MJ, Dolin R, et al. eds. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett’s Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, 8th
ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2015: Table 70-­1, p. 851.

Some data suggest that children and adolescents may be less susceptible to SARS-­C oV-­2 infection than adults. In a meta-­analysis
that included data from 18 contact-­tracing studies, children and
adolescents less than 20 years of age had a 44% lower odds of being
an infected contact compared to adults 20 years of age or older.
However, widespread transmission of SARS-­C oV-­2 has occurred
among children in schools and other congregate childcare settings,
typically when face masks and other mitigation measures have not
been in place.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

In children, COVID-­19 is generally a mild illness, characterized
most frequently by low-­grade fever (30–50%) and cough (30–50%).
Other commonly reported symptoms include nasal congestion or
rhinorrhea, myalgias, and pharyngitis. Older children and adolescents often report headache, loss of smell (anosmia), or loss of
taste (dysgeusia). Gastrointestinal symptoms such as abdominal
pain, diarrhea, and vomiting occur less frequently but may be the
presenting complaints in some children. Skin findings occur infrequently with SARS-­C oV-­2 infection, although maculopapular rash,
urticarial lesions, and reddish-­purple nodules on the toes (sometimes referred to as “COVID toes”) have been described. Tachypnea
and signs of increased work of breathing should raise suspicion
for pneumonia, the most common serious clinical manifestation
of COVID-­19. Severe neurologic symptoms such as seizures and
encephalopathy have been reported among children hospitalized
for severe COVID-­19. There are no signs or symptoms that can reliably distinguish COVID-­19 from other illnesses caused by respiratory
viruses or bacteria. Up to 20–30% of children and adolescents with
COVID-­19 have asymptomatic infections; these individuals can
still effectively transmit the virus to others.
Children and adolescents with SARS-­C oV-­2 infection are at a
lower risk of severe COVID-­19 than adults. Despite accounting for
10–20% of SARS-­C oV-­2 infections in the United States as of August
2021, children and adolescents represented less than 3% of hospitalizations and less than 0.5% of deaths from COVID-­19. Children
with underlying medical conditions are at higher risk of developing severe COVID-­19. Data on risks associated with specific conditions in children are currently lacking, but the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention suggests that children with obesity, medical
complexity, neurodevelopmental disorders, congenital heart disease, asthma or chronic lung disease, diabetes, or sickle cell disease
may be at higher risk of progression to severe illness (Table 449.7).
Children are also at higher risk of multisystem inflammatory
syndrome in children (MIS-­C; see Chapter 207), a postinfectious
inflammatory condition that typically occurs in the 4-­6 weeks after
SARS-­C oV-­2 infection.

DIAGNOSIS

The IDSA recommends that children who have symptoms compatible
with COVID-­19, or asymptomatic individuals with known or suspected exposure to an individual diagnosed with COVID-­19, be tested
for SARS-­CoV-­2 using a nucleic acid amplification test (NAAT). In
symptomatic individuals with a low clinical suspicion of COVID-­19,
a single NAAT test is considered sufficient, and testing should not be
repeated if the result is negative. If the clinical suspicion for COVID­19 is considered intermediate or high but the initial test is negative, a
repeat test should be performed 24-­48 hours after initial testing. When
available, standard laboratory-­based NAATs or rapid reverse transcriptase (RT)-­PCR tests are recommended over rapid isothermal NAATs
because of higher sensitivity (98% for both standard laboratory-­based
NAATs and rapid RT-­
PCR vs 81% for rapid isothermal NAATs),
despite comparable specificity. Rapid antigen tests are widely available
and have high specificity but low to modest sensitivity compared with
NAAT. Antigen test sensitivity is highly dependent on viral load, and
therefore is influenced by the presence of symptoms and the timing of
the test. For these reasons, IDSA does not recommend antigen tests as
the preferred testing strategy, but rather maintains that antigen testing
can identify some individuals infected with SARS-­CoV-­2 when molecular testing is not available.
A variety of specimen types can be tested for the presence of SARS-­
CoV-­2, including nasopharyngeal (NP) swab, NP wash/aspirate, nasal
wash/aspirate, oropharyngeal (OP) swab, nasal mid-­turbinate (MT)
swab, anterior nares (AN) swab, or saliva. Assay performance is highly
dependent on collection procedure. IDSA recommends collecting an
NP swab, MT swab, AN swab, saliva, or a combined AN/OP swab
rather than an OP swab alone for symptomatic individuals suspected
of having COVID-­19. For hospitalized patients with suspected pneumonia and clinical suspicion for COVID-­19, IDSA suggests a strategy
of initially obtaining an upper respiratory specimen (e.g., NP swab)
rather than a lower respiratory sample. However, if the initial specimen
is negative and suspicion for disease remains high, a lower respiratory
specimen (e.g., sputum, bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, or tracheal aspirate) should be collected rather than repeating the test from an upper
respiratory sample.
Common laboratory abnormalities among children hospitalized
for severe COVID-­
19 include lymphopenia, elevated aminotransaminases, and elevated markers of inflammation (e.g., C-­reactive protein). Although imaging findings are neither sensitive nor specific for
COVID-­19, the most common abnormalities on chest radiography
in children are perihilar bronchial wall thickening and/or air space
consolidation. CT scans may show ground-­glass opacities (mainly in
the lower lobes) and/or air space consolidation. Chest radiography
should be used as the first imaging modality to assess for pneumonia
in symptomatic children, whereas CT should be reserved for assessing

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2650 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Table 449.7  Framework for Assessing the Risk of Progression to Severe COVID-­19 Based on Patient Conditions and
COVID-­19 Vaccination Status
RISK LEVEL BY VACCINATION STATUSa

CONDITIONS
UNVACCINATED

PRIMARY SERIES

STRONG OR CONSISTENT ASSOCIATION WITH PROGRESSION TO SEVERE COVID-­19
• Moderately or severely
High
High
immunocompromised
• Obesity (BMI ≥95th percentile
for age), especially severe
obesity (BMI ≥120% of 95th
percentile for age)b
• Medical complexity with
dependence on respiratory
technologyc
• Severe neurologic, genetic,
metabolic, or other disability
that results in impaired airway
clearance or limitations in self-­
care or activities of daily living
• Severe asthma or other severe
chronic lung disease requiring
≥2 inhaled or ≥1 systemic
medications daily
• Severe congenital or acquired
cardiac disease
• Multiple moderate to severe
chronic diseases

High

Intermediate

MODERATE OR INCONSISTENT ASSOCIATION WITH PROGRESSION TO SEVERE COVID-­19
• Age <1 yr
Intermediate
Intermediate
• Prematurity in children age
≤2 yr
• Sickle cell disease
• Diabetes mellitus (poorly
controlled)
• Nonsevere cardiac, neurologic,
or metabolic diseased
WEAK OR UNKNOWN ASSOCIATION WITH PROGRESSION TO SEVERE COVID-­19
• Mild asthma
Low
Low
• Overweight
• Diabetes mellitus (well
controlled)

UP TO DATE
High
Intermediate

Intermediate

Low

aUnvaccinated = individuals who are not eligible for COVID-­19 vaccination or are <2 wk from the final dose of the primary series. Vaccinated with primary series = individuals who

completed the primary series of two or three doses (the current CDC term is fully vaccinated) and are >2 wk after the final dose of the primary series but have not received a
booster if they are eligible for a booster. Vaccinated and up to date = individuals who received the recommended primary series and booster doses.
bThe degree of risk conferred by obesity in younger children is less clear than it is in older adolescents.
cThis includes patients with a tracheostomy and those who require NIV.
dThe data for this group are particularly limited.
BMI, Body mass index; CDC, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; NIV, noninvasive ventilation; the Panel, the COVID-­19 Treatment Guidelines Panel
From NIH COVID-­19 Treatment Guidelines (Table 3b). https://www.covid19treatmentguidelines.nih.gov/tables/assessing-­risk/

for complications, particularly in children with coexisting medical
conditions.

TREATMENT

For ambulatory patients with mild to moderate COVID-­19 at high
risk for progression to severe disease (e.g., obesity or overweight,
immunosuppression, medical-­
related technologic dependence, or
a chronic medical condition such as kidney disease, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, sickle cell disease, or neurodevelopmental disorders), current treatment options include nirmatrelvir/ritonavir
(≥12 years of age) or a 3-day course of remdesivir. Nirmatrelvir is
an inhibitor of the main protease of SARS-CoV-2; coadministration
with ritonavir results in higher concentrations and a longer half-life.
Remdesivir is an antiviral agent that works by interfering with viral
RNA transcription (see Table 449.8). As of July 2023, no monoclonal
antibodies have been authorized for COVID-19 treatment or prophylaxis because of reduced susceptibility of circulating Omicron subvariants to these products.

For hospitalized children with severe illness (SpO2 ≤94% on room
air, including patients on supplemental oxygen) or critical illness
(mechanical ventilation or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
[ECMO]), dexamethasone treatment is recommended (Table 449.8).
Inflammatory injury from the host immune response is thought to play
a role in patients with severe or critical illness.
The IDSA recommends remdesivir for hospitalized patients with
SpO2 ≤94% on room air, including patients on supplemental oxygen,
but suggests against routine administration to patients on mechanical ventilation and/or ECMO. A panel of pediatric infectious diseases
physicians and pharmacists recommended that remdesivir could be
considered on a case-­by-­case basis for children with severe or critical
COVID-­19. Children receiving remdesivir should have daily measurements of creatinine and transaminases.
Tocilizumab is a monoclonal anti–interleukin (IL)-­
6-­
receptor
blocking antibody. The IDSA suggests tocilizumab in addition to
standard of care for hospitalized adults with progressive severe
or critical COVID-­
19 who have elevated markers of systemic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 450 u E-­Cigarette or Vaping Product Use–Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)
inflammation. Baricitinib is a selective Janus kinase 1 and 2 inhibitor
that has been studied as a substitute for dexamethasone in patients
who cannot receive corticosteroids because of a contraindication (see
Table 449.8).

PREVENTION

Vaccination is the most effective intervention to prevent COVID-­19
infection and is highly protective against severe illness, hospitalization,
and death. COVID-­19 vaccination is available for use in children ≥6
months of age. Vaccine modifications are necessary when new variants
emerge.
Because the emergence of viral variants with the potential to escape
vaccine-­induced immunity remains a threat, nonpharmaceutical

2651

interventions to mitigate transmission of SARS-­C oV-­2 still play an
important role in the public health response. Face mask use, eye
protection, and physical distancing have all been demonstrated
to reduce the risk of infection. A cross-­sectional study conducted
in the United States found an increase in reported mask-­wearing
was associated with an increased odds of transmission control. A
modeling study by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention demonstrated that high vaccination coverage and compliance with nonpharmaceutical interventions are essential to control
COVID-­19.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Table 449.8  Therapeutic Management of Hospitalized Children with COVID-­19
DISEASE SEVERITY

PANEL’S RECOMMENDATIONS

Hospitalized for COVID-­19

For children age ≥12 yr admitted for COVID-­19, use prophylactic anticoagulation unless contraindicated.

Does Not Require Supplemental
Oxygen

For children admitted for COVID-­19 who are at the highest risk of progression to severe COVID-­19,a consider
using remdesivirb for children age 12-­17 yr. There is insufficient evidence for using remdesivir in children age
28 days to <12 yr.
For children admitted for reasons other than COVID-­19 who have mild to moderate COVID-­19 and are at the
highest risk of progression, see footnote a.

Requires Conventional Oxygen

Use one of the following options:
• Remdesivirb
• Dexamethasone plus remdesivirb for children with increasing oxygen needs, particularly adolescents

Requires Oxygen Through High-­
Flow Device or NIVd

Use one of the following options:
• Dexamethasone
• Dexamethasone plus remdesivirb
For children who do not have rapid (e.g., within 24 hr) improvement in oxygenation after initiation of
dexamethasone, baricitinibe or tocilizumab
can be considered for children aged
12-­17 yr (BIII) and for children age
2-­11 yr, respectively.

Requires MV or ECMOf

Dexamethasonef
For children who do not have rapid (e.g., within 24 hr) improvement in oxygenation after initiation of
dexamethasone, baricitinibe or tocilizumab may be considered for children age 12-­17 yr and for children age
2-­11 yr, respectively.

a For example, for children who are severely immunocompromised regardless of COVID-­19 vaccination status and those who are unvaccinated and have additional risk factors for

progression.
bThe clinical benefit of remdesivir is greatest if it is initiated within 10 days of symptom onset. Remdesivir should be given for 5 days or until hospital discharge, whichever comes first.
cConventional oxygen refers to oxygen supplementation that is not high-­flow oxygen, NIV, MV, or ECMO.
dPatients who are receiving NIV or MV at baseline and require a substantial increase in baseline support should be treated per the recommendations for patients requiring new NIV

or MV.
eTofacitinib is an alternative if baricitinib is not available.
fFor children who started receiving remdesivir before admission to the ICU, remdesivir should be continued to complete the treatment course.

ECMO, Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation; ICU, intensive care unit; MV, mechanical ventilation; NIV, noninvasive ventilation.
From NIH COVID-­19 Treatment Guidelines (Table 3c). https://www.covid19treatmentguidelines.nih.gov/management/clinical-­management-­of-­children/hospitalized-­children-­
therapeutic-­management/

Chapter 450

E-­Cigarette or Vaping
Product Use–Associated
Lung Injury (EVALI)
Lynn A. D’Andrea and Louella B. Amos
Beginning in 2019, there was a nationwide outbreak of patients who presented with acute lung injury believed to be related to vaping, designated
as E-­cigarette or vaping product use–associated lung injury (EVALI).

EPIDEMIOLOGY

As of January 2020, there were >2,500 hospitalized EVALI patients
reported by all 50 states (approximately two thirds of patients were male).
The median patient age was 21 years (range 13-­85 years). The Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) stopped collecting data on
EVALI cases in early 2020 because of the COVID-­19 pandemic; although
the number of cases may have decreased, EVALI must be considered in
patients with features associated with the condition (Fig. 450.1).
Among hospitalized patients with information on substances used,
∼90% reported using any tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)-­containing product and ∼70% reported using any nicotine-­containing product; 40–60%
reported both THC and nicotine use. The THC products were often flavored, prefilled THC cartridges obtained from black market sources.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

Carrier solvents or humectants such as propylene glycol and glycerin, as well as nicotine vapor itself, can cause airway inflammation

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2652 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Patient with fever, cough, sore throat, shortness of
breath, muscle aches, fatigue, nausea, or vomiting

Has patient used
e-cigarette, or vaping, products

NO

Evaluate and manage
as clinically indicated

YES

Initial clinical assessment
• Vital signs, pulse oximetry
• Focused history and physical exam
• Rule out other possible etiologies
(e.g., influenza,
community-acquired pneumonia)

Determine if patient is candidate for outpatient EVALI
management?
• O2 saturation ≥95% while breathing room air
• No respiratory distress
• No comorbidities that could 1) compromise cardiopulmonary
reserve, 2) increase risk for severe disease, or 3) affect ability to
discontinue e-cigarette, or vaping, product use or adhere to
outpatient treatment plan
• Reliable access to care/strong social support systems

NO

Inpatient clinical evaluation
• Urine toxicology, influenza, and other infectious disease testing
as indicated by clinical findings
• CXR, and consider CT scan even if CXR is normal
• Consider pulmonary, critical care, medical toxicology, infectious
diseases, other consultations
• Consider psychiatry consultation
• Bronchoalveolar lavage or lung biopsy, if clinically indicated,
in consultation with pulmonary specialists
Inpatient clinical management
• Discontinue e-cigarette, or vaping, products use
• Offer cessation services to all patients; facilitate connection
• Consider empiric antimicrobial use according to guidelines
• Consider corticosteroids; use with caution
• Administer routine annual (inactivated or recombinant) influenza
vaccination, if not previously received
Discharge planning
• Screen for mental health, substance use disorders, and social care
needs before discharge
• Ensure clinical stability for 24–48 hours before discharge
• Ensure access to social/mental health/substance use disorder services
• Conduct medication reconciliation and patient counseling by
inpatient pharmacist before discharge
• Ensure initial outpatient follow-up appointment, optimally
within 48 hours of discharge
• Follow-up with pulmonologist within 2–4 weeks

YES

Outpatient clinical evaluation
• Consider CXR if patient has chest pain, shortness of breath or if
indicated by other clinical findings
• Consider influenza testing
Management of possible EVALI
• Advise discontinuation of all e-cigarette, or vaping, products
• Consider corticosteroid use with caution in outpatients because of
risk for worsening of respiratory infections
Management of possible EVALI with a pulmonary infection,
per established guidelines
• Early initiation of antivirals for possible influenza
• Appropriate antibiotics for community-acquired pneumonia
Additional management
• Offer cessation services to all patients; facilitate connection
• Administer routine annual (inactivated or recombinant) influenza
vaccination, if not previously received
• Ensure follow-up within 24–48 hours

Fig. 450.1 Updated algorithm for management of patients with suspected e-­cigarette, or vaping, product use–associated lung injury (EVALI),

December 2019. CT, Computed tomography; CXR, chest x-­ray.* Influenza vaccination recommendations: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/68/r
r/rr6803a1.htm?s_cid=rr6803a1_w. (From Evans ME, Twentyman E, Click ES, et al. Update: interim guidance for health care professionals evaluating
and caring for patients with suspected E-­cigarette, or vaping, product use-­associated lung injury and for reducing the risk of rehospitalization and
death following hospital discharge – United States, December 2019. MMWR. 2020;68:1189-­1194, Fig. p. 1191.)

that can induce airway remodeling and disrupt alveolar macrophage
function. Flavoring additives generate by-­products that directly
injure airway epithelium. Vitamin E acetate that was used as a diluent in the THC-­containing products disrupts alveolar macrophage

function and surfactant homeostasis. EVALI is best considered an
airway-­centered chemical pneumonitis rather than an exogenous
lipoid pneumonia. Thermal injury can also be a factor in acute lung
injury.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 450 u E-­Cigarette or Vaping Product Use–Associated Lung Injury (EVALI)

B

A

C

2653

D

Fig. 450.2 E-­cigarette, or vaping, product use–associated lung injury in a 16-yr-­old male who presented with chest pain, shortness of breath,

and cough for 1 month. A, Posteroanterior (PA) radiograph of the chest demonstrates faint nodular opacities in both lungs (arrows) with diffusely
increased interstitial markings. B, PA radiograph of the chest obtained 2 days later demonstrates progression of the nodular opacities into confluent opacities in the left mid-­lung (arrowheads). Axial (C) and coronal (D) chest CT images in lung windows (slice thickness 0.63 mm, kVp 100, mAs
61-­106) obtained 4 days after the initial chest radiograph demonstrate centrilobular ground-­glass nodules in both lungs and confluent ground-­glass
opacities in the left lower lobe (arrowheads) with subpleural sparing (black arrows) and interstitial septal thickening (white arrows). (From Thakrar PD,
Boyd KP, Swanson CP, et al. E-­cigarette, or vaping, product use-­associated lung injury in adolescents: a review of imaging features. Pediatr Radiol.
2020;50:338–344, Fig. 1, p. 340.)

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Acutely, patients often present with a combination of respiratory distress, gastrointestinal (GI), and constitutional symptoms. Respiratory
symptoms include shortness of breath, cough, hemoptysis, and chest or
pleuritic pain. On physical examination, patients have tachypnea with
hypoxemia and tachycardia. GI symptoms include nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, and abdominal pain.
Subacute constitutional and GI symptoms can occur day to weeks
before the acute presentation. Constitutional symptoms include weight
loss, fatigue, fever, myalgias, and chills.

DIAGNOSIS

There is no specific test for lung injury associated with EVALI; rather,
evaluation should primarily focus on excluding infectious causes. It is
important to evaluate for other possible causes (rheumatologic, neoplastic, cardiac) as appropriate (see Fig. 450.1).

Imaging

Chest radiographic evaluation is key in the diagnosis of EVALI,
although findings are generally nonspecific (Fig. 450.2). Chest CT
imaging is most consistent with acute lung injury from toxic inhalation, with centrilobular ground-­glass opacities with subpleural sparing. The most common radiologic findings reported on chest x-­ray are
bilateral infiltrates, and ground-­glass opacities predominantly at the
bases. The most common radiologic findings reported on chest CT
are bilateral infiltrates, bilateral ground-­glass opacities, and subpleural
sparing, followed by small pleural effusions and centrilobular nodularity. Pneumothorax and pneumomediastinum are less common.

Laboratory

Laboratory evaluation is suggestive of inflammation with neutrophilic
leukocytosis, elevated C-­reactive protein (CRP), and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR). Elevated transaminases (AST/ALT) and lactate
dehydrogenase (LDH) have been reported in some patients. Urine
drug screening is useful to confirm the presence of THC or nicotine.

Other Testing
Pulmonary Function Testing

The acute effects of EVALI on lung function are variable. In a case series of
adolescents hospitalized with EVALI, predischarge testing demonstrated
that >50% had an abnormality on spirometry, with a restrictive pattern
occurring twice as often as obstruction; ∼60% of patients had a decreased
diffusion capacity, and ∼50% had an abnormal 6-­minute walk test. Patients
continued to have abnormal testing at follow-­up, including abnormal spirometry (both obstructive and restrictive patterns), decreased diffusion
capacity, and rarely, 6-­minute walk test. One follow-­up study also identified abnormal 6-­minute walk tests as a marker of lung injury and submaximal exercise capacity. However, another follow-­up study showed ∼85% of
previously hospitalized pediatric patients had normal spirometry.

Bronchoscopy

Bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage is used to evaluate for
possible infectious processes. Gross pathologic abnormalities can
include mucosal hypervascularity, diffuse mucosal erythema, punctate mucosal hemorrhage, and frank airway bleeding consistent with
a pulmonary hemorrhage. Cytopathologic findings commonly include
lipid-­laden macrophages on oil-­red-­O staining and elevated neutrophil counts more than 10% of total cell differential. Hemosiderin-­laden
macrophages are absent. Bacterial cultures are negative.
Caution is required when performing bronchoscopy with lavage, as it
may worsen the patient’s respiratory status. Many patients develop significant airway reactivity (bronchospasm) that requires intraprocedure
management.

TREATMENT

Treatment focuses on supportive care. Supplemental oxygen may be
required to maintain oxygen saturations in an appropriate range. Bronchodilators should be considered if there is an element of bronchospasm.
Some patients have been treated with systemic corticosteroids with good
improvement of their symptoms, but this should be considered on a case-­
by-­case basis (see Fig. 450.1). Antibiotics should only be used for secondary infection.
Less often, patients have required more invasive respiratory support,
including high-­flow nasal cannula, mechanical ventilation, and rarely,
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO). There are rare case
reports of patients requiring lung transplantation.
Follow-­up should include recommendations regarding vaping cessation; some patients will require assistance with nicotine replacement
therapy (see Chapter 157.2). Many adolescents require support from a
mental health provider (see Fig. 450.1).

Advocacy and Prevention

In December 2019, the federal government passed legislation raising the
age for purchasing tobacco products, including e-­cigarettes, from 18 to 21
years. The FDA set the deadline for e-­cigarette manufacturers to submit
their marketing applications or risk having their products taken off the
market. As of September 2021, the FDA ordered over 90% of e-­cigarette
products off the market; however, many products appealing to youth,
including disposable flavored e-­cigarettes, remain available, and the black
market continues to thrive.
The initial EVALI outbreak primarily affected young adults, was driven
by the use of THC-­containing products from black market sources, and
was strongly linked to vitamin E acetate. However, 15–20% of reported
EVALI cases describe the exclusive use of nicotine-­containing products. It
is recommended that the term EVALI refer to all e-cigarette-related lung
injuries, including other chronic respiratory symptoms of vaping (e.g.,
chronic wheeze, recurrent bronchitis, asthma exacerbations, emphysema).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2654 Part XVII u The Respiratory System

Chapter 451

Pleurisy, Pleural Effusions,
and Empyema
Aarthi P. Vemana and Suraiya K. Haider
Pleurisy is the inflammation of the pleura; it may be accompanied by
an effusion. The most common cause of pleural effusion in children is
bacterial pneumonia (see Chapter 449); other common causes include
heart failure (see Chapter 491), rheumatologic and immune causes,
and metastatic or intrathoracic malignancy. A variety of other diseases
account for the remaining cases, including tuberculosis (see Chapter
261), lupus erythematosus (see Chapter 199), aspiration pneumonitis
(see Chapter 446), uremia, pancreatitis, subdiaphragmatic abscess, and
rheumatoid arthritis.
Inflammatory processes in the pleura are usually divided into three
types: dry pleurisy, serofibrinous or serosanguineous, and purulent
pleurisy or empyema.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Pleurisy pain must be distinguished from other diseases, such as epidemic pleurodynia, trauma to the rib cage (rib fracture), lesions of the
dorsal root ganglia, tumors of the spinal cord, herpes zoster, gallbladder
disease, and trichinosis. Even if evidence of pleural fluid is not found
on physical or radiographic examination, a CT-­or ultrasound-­guided
pleural tap in suspected cases often results in the recovery of a small
amount of exudate, which, when cultured, may reveal the underlying bacterial cause in patients with an acute pneumonia. Patients with
pleurisy and pneumonia should always be screened for tuberculosis.

TREATMENT

Therapy should be aimed at the underlying disease. When pneumonia
is present, neither immobilization of the chest with adhesive plaster
nor therapy with drugs capable of suppressing the cough reflex is indicated. If pneumonia is not present or is under good therapeutic control,
strapping of the chest to restrict expansion may afford relief from pain.
Analgesia with nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents may be helpful.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

451.2 Serofibrinous or Serosanguineous
Pleurisy with Pleural Effusion
Aarthi P. Vemana and Suraiya K. Haider

451.1 Dry Pleurisy
Aarthi P. Vemana and Suraiya K. Haider
Dry pleurisy, formerly called plastic pleurisy, may be associated with
acute bacterial or viral pulmonary infections or may develop during
the course of an acute upper respiratory tract illness. The condition
is also associated with tuberculosis and autoimmune and systemic
inflammatory diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus.

PATHOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS

The process is usually limited to the visceral pleura, with small
amounts of yellow serous fluid and adhesions between the pleural
surfaces. In tuberculosis, pleurisy can be caused by a severe delayed-­
type hypersensitivity reaction to Mycobacterium tuberculosis; the
adhesions develop rapidly, and the pleura are often thickened.
Occasionally, fibrin deposition and adhesions are severe enough to
produce a fibrothorax that markedly inhibits the excursions of the
lung.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The primary disease often overshadows signs and symptoms of pleurisy. Pain, the principal symptom, is exaggerated by deep breathing,
coughing, and straining. Occasionally, pleural pain is described as a
dull ache, which is less likely to vary with breathing. The pain is often
localized over the chest wall and is referred to the shoulder or the back.
Pain with breathing is responsible for grunting and guarding of respirations, and the child often lies on the affected side in an attempt to
decrease respiratory excursions. Early in the illness, a leathery, rough,
inspiratory, and expiratory friction rub may be audible, but it usually
disappears rapidly. If the layer of exudate is thick, increased dullness to
percussion and decreased breath sounds may be heard. Pleurisy may
be asymptomatic. Chronic pleurisy is occasionally encountered with
conditions such as atelectasis, pulmonary abscess, connective tissue
diseases, and tuberculosis.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Dry pleurisy may be detected on radiographs as a diffuse haziness at
the pleural surface or a dense, sharply demarcated shadow (Figs. 451.1
and 451.2). The latter finding may be indistinguishable from small
amounts of pleural exudate. Chest radiographic findings may be normal, but ultrasonography or CT findings will be positive.

Serofibrinous pleurisy is defined by a fibrinous exudate on the pleural
surface and an exudative effusion of serous fluid into the pleural cavity.
In general, it is associated with infections of the lung or with inflammatory conditions of the abdomen or mediastinum; occasionally, it is
found with connective tissue diseases such as lupus erythematosus,
periarteritis, and rheumatoid arthritis, and it may be seen with primary
or metastatic neoplasms of the lung, pleura, or mediastinum. Tumors
are commonly associated with a hemorrhagic fluid. Infectious etiologies include Streptococcus pneumonia, Staphylococcus aureus including
methicillin-­resistant S. aureus (MRSA), group A streptococcus, and
viral infections, including COVID-­19 (although pleural disease is seen
in approximately 10%).

PATHOGENESIS

Pleural fluid originates from the capillaries of the parietal pleura and is
absorbed from the pleural space via pleural stomas and the lymphatics of the parietal pleura. The rate of fluid formation is dictated by the
Starling law, by which fluid movement is determined by the balance
of hydrostatic and osmotic pressures in the pleural space and pulmonary capillary bed and the permeability of the pleural membrane.
Normally, approximately 10 mL of fluid is present in the pleural space,
but if formation exceeds clearance, fluid accumulates. Pleural inflammation increases the permeability of the plural surface, with increased
proteinaceous fluid formation; there may also be some obstruction to
lymphatic absorption.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Because serofibrinous pleurisy is often preceded by the dry type, early
signs and symptoms may be those of dry pleurisy. As fluid accumulates,
pleuritic pain may disappear. The patient may become asymptomatic if
the effusion remains small, or there may be only signs and symptoms
of the underlying disease. Large fluid collections can produce cough,
dyspnea, retractions, tachypnea, orthopnea, or cyanosis. In children
with bacterial pneumonia, pleural effusion should be suspected when
symptoms do not improve after 48 hours of appropriate therapy.
Physical findings depend on the amount of effusion. Dullness to
flatness may be found on percussion. Breath sounds are decreased or
absent, and there is a diminution in tactile fremitus, a shift of the mediastinum away from the affected side, and, occasionally, fullness of the
intercostal spaces. If the fluid is not loculated, these signs may shift with
changes in position. If extensive pneumonia is present, crackles and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 451 u Pleurisy, Pleural Effusions, and Empyema

Fig. 451.1 A, Right pleural effusion
(asterisk) caused by lupus erythematosus in a 12-­yr-­old child. Note compressed middle and lower lobes of
the right lung (arrows). B, The effusion
was evacuated, and the right lung was
completely reexpanded after insertion
of the pigtail chest tube (arrow).

*
A

2655

B

*
*
*

A

B

C

D

Fig. 451.2 Left pleural effusion in a teenager with AIDS and Mycobacterium avium-­intracellulare infection. The pleural effusion (asterisk) is clearly
seen on the chest radiograph (A), CT scan (B), and ultrasonogram (C) of the left chest. Arrows point to the compressed and atelectatic left lung. D,
A pigtail chest tube (arrowhead) was inserted, resulting in reexpansion of the left lung.

rhonchi may also be audible. Friction rubs are usually detected only
during the early or late plastic stage. In infants, physical signs are less
definite, and bronchial breathing may be heard instead of decreased
breath sounds.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Radiographic examination shows a homogeneous density obscuring
the normal markings of the underlying lung, obliterating the costophrenic or cardiophrenic angles. Radiographs should be performed
with the patient both supine and upright to demonstrate a shift of the
effusion with a change in position; the decubitus position may be helpful. Especially with large effusions, ultrasonography can identify the
presence of septations, the lack of free movement of the fluid with gravity, and guide placement of a chest tube or site of thoracentesis loculated. Examination of the fluid is essential to differentiate exudates from
transudates and to determine the type of exudate (see Table 449.6).
Depending on the clinical scenario, pleural fluid is sent for culture for
bacterial, fungal, and mycobacterial cultures; microbial analysis (quantitative polymerase chain reaction [qPCR], rapid antigen testing, and
immunochromatography); Gram staining; and chemical evaluation of
content, including protein, lactic dehydrogenase and glucose, amylase,
specific gravity, total cell count and differential, cytologic examination
for malignancy, and pH. Complete blood count and serum chemistry
analysis should be obtained; hypoalbuminemia is often present. Exudates usually have at least one of the following features: protein level
>3.0 g/dL, with pleural fluid:serum protein ratio >0.5; pleural fluid lactic dehydrogenase values >200 IU/L; or fluid:serum lactic dehydrogenase ratio >0.6. Although systemic acidosis reduces the usefulness of
pleural fluid pH measurements, pH <7.20 suggests an exudate. Glucose
is usually <60 mg/dL in malignancy, rheumatoid disease, and tuberculosis; the finding of many small lymphocytes and a pH <7.20 suggest tuberculosis. The fluid of serofibrinous pleurisy is clear or slightly
cloudy and contains relatively few leukocytes and, occasionally, some
erythrocytes. Gram staining may occasionally show bacteria; however,
acid-­fast staining rarely demonstrates tubercle bacilli. Cytologic examination may reveal malignant cells, if present.

DIAGNOSIS AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Unless the patient has a classic-­appearing lobar pneumonia and the
effusion is small, thoracentesis should be performed when pleural fluid
is present or is suggested. Thoracentesis can differentiate serofibrinous pleurisy, empyema, hydrothorax, hemothorax, and chylothorax.
Exudates are usually associated with an infectious process. In hydrothorax, the fluid has a specific gravity <1.015, and evaluation reveals
only a few mesothelial cells rather than leukocytes. Chylothorax and
hemothorax usually have fluid with a distinctive appearance, but differentiating serofibrinous from purulent pleurisy is impossible without
microscopic examination of the fluid. Serofibrinous fluid may rapidly
become purulent.

COMPLICATIONS

Unless the fluid becomes purulent, it usually disappears relatively rapidly, particularly with appropriate treatment of bacterial pneumonia.
It persists somewhat longer if a result of tuberculosis or a connective
tissue disease and may recur or remain for a long time if caused by
a neoplasm. When the effusion is absorbed, adhesions often develop
between the two layers of the pleura, but usually little or no functional
impairment results. Pleural thickening may develop and is occasionally mistaken for small quantities of fluid or for persistent pulmonary
infiltrates. Pleural thickening may persist for months, but the process
usually disappears, leaving no residua.

TREATMENT

Treatment of the underlying pneumonia with antibiotics should be
continued. If the effusion is less than 10 mm in size on a chest x-­ray,
there is no need for drainage. Drainage of large effusions can shorten
the course of treatment and provide symptomatic relief. When a diagnostic thoracentesis is performed, as much fluid as possible should be
removed for therapeutic purposes. Rapid removal of ≥1 L of pleural
fluid may be associated with the development of reexpansion pulmonary edema. If sufficient fluid reaccumulates to cause tachypnea,
chest tube drainage should be performed. In older children, tube
thoracostomy is considered necessary if the pleural fluid pH is <7.20

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2656 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
or the pleural fluid glucose level is <50 mg/dL. If the fluid is thick,
loculated, or clearly purulent, chest tube drainage with fibrinolytic
therapy or, less often, video-­assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS)
is indicated. Patients with pleural effusions may need analgesia, particularly after thoracentesis or insertion of a chest tube. Those with
acute pneumonia may need supplemental oxygen in addition to specific antibiotic treatment. Monitoring with serial chest x-­ray should
be considered in children who have had complications or needed
fibrinolytic treatment.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

loculations. The maximal amount of fluid obtainable should be withdrawn by thoracentesis and studied (see Chapter 451.2). The effusion is
an empyema if bacteria are present on Gram staining, the pH is <7.20,
and there are >100,000 neutrophils/μL (see Chapter 449). Cultures of
the fluid must always be performed to help identify the causal organism. Using standard culture methods, the organism can be identified
in up to 60% of cases. The yield improves significantly with concomitant use of nucleic acid amplification techniques. Blood cultures may
be positive and have a higher yield than cultures of the pleural fluid.
Laboratory analysis shows leukocytosis and elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate and elevated C-­reactive protein.

COMPLICATIONS

451.3 Empyema
Aarthi P. Vemana and Suraiya K. Haider
Empyema is an accumulation of pus in the pleural space. It is most
often associated with pneumonia (see Chapter 449) caused by gram-­
positive organisms such as S. pneumoniae (see Chapter 228), group A
streptococcus, and S. aureus (see Chapter 227.1). The relative incidence
of Haemophilus influenzae (see Chapter 240) empyema has decreased
since the introduction of the H. influenzae type b vaccination. Gram-­
negative organisms, tuberculosis, fungi, viruses, and malignancy are
less common causes. The disease can also be produced by rupture of
a lung abscess into the pleural space, contamination introduced from
trauma or thoracic surgery, or, rarely, mediastinitis or the extension of
intraabdominal abscesses.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

With staphylococcal infections, bronchopleural fistulas and pyopneumothorax commonly develop. Other local complications include
purulent pericarditis, pulmonary abscesses, peritonitis from extension
through the diaphragm, and osteomyelitis of the ribs. Septic complications such as meningitis, arthritis, and osteomyelitis may also occur.
Septicemia is often encountered in H. influenzae and pneumococcal
infections. The effusion may organize into a thick “peel,” which may
restrict lung expansion and may be associated with persistent fever and
temporary scoliosis.

TREATMENT

The aim of empyema treatment is to sterilize pleural fluid and restore
normal lung function. Treatment includes systemic antibiotics, thoracentesis, chest tube drainage, and use of a fibrinolytic agent; VATS and
open decortication are used if there is poor resolution with the preceding therapies (see Chapter 461).

Empyema is most frequently encountered in infants and preschool
children. Although rates of bacterial pneumonia have decreased, the
incidence of parapneumonic effusions has increased. This may be
related to a shift toward more virulent organisms after the introduction
of the 13-­valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine, with a trend toward
serotypes not covered by the vaccine. Empyema occurs in 5–10% of
children with bacterial pneumonia and in up to 86% of children with
necrotizing pneumonia.

PATHOLOGY

Empyema has three stages: exudative, fibrinopurulent, and organizational. During the exudative stage, fibrinous exudate forms on the
pleural surfaces. In the fibrinopurulent stage, fibrinous septa form,
causing loculation of the fluid and thickening of the parietal pleura.
If the pus is not drained, it may dissect through the pleura into lung
parenchyma, producing bronchopleural fistulas and pyopneumothorax, or into the abdominal cavity. Rarely, the pus dissects through the
chest wall (i.e., empyema necessitatis). During the organizational stage,
there is fibroblast proliferation; pockets of loculated pus may develop
into thick-­walled abscess cavities, or the lung may collapse and become
surrounded by a thick, inelastic envelope (peel).

A

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The initial signs and symptoms are primarily those of bacterial
pneumonia. Children treated with antibiotic agents may have an
interval of a few days between the clinical pneumonia phase and the
evidence of empyema. Most patients are febrile, develop increased
work of breathing or respiratory distress, and often appear more
ill. Physical findings are identical to those described for serofibrinous pleurisy, and the two conditions are differentiated only by
thoracentesis, which should always be performed when empyema
is suspected.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Radiographically, all pleural effusions appear similar, but the absence
of a shift of the fluid with a change of position indicates a loculated
empyema (Figs. 451.3-­451.5 and see Fig. 449.5). Ultrasonography, CT,
and, less frequently, magnetic resonance imaging can all be used to
further define the size of the effusion, identify septations, and assess

*

B
Fig. 451.3 Empyema and pneumonia in a teenager. A, Chest radio-

graph shows opacification of the left thorax. Note shift of mediastinum
and trachea (arrowhead) to the right. B, Thoracic CT scan shows massive left pleural effusion (asterisk). Note the compression and atelectasis
of the left lung (arrows) and shift of the mediastinum to the right.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 451 u Pleurisy, Pleural Effusions, and Empyema

A

*

B
Fig. 451.4 Pneumonia and parapneumonic effusion in a 4-­
yr-­
old

child. A, Chest radiograph shows complete opacification of the right
thorax as a result of a large pleural effusion. Note the shift of the mediastinum and trachea (arrow) to the left. B, Thoracic CT scan shows a
large right pleural effusion (asterisk) surrounding and compressing the
consolidated right lung (arrowhead). Note the shift of the mediastinum
and tracheal carina (arrow) to the left.

A

B

2657

If empyema is diagnosed early, antibiotic treatment plus thoracentesis achieves a complete cure. The selection of antibiotic should be based
on the in vitro sensitivities of the responsible organism. See Chapters
227, 228, and 240 for treatment of infections by Staphylococcus, S.
pneumoniae, and H. influenzae, respectively. Treatment with systemic
antibiotics is usually needed for 2-­4 weeks, with the duration being
guided by individual clinical response to treatment. Instillation of antibiotics into the pleural cavity does not improve results.
After empyema has been confirmed, interventions include closed
chest tube drainage with fibrinolytics, decortication with VATS (video-­
assisted thoracoscopic surgery), and, less often, open thoracotomy.
Multiple aspirations of the pleural cavity should not be attempted.
Closed-­chest tube drainage is controlled by an underwater seal or continuous suction; sometimes more than one tube is required to drain
loculated areas. Closed drainage is usually continued for 5-­7 days.
Chest tubes that are no longer draining are removed.
Instillation of fibrinolytic agents into the pleural cavity via the chest
tube often promotes drainage, decreases the length of time a chest tube
is in place, decreases fever, lessens the need for surgical intervention,
and shortens hospitalization. The optimal fibrinolytic drug and dosages have not been determined. Streptokinase 15,000 units/kg in 50
mL of 0.9% saline, urokinase 40,000 units in 40 mL saline, and tissue
plasminogen activator (tPA) 4 mg in 20-­40 mL of saline have been used
in the pediatric population. Although the combination of fibrinolytic
therapy with dornase alfa (DNAse) improves outcomes in adults with
empyema, it has not been shown to consistently improve outcomes in
pediatric patients with empyema. There is a risk of anaphylaxis with
streptokinase, and all three drugs can be associated with hemorrhage
and other complications.
If pneumatoceles form, no attempt should be made to treat them
surgically or by aspiration, unless they reach sufficient size to cause
respiratory compromise or become secondarily infected. Pneumatoceles usually resolve spontaneously with time. Extensive fibrinous
changes may take place over the surface of the lungs owing to empyema, but they eventually resolve. The long-­term clinical prognosis for
adequately treated empyema is excellent, and follow-­up pulmonary
function studies suggest that residual restrictive disease is uncommon,
with or without surgical intervention.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

C

Fig. 451.5 Loculated hydropneumothorax. Frontal (A) and lateral (B) chest radiographs show loculated hydropneumothorax that complicated

pneumonia in a 14-­yr-­old child. Arrows point to the horizontal air-­fluid level at the interface between the intrapleural effusion and air. C, Thoracic CT
scan helps to localize the loculated hydropneumothorax, with its air-­fluid level (arrows).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2658 Part XVII u The Respiratory System

Chapter 452

Bronchiectasis
Oren J. Lakser
Bronchiectasis is characterized by irreversible abnormal dilation and
anatomic distortion of the bronchial tree and represents the common
end stage of many nonspecific and unrelated antecedent events. Its
incidence has been decreasing overall in industrialized countries, but
it persists as a problem in lower-­and middle-­income countries and
among some ethnic groups in industrialized nations (particularly in
aboriginal children). Females are afflicted more frequently than males.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS

In industrialized nations, cystic fibrosis (see Chapter 454) is the most
common cause of clinically significant bronchiectasis. Other conditions
associated with bronchiectasis include primary ciliary dyskinesia (see
Chapter 455), postinfectious conditions, especially pertussis, measles,
and tuberculosis, immune deficiency syndromes (especially humoral
immunity), foreign body aspiration, and aspiration of gastric contents
(Table 452.1). Bronchiectasis has also been associated with severe
asthma in children. It can also be congenital, as in Williams-­Campbell
syndrome, in which there is an absence of annular bronchial cartilage,
and Marnier-­Kuhn syndrome (congenital tracheobronchomegaly),
in which there is a connective tissue disorder. Other disease entities
associated with bronchiectasis are yellow nail syndrome (pleural effusion, lymphedema, discolored nails) and right middle lobe syndrome.
Right middle lobe syndrome is mostly associated with other generalized causes of bronchiectasis, including asthma, cystic fibrosis, primary
ciliary dyskinesia, severe pneumonia, aspiration pneumonia, foreign
bodies, and immune-­deficient states.
Three basic mechanisms are involved in the pathogenesis of bronchiectasis. Obstruction can occur because of tumor, foreign body,
impacted mucus because of poor mucociliary clearance, external
compression, bronchial webs, and atresia. Infections caused by Bordetella pertussis, measles, rubella, togavirus, respiratory syncytial
virus, adenovirus, and Mycobacterium tuberculosis induce chronic
inflammation, progressive bronchial wall damage, and dilation. More
recently, nontypeable Haemophilus influenzae seems to be a common
cause of infection in adults and children with bronchiectasis. Streptococcus pneumoniae and Moraxella catarrhalis are more common in
children with bronchiectasis than in adult patients. Chronic inflammation similarly contributes to the mechanism by which obstruction
leads to bronchiectasis. Both inadequate and exaggerated/dysregulated
immune responses may play a role in the development of bronchiectasis. Activation of toll-­like receptors results in the activation of nuclear
factor κB and the release of proinflammatory cytokines interleukin
(IL)-­1β, IL-­8, and tumor necrosis factor-­α. IL-­8 is a chemoattractant
for neutrophils, which are the main inflammatory cell involved in the
pathogenesis of bronchiectasis. Once activated, neutrophils produce
neutrophil elastase and matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-­8 and MMP-­
9. IL-­6, IL-­8, and tumor necrosis factor-­α are elevated in the airways of
patients with bronchiectasis. Eosinophils are also elevated in the airways of indigenous children with bronchiectasis, which promotes neutrophil recruitment, goblet cell hyperplasia, and airway destruction.
There is an increase in proinflammatory cytotoxic T lymphocytes in
the peripheral blood of children with bronchiectasis. The mechanism
by which bronchiectasis occurs in congenital forms is likely related to
abnormal cartilage formation. The common thread in the pathogenesis
of bronchiectasis consists of difficulty clearing secretions and recurrent
infections with a “vicious cycle” of infection and inflammation resulting in airway injury and remodeling. This cycle results in a spectrum
of pediatric suppurative lung disorders: protracted bacterial bronchitis
(PBB), chronic suppurative lung disease (CSLD), and bronchiectasis.
CSLD patients suffer from symptoms of bronchiectasis without its

radiographic features. In early stages, bronchiectasis consists primarily
of bronchiolar wall thickening and destruction of elastin resulting in
bronchial dilatation. In later stages, the bronchial walls develop cartilage destruction with associated pulmonary artery/arteriole vascular
remodeling, resulting in pulmonary hypertension.
Bronchiectasis can manifest in any combination of three pathologic
forms, best defined by high-­resolution CT (HRCT) scan (Fig. 452.1).
In cylindrical bronchiectasis, the bronchial outlines are regular, but
there is diffuse dilation of the bronchial unit. The bronchial lumen
ends abruptly because of mucous plugging. In varicose bronchiectasis, the degree of dilation is greater, and local constrictions cause an
irregularity of outline resembling that of varicose veins. There may also
be small sacculations. In saccular (cystic) bronchiectasis, bronchial
dilation progresses and results in ballooning of bronchi that end in
fluid-­or mucus-­filled sacs. This is the most severe form of bronchiectasis. The following definitions have been proposed: prebronchiectasis
(chronic or recurrent endobronchial infection with nonspecific HRCT
changes; may be reversible), HRCT bronchiectasis (clinical symptoms
with HRCT evidence of bronchial dilation; may persist, progress, or
improve and resolve), and established bronchiectasis (like the previous but with no resolution within 2 years). Early diagnosis and aggressive therapy are important to prevent the development of established
bronchiectasis.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The most common complaints in patients with bronchiectasis are
chronic wet cough and/or production of copious purulent sputum.
Younger children may swallow the sputum. In particular, wet or productive cough failing to respond to 4 weeks of oral antibiotics is predictive of the presence of chest CT–defined bronchiectasis. Hemoptysis
is seen with some frequency. Fever can occur with infectious exacerbations. Anorexia and poor weight gain may occur as time passes.
Physical examination typically reveals crackles localized to the affected
area, but wheezing and digital clubbing may also occur. In severe cases,
dyspnea and hypoxemia can occur. Pulmonary function studies may
demonstrate an obstructive, restrictive, or mixed pattern. Typically,
impaired diffusion capacity is a late finding.
Table 452.1  Conditions That Predispose to Bronchiectasis
in Children
PROXIMAL AIRWAY NARROWING
Airway wall compression (i.e., vascular ring, adenopathy impinging
on airways)
Airway intraluminal obstruction (e.g., inhaled foreign body, granulation
tissue)`
Airway stenosis and malacia (tracheal, bronchial)
AIRWAY INJURY
Bronchiolitis obliterans (e.g., postviral, after lung transplantation)
Recurrent pneumonitis or pneumonia (e.g., pneumococcal pneumonia,
aspiration pneumonia, tuberculosis, B. pertussis)
ALTERED PULMONARY HOST DEFENSES
Cystic fibrosis
Primary ciliary dyskinesia
Impaired cough (e.g., neuromuscular weakness conditions)
ALTERED IMMUNE STATES
Primary abnormalities (e.g., agammaglobulinemia,
hypogammaglobulinemia, common variable immune deficiency,
hyper IgE, hyper IgM, neutrophil dysfunction, gain-­of-­function
STAT1 variants)
Secondary abnormalities (e.g., HIV infection, immunosuppressive
agents)
OTHER
Systemic pseudohypoaldosteronism
Epithelial sodium channel variants (SCNN1A, SCNN1B)
Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis
Plastic bronchitis
Right middle lobe syndrome
From Redding GJ. Bronchiectasis in children. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2009;56:157–171,
Box 1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 452 u Bronchiectasis
DIAGNOSIS

Conditions that can be associated with bronchiectasis should be
ruled out by appropriate investigations (e.g., sweat test, immunologic
workup). Chest radiographs of patients with bronchiectasis tend to
be nonspecific. Typical findings can include increase in size and loss
of definition of bronchovascular markings, crowding of bronchi, and
loss of lung volume. In more severe forms, cystic spaces, occasionally with air-­fluid levels and honeycombing, may occur. Compensatory overinflation of the unaffected lung may be seen. Thin-­section

2659

HRCT scanning and multidetector CT scanning are the gold standards
because they have excellent sensitivity and specificity. CT provides further information on disease location, presence of mediastinal lesions,
and the extent of segmental involvement. The main features of bronchiectasis in CT scans include (1) increased bronchoarterial ratio and
signet-­ring appearance; (2) bronchial wall thickening; (3) mucous plugging; (4) lack of bronchial tapering to the lung periphery—“tramlines”;
(5) bronchial structures in the lung periphery; and (6) air trapping
(mosaic perfusion), most obvious on expiration. The lower lobes (left
> right) are more commonly affected. Early in the course, tree-­in-­bud
appearance can also be seen. These CT findings are used to define the
bronchiectasis as cylindrical (“tram lines,” “signet ring appearance”),
varicose (bronchi with “beaded contour”), cystic (cysts in “strings and
clusters”), or mixed forms (Fig. 452.2).

TREATMENT

A

B

C

D

Fig. 452.1 High-­resolution chest CT scans (A and B) and bronchos-

copy images (C and D) in a child with bronchiectasis. (C and D) Bronchoscopy findings. Images from a chest high-­resolution computed tomography (cHRCT) scan (A and B) in a 10-­yr-­old girl who presented with
a chronic wet cough. The child was treated with a 2-­wk course of IV antibiotics (after failing oral antibiotic treatment). The scan was reported
as having no evidence of bronchiectasis by pediatric radiologists. At
bronchoscopy thick mucus was seen in the trachea (C) and the right
lower lobe (D). The case highlights the need to consider the diagnosis
of bronchiectasis on the basis of history, examination findings, and using the pediatric cutoff (bronchoarterial ratio >0.8) for defining bronchiectasis on the cHRCT scan. (From Goyal V, Grimwood K, Marchant
J, et al. Pediatric bronchiectasis: no longer an orphan disease. Pediatr
Pulmonol. 2016;51:450–469.)

A

B

C

The initial therapy for patients with bronchiectasis is medical and aims
at decreasing airway obstruction and controlling infection. Airway
clearance techniques (e.g., gravity-­assisted drainage, active cycle of
breathing, positive expiratory pressure [PEP], acapella, high-­frequency
chest wall oscillation), antibiotics, and bronchodilators are essential.
Two to four weeks of parenteral antibiotics (in hospital or at home) is
often necessary to manage more severe acute exacerbations adequately.
Exacerbations can be defined as the presence of one major criteria (wet
cough enduring longer than 72 hours, increased cough frequency over
72 hours) plus one laboratory criteria (C-­reactive protein >3 mg/L,
serum IL-­6 >2 ng/L, serum amyloid A >5 mg/L, elevated neutrophil
percentage), two major criteria, or one major criterion plus two minor
criteria (change in sputum color, breathlessness, chest pain, crackles/
crepitations, wheeze). The presence of dyspnea (increased work of
breathing) and/or hypoxemia should be considered a severe exacerbation, irrespective of duration.
Antibiotic choice is dictated by the identification and sensitivity
of organisms found on deep throat, sputum (induced or spontaneous), or bronchoalveolar lavage fluid cultures. The most common
organisms found in children with bronchiectasis include H. influenzae non–type b, S. pneumoniae, M. catarrhalis, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Staphylococcus aureus. Viruses
(most commonly human rhinovirus) are often found in children with
bronchiectasis suffering from an exacerbation. A 14-day course of
amoxicillin/clavulanic acid (22.5 mg/kg/dose twice daily) has been
particularly successful at treating most pulmonary exacerbations.
Azithromycin (5 mg/kg/day) is a reasonable alternative in those with
penicillin allergy. For those experiencing frequent exacerbations of
more than three per year, long-­term prophylactic macrolide antibiotics (which also have immunomodulatory and antiinflammatory properties) or nebulized antibiotics (e.g., tobramycin, colistin, aztreonam,
ciprofloxacin) may be beneficial (reduced exacerbations and hospitalizations, improved lung function) but may also increase antibiotic

D

Fig. 452.2 Bronchiectasis. A, Axial CT image demonstrates a beaded appearance of dilated bronchi (arrow) in the right upper lobe, consistent with

varicoid bronchiectasis. B, Coronal reformation CT image shows multiple foci of cystic bronchiectasis, with a few air-­fluid levels (arrow). Also note paraseptal emphysema, most marked at the right apex. C, Bronchiectatic form of chronic atypical mycobacterial infection. Axial CT scan shows extensive bronchiectasis, bronchial wall thickening, and centrilobular nodules, most severe in the middle lobe and lingula. D, Allergic bronchopulmonary
aspergillosis. Coronal reformation CT image demonstrates impacted bronchi in the left upper lobe (arrow) producing a “gloved finger” appearance.
(From Boiselle PM. Airway. In: Haaga JR, Boll DT, eds. CT and MRI of the Whole Body, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017: Figs 40-­30, 32-­34.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2660 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
resistance. Airway hydration (inhaled hypertonic saline or mannitol) also improves quality of life in adults with bronchiectasis, but
there are few studies in children. Any underlying disorder (immunodeficiency, aspiration) that may be contributing must be addressed.
When localized bronchiectasis becomes more severe or resistant to
medical management, segmental or lobar resection may be warranted
and may improve growth and reduce the need for intravenous antibiotics. Lung transplantation can also be performed in patients with
bronchiectasis. There is no strong evidence to support the routine
use of inhaled corticosteroids, although some studies demonstrate
improved quality of life and reduced exacerbations in patients with
bronchiectasis treated with inhaled corticosteroids. Preventive strategies, including immunization against typical respiratory pathogens
(influenza, pneumococci), are generally recommended.
Development of novel treatments is ongoing and centered around
targeting three components of the vicious cycle of bronchiectasis: bacterial infection (vitamin D supplementation, exogenous granulocyte-­
macrophage stimulating factor, phosphodiesterase 4 inhibitors,
statins), neutrophilic inflammation (e.g., neutrophil elastase inhibitors,
cathepsin C inhibitors, CXCR2 receptor antagonists), and mucociliary
clearance (epithelial sodium channel inhibitors).

PROGNOSIS

Children with bronchiectasis often suffer from recurrent pulmonary
illnesses, resulting in missed school days, stunted growth, osteopenia, and osteoporosis. The prognosis for patients with bronchiectasis
has improved considerably in the past few decades. In some children
and adolescents, their bronchiectasis is reversible and/or preventable.
Factors important for reversibility and/or prevention of bronchiectasis include early identification and treatment of inhaled foreign bodies, preventing early and severe pneumonia, preventing recurrent
protracted bacterial bronchitis, treating primary immunodeficiency
disorders causing bronchiectasis, promoting breastfeeding and immunization, and avoiding tobacco smoke and other pollutants.
Thus earlier recognition or prevention of predisposing conditions,
specialist multidisciplinary management, more powerful and broad-­
spectrum antibiotics, and improved surgical outcomes will further
improve the prognosis for children with bronchiectasis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 453

Pulmonary Abscess
Oren J. Lakser
Lung infection that destroys the lung parenchyma, resulting in cavitations and central necrosis, can result in localized areas composed
of thick-­walled purulent material called lung abscesses. Primary lung
abscesses occur in previously healthy patients with no underlying medical disorders and are usually solitary. Secondary lung abscesses occur
in patients with underlying or predisposing conditions and may be
multiple. Lung abscesses are much less common in children (estimated
at 0.7 per 100,000 admissions per year) and result in less morbidity
than in adults.

PATHOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS

Multiple conditions predispose children to the development of pulmonary abscesses, including aspiration, pneumonia, cystic fibrosis
(see Chapter 454), gastroesophageal reflux (see Chapter 369), tracheoesophageal fistula (see Chapter 365.1), immunodeficiencies, postoperative complications of tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy, seizures,

a variety of neurologic diseases, and other conditions associated
with impaired mucociliary defense. Lung abscesses have been associated with e-­cigarette or vaping product use–associated lung injury
(EVALI; see Chapter 450). In children, aspiration of infected materials
or a foreign body is the predominant source of the organisms causing abscesses. Initially, pneumonitis impairs drainage of fluid or the
aspirated material. Inflammatory vascular obstruction occurs, leading
to tissue necrosis, liquefaction, and abscess formation. Abscess can
also occur as a result of pneumonia and hematogenous seeding from
another site.
If the aspiration event occurred while the child was recumbent, the
right and left upper lobes and apical segment of the right lower lobes
are the dependent areas most likely to be affected. In a child who was
upright, the posterior segments of the upper lobes were dependent and
therefore are most likely to be affected. Primary abscesses are found
most often on the right side, whereas secondary lung abscesses, particularly in immunocompromised patients, have a predilection for the
left side.
Both anaerobic and aerobic organisms can cause lung abscesses.
Common anaerobic bacteria that can cause a pulmonary abscess
include Bacteroides spp., Fusobacterium spp., and Peptostreptococcus
spp. Abscesses can be caused by aerobic organisms such as Streptococcus angiosus, group A streptococcus, Staphylococcus aureus, Escherichia
coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and very rarely,
Mycoplasma pneumoniae. Aerobic and anaerobic cultures should be
part of the workup for all patients with lung abscess. Occasionally, concomitant viral-­bacterial infection can be detected. Fungi can also cause
lung abscesses, particularly in immunocompromised patients.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The most common symptoms of pulmonary abscess in the pediatric
population are fever, cough, and emesis. Other common symptoms
include tachypnea, dyspnea, chest pain, sputum production, weight
loss, and hemoptysis. Physical examination typically reveals tachypnea, dyspnea, retractions with accessory muscle use, decreased breath
sounds, and dullness to percussion in the affected area. Crackles and,
occasionally, a prolonged expiratory phase may be heard on lung
examination.

DIAGNOSIS

Diagnosis is most commonly made on the basis of chest radiography.
Classically, the chest radiograph shows a parenchymal inflammation
with a cavity containing an air-­fluid level (Fig. 453.1). A chest CT scan
can provide better anatomic definition of an abscess, including location
and size (Fig. 453.2). Ultrasound can also help provide rapid diagnosis
and procedural guidance.
An abscess is usually a thick-­walled lesion with a low-­density center progressing to an air-­fluid level. Abscesses should be distinguished
from pneumatoceles, which often complicate severe bacterial pneumonias and are characterized by thin-­and smooth-­walled, localized air
collections with or without air-­fluid level (Fig. 453.3). Pneumatoceles
often resolve spontaneously with the treatment of the specific cause of
the pneumonia. The differential diagnosis of a cavitary lung lesion is
noted in Table 453.1.
The determination of the etiologic bacteria in a lung abscess can be
helpful in guiding antibiotic choice. Although Gram stain of sputum
can provide an early clue as to the class of bacteria involved, sputum cultures typically yield mixed bacteria and therefore are not always reliable.
Attempts to avoid contamination from oral flora include direct lung puncture, percutaneous (aided by CT guidance) or transtracheal aspiration, and
bronchoalveolar lavage specimens obtained bronchoscopically. Bronchoscopic aspiration should be avoided, as it can be complicated by massive
intrabronchial aspiration, and great care should therefore be taken during
the procedure. To avoid invasive procedures in previously normal hosts,
empiric therapy can be initiated in the absence of culturable material.

TREATMENT

Conservative management is recommended for pulmonary abscess.
Most experts advocate a 2-­to 3-­week course of parenteral antibiotics

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 453 u Pulmonary Abscess

2661

A
Fig. 453.1 Multiloculated lung abscess (arrows). (From Brook I.

Lung abscess and pulmonary infections due to anaerobic bacteria.
In Chernick V, Boat TF, Wilmott RW, et al., eds. Kendig’s Disorders of
the Respiratory Tract in Children, 7th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders;
2006:482.)

B
Fig. 453.3 Appearance over a period of 5 days of a large, multilocu-

lated pneumatocele in a segment of alveolar consolidation. A, There
is a large cavity with two air-­fluid levels in a segment of alveolar pneumonia in the right upper lobe. B, Five days later, the cavity and most of
the pneumonic consolidation have disappeared. (From Silverman FN,
Kuhn JP. Essentials of Caffey’s Pediatric X-­ray Diagnosis. Chicago: Year
Book; 1990:303.)

bacteria are suspected or isolated, piperacillin-­tazobactam or a carbapenem should be added. With improvement, oral antibiotics (clindamycin or amoxicillin-­clavulanate) can be used to finish the 4 weeks of total
therapy. Early CT-­guided percutaneous aspiration or drainage has been
advocated by some; it may hasten the recovery and shorten the course of
parenteral antibiotic therapy. Nonetheless, antibiotic therapy is successful in ∼85% of patients with uncomplicated lung abscesses.
For severely ill patients, patients with larger abscess, or those whose
status fails to improve after 7-­10 days of appropriate antimicrobial
therapy, surgical intervention should be considered. Minimally invasive percutaneous aspiration techniques, often with CT guidance,
are the initial and, often, only intervention required. Thoracoscopic
drainage has also been successfully used with minimal complications.
In rare, complicated cases, thoracotomy (e.g., video-­assisted thoracoscopic surgery [VATS] with or without bronchoscopic occlusion)
with surgical drainage or lobectomy and/or decortication may be
necessary. Abscess drainage is reportedly required in ∼20% of cases
of pulmonary abscess in children.

A

B
Fig. 453.2 Pulmonary abscess in a 2-­yr-­old male with persistent cough.

A, Chest radiograph shows large oval mass in the left upper lobe. B, CT
scan demonstrates an abscess with a thick enhancing wall that contains
both air and fluid. (From Slovis T, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2008, Fig. 78-­3, p. 1297.)

for uncomplicated cases, followed by a course of oral antibiotics to complete a total of 3-­4 weeks. Antibiotic choice should be guided by results
of Gram stain and culture but initially should include agents with
aerobic and anaerobic coverage. Treatment regimens should include a
penicillinase-­resistant agent active against S. aureus and anaerobic coverage, typically with clindamycin or ampicillin-­sulbactam. If gram-­negative

PROGNOSIS

Overall, the prognosis for children with primary pulmonary abscesses
is excellent. The presence of aerobic organisms may be a negative prognostic indicator, particularly in those with secondary lung abscesses.
Most children become asymptomatic within 7-­10 days, although the
fever can persist for as long as 3 weeks. Radiologic abnormalities usually resolve in 1-­3 months but can persist for years (e.g., B-line artifacts
on lung ultrasound). Long-­term sequalae can also include air trapping/
hyperinflation on lung function testing. With treatment, mortality is
typically less than 5%.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2662 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Table 453.1  Differential Diagnosis of a Cavitary Lesion on
Chest Radiograph
INFECTIOUS CAUSES
Bacteria
Oral anaerobes
Less commonly: Staphylococcus aureus, Klebsiella pneumoniae,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, enteric gram-­negative rods, Pasteurella
multocida, Burkholderia cepacia, Burkholderia pseudomallei,
Haemophilus influenzae types b and c, Legionella, group A
streptococcus, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Streptococcus
anginosus, Nocardia, Rhodococcus equi, Actinomyces,
Clostridium, Capnocytophaga
Septic Pulmonary Embolism
Originating in septic phlebitis, including Lemierre syndrome and
vegetations from tricuspid endocarditis
Mycobacteria
Tuberculosis and nontuberculous pathogens
Fungi
Endemic mycoses (Histoplasma, Coccidioides, blastomycosis),
Cryptococcus, Aspergillus, Zygomycetes
Parasites
Paragonimus westermani, Entamoeba histolytica, Echinococcus
NONINFECTIOUS CAUSES
Neoplasm
Primary lung cancer, metastatic carcinoma (particularly squamous
cell)
Pulmonary infarction caused by bland embolus
Vasculitis
Wegener granulomatosis, rheumatoid lung nodule
Airway Disease
Bullae, blebs, or cystic bronchiectasis
Developmental cause
Pulmonary sequestration
Other
Sarcoidosis, achalasia, or transdiaphragmatic bowel herniation giving
appearance of cavity with air-­fluid level
Modified from Lorber B. Bacterial lung abscess. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser M,
eds. Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2014:855–859.

Chapter 454

Cystic Fibrosis
Marie E. Egan, Michael S. Schechter, and
Judith A. Voynow
Cystic fibrosis (CF) is an inherited multisystem disorder of children
and adults; it is the most common life-­limiting recessive genetic trait
among Whites. Dysfunction of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) protein, the primary defect, leads to a wide
and variable array of presenting manifestations and complications.
CF is responsible for most cases of exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
in early life and is the major cause of severe chronic lung disease in
children. It is also responsible for many cases of hyponatremic salt
depletion, nasal polyposis, pansinusitis, rectal prolapse, pancreatitis,
cholelithiasis, and nonautoimmune insulin-­dependent hyperglycemia.

Table 454.1  Complications of Cystic Fibrosis
RESPIRATORY
Bronchiectasis, bronchitis, bronchiolitis, pneumonia
Atelectasis
Hemoptysis
Pneumothorax
Nasal polyps
Sinusitis
Reactive airway disease
Mucoid impaction of the bronchi
Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis
Cor pulmonale
Respiratory failure
GASTROINTESTINAL
Meconium ileus, meconium plug (neonate)
Meconium peritonitis (neonate)
Distal intestinal obstruction syndrome (non-­neonatal obstruction)
Rectal prolapse
Intussusception
Volvulus
Fibrosing colonopathy (strictures)
Appendicitis
Intestinal atresia
Pancreatitis (recurrent)
Biliary cirrhosis (portal hypertension: esophageal varices,
hypersplenism)
Neonatal obstructive jaundice
Hepatic steatosis
Gastroesophageal reflux
Cholelithiasis
Inguinal hernia
Growth failure (malabsorption)
Vitamin deficiency states (vitamins A, K, E, D)
Insulin deficiency, symptomatic hyperglycemia, diabetes
Malignancy (rare)
OTHER
Infertility (female)
Congenital absence of vas deferens, azoospermia
Delayed puberty
Edema: hypoproteinemia
Dehydration: heat exhaustion
Hyperchloremic metabolic alkalosis: dehydration
Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy: arthritis
Urinary calculi
Clubbing
Amyloidosis
Diabetes mellitus
Aquagenic palmoplantar keratoderma (skin wrinkling)
Adapted from Silverman FN, Kuhn JP. Essentials of Caffey’s Pediatric X-­ray Diagnosis.
Chicago: Year Book; 1990:649.

Because CF may manifest as failure to thrive and hepatic dysfunction,
including cirrhosis, this disorder enters into the differential diagnosis
of many pediatric conditions (Table 454.1).

GENETICS

CF occurs most frequently in White populations of Northern Europe,
North America, and Australia/New Zealand. The prevalence in these
populations varies but approximates 1 in 3,500 live births (compared
with 1 in 9,200 individuals of Hispanic descent and 1 in 15,000 African Americans). Although less frequent in African, Hispanic, Middle
Eastern, South Asian, and Eastern Asian populations, the disorder does
exist in these populations as well (Fig. 454.1).
CF is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. The CF gene codes for
the CFTR protein, which is 1,480 amino acids. CFTR is expressed largely
in epithelial cells of airways, the gastrointestinal tract (including the pancreas and biliary system), the sweat glands, and the genitourinary system,
but is expressed in other cell types at lower levels. CFTR is a member of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 454 u Cystic Fibrosis

2663

Fig. 454.1 Approximate cystic fibrosis birth prevalence and common pathogenic variants for selected countries. Birth prevalence is reported as the

number of live births per case of cystic fibrosis. Common/important pathogenic variants in each region are listed below the prevalence figures. The
birth prevalence can vary greatly among ethnic groups in a country. (From O’Sullivan BP, Freedman SD. Cystic fibrosis. Lancet. 2009;373:1891–1902.)

the adenosine triphosphate (ATP)–binding cassette superfamily of proteins. It functions as an anion channel and is essential for proper chloride
and bicarbonate transport across epithelia. More than 1,900 CFTR polymorphisms have been described, many of which are not clearly of clinical significance. Those that are associated with clinical manifestations
may be grouped into six main classes based on how they affect protein
structure and function (Fig. 454.2). Class I-­III pathogenic variants are
generally considered to be severe pathogenic variants in that they lead to
a complete or nearly complete absence of CFTR function, whereas class
IV-­VI pathogenic variants are associated with some residual functional
protein. The most prevalent pathogenic variant of CFTR is the deletion of
a single phenylalanine residue at amino acid 508 (F508del). This pathogenic variant is responsible for the high incidence of CF in northern
European populations and is considerably less frequent in other populations, such as those of southern Europe and Israel. Nearly 50% of individuals with CF in the United States Cystic Fibrosis Foundation (CFF)
Patient Registry are homozygous for F508del, and approximately 87%
carry at least one F508del gene. The remaining patients have an extensive
array of pathogenic variants, none of which has a prevalence of more than
several percentage points, except in certain populations; for example, the
W1282X pathogenic variant occurs in 60% of Ashkenazi Jews with CF.
Through the use of probes for 40 of the most common pathogenic variants, the genotype of 80–90% of Americans with CF can be ascertained.
Genotyping using a discrete panel of pathogenic variant probes is quick
and less costly than more comprehensive sequencing and is the approach
typically used in state newborn screening (NBS) programs. In remaining
patients, sequencing the entire CFTR gene and looking for deletions and
duplications are necessary to establish the genotype.

The relationship between CFTR genotype and clinical phenotype
is highly complex. The CFTR pathogenic variant class is strongly
associated with pancreatic dysfunction and will usually predict this
manifestation in any given patient. Respiratory complications and
lung function decline are also correlated with pathogenic variant
class severity but with greater variation because of the influence
of non-­CFTR modifier gene polymorphisms and environmental
influences on the manifestations of lung disease in any one individual. Studies have identified specific non-­CFTR modifier genes of
importance; genome-­wide association studies identified a polymorphism on chromosome 11 in the intergenic region between EHF (an
epithelial transcription factor) and APIP (an inhibitor of apoptosis)
that is associated with lung disease severity and may influence the
expression of EHF and APIP, as well as other genes in the region,
including PDHX, CD44, and ELF5. A region on chromosome 20
may also be found to relate to lung disease severity. This region
encompasses several genes (MC3R, CASS4, AURKA) that may play
a role in lung host defense involving neutrophil function, apoptosis,
and phagocytosis. Genome-­wide association studies analysis also
identified genetic regions that predispose to risk for liver disease,
CF-­related diabetes, and meconium ileus.
The high frequency of CFTR pathogenic variants has been
ascribed to resistance to the morbidity and mortality associated
with infectious dysenteries through the ages. Cultured CF intestinal
epithelial cells homozygous for the F508del pathogenic variant are
unresponsive to the secretory effects of cholera toxin. CFTR heterozygous mice experience less mortality when treated with cholera
toxin than their unaffected wild-­type littermates.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2664 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Normal

I

II

III

Cl− − Cl− Cl−
Cl−Cl−Cl Cl−
Cl−

Absent
functional
CFTR
Golgi
Absent
nascent
CFTR

Endoplasmic reticulum

Endoplasmic reticulum

Full-length
CFTR RNA

CFTR DNA

Absent
functional
CFTR
Golgi

Nascent
CFTR

Nucleus

V

VI

−

−

Cl−

Cl

Mature
functional
CFTR
Golgi

IV

Golgi

Endoplasmic reticulum

CFTR DNA

CFTR DNA

Golgi

Golgi

Nascent
CFTR

Nascent
CFTR

Scarce
nascent
CFTR

Nascent
CFTR

Endoplasmic reticulum

Endoplasmic reticulum

Endoplasmic reticulum

Endoplasmic reticulum

Full-length
CFTR RNA

Nucleus

Decreased
CFTR
membrane
stability

Scarce
functional
CFTR

Defective
CFTR
channel
Golgi

Protease
destruction of
misfolded
CFTR

Unstable
truncated
RNA
Nucleus

Defective
channel
regulation

Cl

Full-length
CFTR RNA

Nucleus

CFTR DNA

Full-length Correct RNA Incorrect RNA
CFTR RNA

Nucleus

CFTR DNA

Nucleus

CFTR DNA

Full-length
CFTR RNA

Nucleus

CFTR DNA

CFTR defect

No functional
CFTR protein

CFTR trafficking
defect

Defective channel
regulation

Decreased channel
conductance

Reduced synthesis
of CFTR

Decreased CFTR
stability

Type of mutations

Nonsense;
frameshift;
canonical splice

Missense;
aminoacid deletion

Missense;
aminoacid change

Missense;
aminoacid change

Splicing defect;
missense

Missense;
aminoacid change

Specific mutation
examples

Gly542X
Trp1282X
Arg553X
621+1G→T

Phe508del
Asn1303Lys
Ile507del
Arg560Thr

Gly551Asp
Gly178Arg
Gly551Ser
Ser549Asn

Arg117His
Arg347Pro
Arg117Cys
Arg334Trp

3849+10kbC→T
2789+5G→A
3120+1G→A
5T

4326delTC
Gln1412X
4279insA

Fig. 454.2 Classes of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) pathogenic variants. Pathogenic variants in the CFTR gene can

be divided into six classes. Class I pathogenic variants result in no protein production. Class II pathogenic variants (including the most prevalent,
Phe508del) cause retention of a misfolded protein at the endoplasmic reticulum and subsequent degradation in the proteasome. Class III pathogenic variants affect channel regulation, impairing channel opening (e.g., Gly551Asp). Class IV pathogenic variants show reduced conduction—that
is, decreased flow of ions (e.g., Arg117His). Class V pathogenic variants cause substantial reduction in mRNA or protein, or both. Class VI pathogenic
variants cause substantial plasma membrane instability and include Phe508del when rescued by most correctors (rPhe508del). (From Boyle MP, De
Boeck K. A new era in the treatment of cystic fibrosis: correction of the underlying CFTR defect. Lancet Respir Med. 2013;1:158–163.)

PATHOGENESIS

A number of long-­standing observations of CF are of fundamental
pathophysiologic importance; they include failure to clear mucous
secretions, a paucity of water in mucous secretions, an elevated salt
content of sweat and other serous secretions, and chronic infection
limited to the respiratory tract. In addition, there is a greater negative
potential difference across the respiratory epithelia of patients with CF
than across the respiratory epithelia of control subjects. Aberrant electrical properties are also demonstrated for CF sweat gland duct and
rectal epithelia. The membranes of CF epithelial cells are unable to
secrete chloride or bicarbonate in response to cyclic adenosine monophosphate–mediated signals, and at least in the respiratory epithelial
cells, excessive amounts of sodium are absorbed through these membranes. These defects can be traced to a dysfunction of CFTR. CFTR
function is highly regulated and energy dependent; it requires both
cyclic adenosine monophosphate–stimulated protein kinase A phosphorylation of the regulatory domain and ATP binding and hydrolysis
at the nucleotide binding domains. CFTR also interacts with other ion
channels, signal transduction proteins, and the cytoskeleton (Fig. 454.3
and see Fig. 454.2).
Many hypotheses have been postulated to explain how CFTR dysfunction results in the clinical phenotype (Fig. 454.4). It is likely that
no one hypothesis explains the full spectrum of disease. One model
is that airway hydration homeostasis requires both CFTR and P2Y2-­
regulated calcium-­activated chloride secretion. When extracellular
ATP is depleted, such as after viral infections, calcium-­activated
chloride secretion is not activated, and the failure of CFTR chloride
secretion results in dehydrated airway secretions, increased concentration of mucin solids, and more viscoelastic mucus that is not
cleared by normal mucociliary transport. Another mechanism that

is supported by both primary human airway studies and investigations in the CF pig is that variant CFTR causes failure of HCO3−
secretion and a more acidic airway surface liquid, which increases
mucous viscoelasticity, resulting in poor mucociliary clearance.
Mucous secretions are tethered to submucosal gland ducts and are
retained and obstruct airways, starting with those of the smallest
caliber, the bronchioles. Airflow obstruction at the level of small airways is the earliest observable physiologic abnormality of the respiratory system. CFTR dysfunction in airway smooth muscle has been
implicated in tracheal and airway abnormalities in humans and in
animal models of the disease (pig and mice). These data suggest that
CFTR expression in this nonepithelial tissue contributes to airway
constriction.
It is plausible that similar pathophysiologic events take place in
the pancreatic and biliary ducts (and in the vas deferens), leading to
desiccation of proteinaceous secretions and obstruction. Because the
function of sweat gland duct cells is to absorb rather than secrete chloride, salt is not retrieved from the isotonic primary sweat as it is transported to the skin surface; chloride and sodium levels are consequently
elevated.
Chronic infection in CF is limited to the airways. One explanation
for infection is a sequence of events starting with failure to clear inhaled
bacteria promptly and then proceeding to persistent infection and an
inflammatory response in airway walls. Another explanation for early
infection is the failure of innate immune proteins to kill bacteria in
an abnormally acidic airway milieu. In addition, it has been proposed
that abnormal CFTR creates a proinflammatory state or amplifies
the inflammatory response to initial infections (viral or bacterial).
Some investigators have identified primary differences in CF-­affected
immune cells (including macrophage, neutrophils, lymphocytes, and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 454 u Cystic Fibrosis
Normal
Na+ Cl- Cl-

Na+

CF

2665

Cl-

Cl-

Fig. 454.3 Schematic diagram depicting cystic fibro-

sis (CF) epithelial channel defects, characterized by impaired chloride secretion, massive sodium absorption,
and movement of water through the epithelium, leading to a dehydrated airway surface. ADP, Adenosine diphosphate; ATP, adenosine triphosphate; CFTR, cystic
fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator; ClCa,
alternative chloride channel; ENaC, epithelium sodium
channel; PKA, protein kinase A. (From Michelson P, Faro
A, Ferkol T. Pulmonary disease in cystic fibrosis. In Wilmott RW, Deterding RR, Li A et al., eds. Kendig’s Disorders of the Respiratory Tract in Children, 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019: Fig. 51.1, p. 778.)

ADP
ATP

Decreased
bicarbonate
secretion and
decreased
ASL pH

Increased
mucus
viscoelasticity
and airway
obstruction

Decreased
thiocyanate
secretion

Impaired
bacterial
clearance and
killing

ClCFTR

PKA
ATP
ADP

K+

Na+

Pathogenic variant
CFTR

Decreased
chloride
secretion and
increased
sodium
absorption

ENaC
ADP
ATP

Decreased
glutathione
secretion

Increased
oxidative
stress

Vicious cycle
of infection and
inflammation
with airway
remodeling

Fig. 454.4 Schema of variant cystic fibrosis transmembrane conduct-

ance regulator (CFTR) mechanisms of chronic airway disease. CFTR conducts several anions, including chloride, bicarbonate, thiocyanate, and
glutathione. The loss of CFTR function affects critical airway epithelial
functions: (1) It increases the risk for dehydration of airway surface liquid
(ASL) with loss of chloride efflux and associated increased sodium channel activity. (2) The loss of secreted bicarbonate and/or acidic pH of the
ASL increases mucous viscoelasticity resulting in failure of mucociliary
transport. (3) Acidic pH in the ASL impairs normal innate immune clearance of bacteria. (4) Loss of thiocyanate impairs lactoperoxidase bacterial killing. (5) Loss of glutathione secretion depletes the antioxidant
capacity of the airway resulting in increased inflammation, increased
mucous secretion, and increased mucous viscoelasticity. These factors
lead to a vicious cycle of infection and inflammation that is progressive.

dendritic cells) and have suggested that these alterations contribute to
this proinflammatory state and to a dysregulated immune response. It
appears that inflammatory events occur first in small airways, perhaps
because it is more difficult to clear altered secretions and microorganisms from these regions. The agents of airway injury include neutrophil
products, such as oxidative radicals and proteases, and immune reaction products. These inflammatory products further aggravate airway
obstruction by increasing mucin secretion and altering mucin structure to promote both intramolecular and intermolecular interactions.

K+

Na+ K+
2Cl

Na+
H2O

ClCa

Na+ K+
2Cl H2O

Excessive inflammatory cell polymers in CF sputum, including DNA,
filamentous actin, and glycosaminoglycans, further contribute to
abnormal mucous viscoelastic properties and airway obstruction.
Chronic bronchiolitis and bronchitis are the initial lung manifestations (see Chapter 439), but after months to years, structural changes
in airway walls produce bronchiolectasis and bronchiectasis. With
advanced lung disease, infection may extend to peribronchial lung
parenchyma.
A central feature of lung disease in patients with CF is the high
prevalence of airway infection with Staphylococcus aureus (see Chapter 227.1), Pseudomonas aeruginosa (see Chapter 251.1), and Burkholderia cepacia complex (see Chapter 251.2), organisms that rarely
infect the lungs of other individuals. It has been postulated that the
CF airway epithelial cells or surface liquids may provide a favorable
environment for harboring these organisms. CF airway epithelium
may be compromised in its innate defenses against these organisms,
through either acquired or genetic alterations. Antimicrobial activity is diminished in CF secretions; this diminution may be related
to hyperacidic surface liquids or other effects on innate immunity.
Another puzzle is the propensity for P. aeruginosa to undergo mucoid
transformation in the CF airways. The complex polysaccharide produced by these organisms generates a biofilm that provides a hypoxic
environment and thereby protects Pseudomonas against antimicrobial agents.
Altered lipid homeostasis has been implicated as a predisposing
factor for respiratory tract infection and inflammation. Concentrations of lipoxins—molecules that suppress neutrophilic inflammation—are suppressed in CF airways. There is an imbalance of lipids
with increased arachidonic acid and decreased docosahexaenoic
acid, which promotes inflammation. There is also an imbalance of
ceramide in the CF airway that is proinflammatory. Supporting the
idea that altered lipid uptake affects infection and inflammation is
the observation that the 10–15% of individuals with CF who retain
substantial exocrine pancreatic function have delayed acquisition of
P. aeruginosa and slower deterioration of lung function. However, it
appears that nutritional factors are contributory only because preservation of pancreatic function does not preclude development of typical lung disease.
The variation in progression of lung disease seen in patients with CF
is also influenced by social and physical environment factors, whose
impact matches that of the CFTR genotype. Exposure to environmental tobacco smoke and outdoor air pollutants and early acquisition
of respiratory virus infections, as well as pathogenic organisms like
P. aeruginosa and methicillin-­resistant S. aureus (MRSA), have been
implicated as causes of worsening disease. Sex/gender disparities also
seem to exist, with females having a poorer prognosis. Although studies have suggested that estrogen may influence disease exacerbations,
the gap seems to be narrowing.
Although most CF care is delivered at specialty centers and is broadly
influenced by current clinical guidelines, there is enough variability
in treatment approaches to cause large variation in respiratory and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2666 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
nutritional outcomes across the care networks in both North America
and Europe. Social determinants of health are associated with significant disparities in outcome; socioeconomic status has been shown to
be a strong predictor of mortality, as well as both nutritional status and
lung function on both sides of the Atlantic. The specific mechanism of
effect is unclear, but evidence suggests a role for socioeconomic status–
related differences in health behaviors and disease self-­management
practices, stress and mental health issues, and environmental tobacco
smoke exposure. Differential access to specialty care and medications
are also known to affect clinical outcomes.

PATHOLOGY

The earliest pathologic lesion in the lung is that of bronchiolitis
(mucous plugging and an inflammatory response in the walls of the
small airways); with time, mucous accumulation and inflammation
extend to the larger airways (bronchitis) (see Chapter 439.2). Goblet
cell hyperplasia and submucosal gland hypertrophy become prominent pathologic findings, which is most likely a response to chronic
airway infection. Organisms appear to be confined to the endobronchial space; invasive bacterial infection is not characteristic.
With long-­standing disease, evidence of airway destruction such as
bronchiolar obliteration, bronchiolectasis, and bronchiectasis (see
Chapter 452) becomes prominent. Imaging modalities demonstrate
both increased airway wall thickness and luminal cross-­sectional
area relatively early in lung disease evaluation. Bronchiectatic cysts
and emphysematous bullae or subpleural blebs are frequent with
advanced lung disease, with the upper lobes being most commonly
involved. These enlarged air spaces may rupture and cause pneumothorax. Interstitial disease is not a prominent feature, although areas
of fibrosis appear eventually. Bronchial arteries are enlarged and
tortuous, contributing to a propensity for hemoptysis in bronchiectatic airways. Small pulmonary arteries eventually display medial
hypertrophy, which would be expected in secondary pulmonary
hypertension.
The paranasal sinuses are uniformly filled with secretions containing inflammatory products, and the epithelial lining displays hyperplastic and hypertrophied secretory elements (see Chapter 429). Polypoid
lesions within the sinuses and erosion of bone have been reported. The
nasal mucosa may form large or multiple polyps, usually from a base
surrounding the ostia of the maxillary and ethmoidal sinuses.
The pancreas is usually small, occasionally cystic, and often difficult
to find at postmortem examination. The extent of involvement varies at
birth. In infants, the acini and ducts are often distended and filled with
eosinophilic material. In 85–90% of patients, the lesion progresses to
complete or almost complete disruption of acini and replacement with

fibrous tissue and fat. Infrequently, foci of calcification may be seen on
radiographs of the abdomen. The islets of Langerhans contain normal-­
appearing β cells, although they may begin to show architectural disruption by fibrous tissue in the second decade of life.
The intestinal tract shows only minimal changes. Esophageal and
duodenal glands are often distended with mucous secretions. Concretions may form in the appendiceal lumen or cecum. Crypts of the
appendix and rectum may be dilated and filled with secretions.
Focal biliary cirrhosis secondary to blockage of intrahepatic bile
ducts is uncommon in early life, although it is responsible for occasional cases of prolonged neonatal jaundice. This lesion becomes much
more prevalent and extensive with age and is found in 70% of patients
at postmortem examination. This process can proceed to symptomatic multilobular biliary cirrhosis that has a distinctive pattern of large,
irregular parenchymal nodules and interspersed bands of fibrous tissue. Approximately 30–70% of patients have fatty infiltration of the
liver, in some cases despite adequate nutrition. At autopsy, hepatic congestion secondary to cor pulmonale can be observed. The gallbladder
may be hypoplastic and filled with mucoid material and often contains
stones. The epithelial lining often displays extensive mucous metaplasia. Atresia of the cystic duct and stenosis of the distal common bile
duct have been observed.
Glands of the uterine cervix are distended with mucus, copious
amounts of which collect in the cervical canal. In >95% of males, the
body and tail of the epididymis, the vas deferens, and the seminal vesicles are obliterated or atretic, resulting in male infertility.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Since the universal adoption of CF NBS, along with the evolution of
aggressive and proactive treatment approaches, the clinical face of CF
is quite different from what it was in earlier decades. Diagnosis is typically accomplished before 1 month of age, before any obvious clinical
symptoms or signs, and treatment is targeted at immediately correcting
nutritional deficiencies and delaying the respiratory complications of
the disease. The interaction of pathogenic variant heterogeneity and
environmental factors leads to highly variable involvement of the lungs,
pancreas, and other organs. A summary of the time course of potential
development of clinical manifestations is shown in Figure 454.5.

Respiratory Tract

Infants diagnosed by CF NBS are generally asymptomatic from a respiratory standpoint. Nonetheless, the majority are infected with S. aureus, Haemophilus influenza, or even P. aeruginosa within the first month of life, and
chest CT scans show characteristic heterogeneous air trapping in ∼65%
of infants by their first birthday, and bronchiectasis is found in more than

Sinopulmonary
• Infection

• ABPA
• Sinusitis
• Polyposis

• ABPA
• Haemoptysis, pneumothorax
• Respiratory failure
• Sinusitis, polyposis, anosmia

Gastrointestinal
• Fetal echogenic bowel
• Meconium ileus
• Pancreatic insufficiency
• Rectal prolapse

Infancy

• DIOS
• Intussusception
• Hepatic steatosis, biliary fibrosis
• Rectal prolapse

• DIOS
• Intussusception
• Biliary fibrosis, cirrhosis
• Digestive tract cancer (adenocarcinoma)

Childhood

Adolescence/adulthood

Renal, endocrine, other
• Dehydration
• Hyponatraemic hypochloraemic
metabolic alkalosis

• Renal calculi
• Hyponatraemic hypochloraemic
metabolic alkalosis

• Delayed puberty, osteoporosis, CFRD
• Renal calculi, renal failure
• CBAVD, HPOA
• Arthritis, vasculitis
• Hyponatraemic hypochloraemic
metabolic alkalosis

Fig. 454.5 Approximate age of onset of clinical manifestations of cystic
fibrosis. ABPA, Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis; CBAVD, congenital
bilateral absence of the vas deferens;
CFRD, cystic fibrosis–related diabetes
mellitus; DIOS, distal intestinal obstruction syndrome; HPOA, hypertrophic pulmonary osteoarthritis. (From
O’Sullivan BP, Freedman SD. Cystic
fibrosis. Lancet. 2009;373:1891–1902.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 454 u Cystic Fibrosis
10% of 1-­year-­olds and ∼60% of 5-­year-­olds. The earliest symptom is usually a cough that may begin with a viral respiratory tract infection but then
persists unless treated with antibiotics. With treatment, the generally realized goal is for patients to remain asymptomatic throughout childhood,
except for the periodic development of cough, chest congestion, sputum
production, and/or wheezing that define a pulmonary exacerbation.
The rate of progression of lung disease is the chief determinant of
morbidity and mortality. As lung disease slowly progresses, chronic
cough, sputum production, exercise intolerance, shortness of breath,
and inability to maintain weight are noted. Common pulmonary
complications include atelectasis, hemoptysis, and pneumothorax;
these usually appear in late adolescence or beyond. Cor pulmonale,
respiratory failure, and death eventually supervene unless lung transplantation is accomplished; this has become increasingly uncommon
in childhood. Infection with certain strains of B. cepacia and other
multidrug-­resistant organisms such as non-­tuberculous mycobacteria
may be associated with particularly rapid pulmonary deterioration.
Children with CF are unlikely to exhibit any abnormal findings on
physical exam except during pulmonary exacerbations. Eventual physical findings include increased anteroposterior diameter of the chest,
generalized hyperresonance, scattered or localized coarse crackles, and
digital clubbing. Expiratory wheezes may be heard, a manifestation of
airway inflammation and edema that may or may not be associated with
bronchodilator responsiveness. Cyanosis is a late sign. Even though the
paranasal sinuses are virtually always opacified radiographically, acute
sinusitis is infrequent. Nasal obstruction, rhinorrhea, and anosmia are
common, caused by inflamed, swollen mucous membranes or, in some
cases, nasal polyposis. Nasal polyps are most troublesome between 5
and 20 years of age and often require repeated surgeries to control.

Intestinal Tract

In 15–20% of newborn infants with CF, the ileum is completely
obstructed by meconium (meconium ileus). The frequency is greater
among siblings born subsequent to a child with meconium ileus, and
concordance is particularly striking in monozygotic twins, reflecting
a genetic contribution from one or more unknown modifying genes.
Abdominal distention, emesis, and failure to pass meconium appear in
the first 24-­48 hours of life (see Chapter 135) and often require surgical
intervention. Abdominal radiographs (Fig. 454.6) show dilated loops
of bowel with air-­fluid levels and, frequently, a collection of granular,
“ground-­glass” material in the lower central abdomen. Rarely, meconium peritonitis results from intrauterine rupture of the bowel wall
and can be detected radiographically as the presence of peritoneal or
scrotal calcifications. These infants may need bowel resection, leading
to significant nutritional challenges caused by short bowel syndrome
superimposed upon pancreatic insufficiency.

2667

Constipation and ileal obstruction with fecal material (distal intestinal obstruction syndrome [DIOS]) occur in older children, causing
cramping abdominal pain, abdominal distention, and obstruction that
can be treated with medical approaches to bowel evacuation—typically
oral hyperosmotic polyethylene glycol preparations, and occasionally,
in more severe cases, hyperosmotic contrast enemas.
More than 85% of children with CF have exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, causing protein and fat malabsorption. Symptoms, if untreated,
include frequent, bulky, greasy stools and failure to gain weight even
when food intake appears to be large. Weight gain can be challenging,
but attainment of normal growth and development is an expectation
of treatment. A protuberant abdomen, decreased muscle mass, poor
growth, and delayed maturation are classic and rarely seen physical
signs. Excessive flatus may be a problem even in well-­nourished children. Supplementation with fat-­soluble vitamin preparations has made
deficiencies of vitamins A, E, and K unusual, but vitamin D deficiency
continues to be prevalent, and although rickets is rare, osteoporosis is
common, especially in older patients and those with more severe lung
disease. Class IV-­VI pathogenic variants are associated with pancreatic sufficiency, but patients with these pathogenic variants are prone to
recurrent pancreatitis when they reach adolescence.
Historically a relatively common event, rectal prolapse occurs much
less frequently as the result of earlier diagnosis and initiation of pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy.

Biliary Tract

Infants may occasionally present with neonatal jaundice suggestive of
biliary obstruction. Evidence of later liver dysfunction is most often
detected in the first 15 years of life and can be found in up to 30%
of individuals. Biliary cirrhosis develops in about 5–7% of patients.
Manifestations can include icterus, ascites, hematemesis from esophageal varices, and evidence of hypersplenism. Biliary colic secondary to
cholelithiasis may occur in the second decade or later. Liver disease
occurs independent of genotype but is associated with meconium ileus
and pancreatic insufficiency.

Cystic Fibrosis–Related Diabetes and Pancreatitis

Endocrine pancreatic insufficiency tends to develop in the second decade
and beyond and is more common in patients with a family history of
type 2 diabetes mellitus. It most commonly begins with postprandial
hyperglycemia and may or may not be accompanied by weight loss or
flattening weight gain. Fasting hyperglycemia and elevated hemoglobin
A1c are later manifestations. Ketoacidosis usually does not occur because
insulin deficiency is relative and not absolute, but eye, kidney, and other
vascular complications have been noted in patients living ≥10 years after
the onset of hyperglycemia. Recurrent acute pancreatitis occurs occasionally in adolescents and adults who have residual function CFTR
pathogenic variants with exocrine pancreatic sufficiency.

Genitourinary Tract

Virtually all males are azoospermic because of failure of development of
wolffian duct structures, but sexual function is generally unimpaired. The
female fertility rate is diminished, especially in women who have poor
nutrition or advanced lung disease. Pregnancy is generally tolerated well
by women with good pulmonary function but may accelerate pulmonary
progression in those with advanced lung disease and may lead to glucose intolerance that persists after the pregnancy is over. Urinary incontinence associated with cough occurs in 18–47% of female children and
adolescents.

Sweat Glands
A

B

Fig. 454.6 A and B, Contrast enema study in a newborn infant with

abdominal distention and failure to pass meconium. Notice the small
diameter of the sigmoid and ascending colon and dilated, air-­filled
loops of small intestine. Several air-­fluid levels in the small bowel are
visible on the upright lateral view.

Excessive loss of salt in the sweat predisposes young children to salt
depletion episodes, especially during episodes of gastroenteritis and
during warm weather. These children may present with hypochloremic alkalosis. Hyponatremia is a risk particularly in warm climates.
Frequently, parents notice salt frosting of the skin or a salty taste when
they kiss the child. A few genotypes are associated with relatively normal
sweat chloride values.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2668 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
DIAGNOSIS AND ASSESSMENT

CF is diagnosed when an individual has both a clinical presentation of
the disease (such as elevated immunoreactive trypsinogen in the newborn period or signs and symptoms discussed earlier in older patients)
and evidence of CFTR dysfunction (physiologic assays and/or the
presence of disease-­causing CFTR genetic variants) (Table 454.2). This
simple formulation is complicated by the existence of CFTR genetic
variants that are associated with little or no compromise of CFTR function and are therefore of no or varying clinical consequence, leading to
a number of patients who fall into “gray” areas.

DIAGNOSIS OF CF VIA NEWBORN SCREENING

All CF NBS algorithms begin in the first days of life with the measurement of serum immunoreactive trypsinogen (IRT), a pancreatic
proenzyme that is elevated in almost all infants with CF. Because IRT
levels can fluctuate day by day and season by season, most states set a
cutoff level based on an average of IRT levels (e.g., ≥95% percentile).
Depending on the state, three different CF NBS algorithms are used:
1.	IRT/DNA: This is the most commonly used algorithm. A CFTR gene
pathogenic variant screening panel (whose composition varies by
state) is applied to the original blood spot. Because not all pathogenic
variants are included in the screening panel, the finding of just one
CFTR pathogenic variant represents a positive screen. Some states
(California, New York) perform gene sequencing from the dried
blood spot in response to finding one CFTR gene pathogenic variant.
2.	IRT/IRT: The IRT is repeated 2-­4 weeks later. In infants without CF,
the second IRT is usually normal, whereas in infants with CF, it is
persistently elevated, representing a positive screen. This approach
has been shown to have lower sensitivity than IRT/DNA.
3.	IRT/IRT/DNA: Lower cutoffs are used for IRT than in the states with
IRT/IRT algorithms, and in infants with persistently elevated IRT,
pathogenic variant screening is performed, and the finding of at least
one pathogenic variant represents a positive screen.
A positive CF NBS test only identifies infants with a high likelihood
of having CF, but it is not diagnostic for CF. Any infant with a positive
CF NBS test should have a sweat chloride test (SCT) performed to confirm the diagnosis of CF. In states using the IRT-­IRT algorithm, about
20% of those who have a positive CF NBS are subsequently diagnosed
with CF by SCT. In states using the IRT-­DNA algorithm, only about
10% of infants who are found to have just one CF-­causing pathogenic
variant from the screening panel are found to have CF (depending on
the pathogenic variant screening panel and ethnic background of the
child). Even in cases where two CF-­causing pathogenic variants have

Table 454.2  Diagnostic Criteria for Cystic Fibrosis (CF)
Presence of typical clinical features (respiratory, gastrointestinal, or
genitourinary)
or
A history of CF in a sibling
or
A positive newborn screening test
plus
Laboratory evidence for CFTR (CF transmembrane regulator)
dysfunction:
Two elevated sweat chloride concentrations obtained on separate
days
or
Identification of two CF pathogenic variants
or
An abnormal nasal potential difference measurement

been identified, sweat testing is indicated to rule out laboratory error or
misidentification of newborn blood spots.

DIAGNOSIS OF CYSTIC FIBROSIS OUTSIDE OF
NEWBORN SCREENING

Although most cases of CF are diagnosed through NBS, there is still
a need to consider the diagnosis in the occasional older patient. This
is because NBS is not performed everywhere, and even for individuals who were screened, there is the possibility of a false negative. Most
older patients whose diagnosis was missed early in life will have unusual
class IV, V, or VI pathogenic variants and therefore normal pancreatic
function. A CF diagnosis in individuals outside of NBS relies on (1)
clinical evidence, such as a chronic productive cough resulting from
either bronchitis or chronic sinusitis, nasal polyps, allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis or unexplained bronchiectasis, congenital
bilateral absence of the vas deferens (CBAVD) (in males) or recurrent
pancreatitis, and (2) evidence of CFTR dysfunction (such as CFTR
molecular genetic analysis, SCT, or other CFTR physiologic tests).

Sweat Testing

The sweat test, which involves using pilocarpine iontophoresis to collect sweat and performing chemical analysis of its chloride content, is
the standard approach to the diagnosis of CF. The procedure requires
meticulous attention to detail, and its accuracy can only be assumed
when performed at CF Foundation–accredited care centers. An electric current is used to carry pilocarpine into the skin of the forearm
and locally stimulate the sweat glands because the measurement is validated under conditions of maximal sweat production. Sweat testing is
accurate at any postnatal age, but adequate sweat rates are harder to
attain in infants less than 36 weeks gestational age and/or less than 2
kg in weight. Positive results should be confirmed; for a negative result,
the test should be repeated if suspicion of the diagnosis remains.
More than 60 mmol/L of chloride in sweat is diagnostic of CF when
one or more criteria are present. In individuals with a positive NBS, a
sweat chloride level less than 30 mmol/L indicates that CF is unlikely.
Borderline (or intermediate) values of 30-­
59 mmol/L have been
reported in patients of all ages who have CF with atypical involvement
and require further testing. Table 454.3 lists the conditions associated
with false-­negative and false-­positive sweat test results.
Table 454.3  Conditions Associated with False-­Positive and
False-­Negative Sweat Test Results
WITH FALSE-­POSITIVE RESULTS
Eczema (atopic dermatitis)
Ectodermal dysplasia
Malnutrition/failure to thrive/deprivation
Anorexia nervosa
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
Adrenal insufficiency
Glucose-­6-­phosphatase deficiency
Mauriac syndrome
Fucosidosis
Familial hypoparathyroidism
Hypothyroidism
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus
Pseudohypoaldosteronism
Klinefelter syndrome
Familial cholestasis syndrome
Autonomic dysfunction
Prostaglandin E infusions
Munchausen syndrome by proxy
WITH FALSE-­NEGATIVE RESULTS
Dilution
Malnutrition
Edema
Insufficient sweat quantity
Hyponatremia
Cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator pathogenic
variants with preserved sweat duct function

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 454 u Cystic Fibrosis
DNA Testing

Several commercial laboratories provide screening panels that test for
the most common CFTR pathogenic variants. The American College
of Medical Genetics recommends at least 23; other panels screen for
>100 pathogenic variants. The sensitivity of these panels depends on
the race/ethnicity of the population tested, but is always well under
100%, so it is important to view them as screening, but not definitive,
diagnostic tests. Whole CFTR gene sequencing with additional attention to deletions and duplications is available but is expensive and only
helpful in very select situations.

Other Physiologic Measures of CFTR Function

The finding of increased potential differences across nasal epithelium
(nasal potential difference), that is the increased voltage response
to topical amiloride application, followed by the absence of a voltage response to a β-­adrenergic agonist, has been used to confirm the
diagnosis of CF in patients with equivocal or frankly normal sweat
chloride values. Intestinal current measurements may also provide
additional helpful information, particularly in children who are unable
to cooperate with nasal potential difference testing. These procedures
are primarily used in research applications and have never undergone
extensive validation as a clinical tool.

A

OTHER LABORATORY TESTING OF IMPORTANCE IN
DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT
Pancreatic Function

The diagnosis of pancreatic insufficiency can be made by the quantification of elastase-­1 activity in a fresh stool sample by an enzyme-­linked
immunosorbent assay specific for human elastase. The quantification
of fat malabsorption with a 72-­hour stool collection is rarely performed
in the clinical setting. CF-­related diabetes affects approximately 20% of
adolescents and 40–50% of adults, and clinical guidelines recommend
yearly oral glucose tolerance testing (OGTT) after age 10. OGTT may
sometimes be clinically indicated at an earlier age. Spot testing of blood
and urine glucose levels and glycosylated hemoglobin levels are not
sufficiently sensitive.

Radiology

Hyperinflation of lungs occurs early and is often accompanied by nonspecific peribronchial thickening (Fig. 454.7). Bronchial thickening and
plugging and ring shadows suggesting bronchiectasis usually appear first
in the upper lobes. Nodular densities, patchy atelectasis, and confluent
infiltrate follow. Hilar lymph nodes may be prominent. With advanced
disease, impressive hyperinflation with markedly depressed diaphragms,
anterior bowing of the sternum, and a narrow cardiac shadow are noted.

B

D

2669

C

E

Fig. 454.7 Serial radiographs in a child show the changing appearance of cystic fibrosis over 6 yr. A, At 9 yr, frontal radiograph shows minimal

peribronchial thickening and hyperaerated lungs indistinguishable from asthma. B, Nineteen mo later, the radiographic picture has worsened
considerably. Extensive peribronchial thickening is now noted. Mucoid impaction of the bronchus is seen in the left upper lobe, and hilar shadows
have become abnormally prominent. C, Ten mo later, further deterioration is obvious. Widespread typical changes of cystic fibrosis (CF) are noted
throughout both lungs. D, Follow-­up studies show considerable improvement, which suggested that some of the changes evident on (C) were from
superimposed infection. E, One yr later, note the progressive changes of CF—most severe in the upper lobes bilaterally. (From Long FR, Druhan
SM, Kuhn JP. Diseases of the bronchi and pulmonary aeration. In Slovis T, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby;
2008: Fig. 73-­54.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Percentage of Individuals

2670 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

<2

2–5

6–10

P. aeruginosa
S. aureus
S. maltophilia

A

11–17
18–24
Age (Years)

25–34

35–44

H. influenzae
MRSA

B. cepacia complex
Achromobacter

≥45

Fig. 454.9 Prevalence of respiratory microorganisms by age cohort,

2021. (From the Cystic Fibrosis Patient Registry 2021. Annual Data Report. p. 30. © 2022 Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. Bethesda, Maryland.
https://www.cff.org/sites/default/files/2021-­1 1/Patient-­R egistry-­
Annual-­Data-­Report.pdf)

*

B
Fig. 454.8 CT scans of the chest in cystic fibrosis. A, A 12-­yr-­old male

with moderate lung disease. Airway and parenchymal changes are present throughout both lungs. Multiple areas of bronchiectasis (arrows)
and mucous plugging (arrowheads) can be seen. B, A 19-­yr-­old female
has mostly normal lung with one area of saccular bronchiectasis in the
right upper lobe (arrows) and a focal area of peripheral mucous plugging in the left lower lobe (arrowhead). Lung density is heterogeneous
with areas of normal lung (open arrow) and areas of low attenuation
reflecting segmental and subsegmental air trapping (asterisk).

Cyst formation, extensive bronchiectasis, dilated pulmonary artery
segments, and segmental or lobar atelectasis is often apparent with
advanced disease. Most CF centers obtain chest radiographs (posteroanterior [PA] and lateral) at least annually. CT of the chest can detect heterogeneous hyperinflation and localized thickening of bronchial airway
walls, mucous plugging, focal hyperinflation, and bronchiectasis (Fig.
454.8). CT abnormalities are commonly seen as early as the first year of
life and even in asymptomatic children with normal lung function.
Radiographs of paranasal sinuses reveal panopacification and, often,
failure of frontal sinus development. CT provides better resolution of
sinus changes if this information is required clinically.
Fetal ultrasonography may show pancreatic changes indicative of
CF and suggest ileal obstruction with meconium early in the second
trimester, but this finding is not predictive of meconium ileus at birth.

Pulmonary Function

Infant pulmonary function testing is done routinely for clinical evaluation at a few CF centers, but given its complexity and the need for
sedation, for the most part it is reserved for research protocols. Lung
clearance index (LCI), measured by multiple breath washout, can be
done in infants and young children and is a sensitive measure of ventilation inhomogeneity caused by small airways disease. Currently it is
primarily used for research, but given its ease and applicability, it may
be adopted as a standard monitoring tool in the future as CF care centers become more accustomed to its use.
Standard pulmonary function studies are usually obtained starting at
about 4 years of age and are routinely done by age 6. Forced expiratory
volume in 1 second (FEV1) is the measurement that has been shown
to correlate most closely with mortality and shows a gradual decline
averaging 2–3% per year throughout childhood. Although a small
number of children may already show evidence of airway obstruction

by age 6, trends over the past several decades, as reported by the CFF
patient registry, show a steady improvement in average FEV1 of the
CF population. The proportion of people with CF age 18 years who
are in the normal/mild lung disease category (FEV1 ≥70% predicted)
has increased from 33.8% in 1989 to 78.3% in 2019. The proportion in
the severe lung disease category (FEV1 <40% predicted) has decreased
from 24.0% in 1988 to 2.6% in 2019. Residual volume and functional
residual capacity are increased early in the course of lung disease and
are the cause of decreasing forced vital capacity (FVC) measurement.
Restrictive changes, characterized by declining total lung capacity and
vital capacity, correlate with extensive lung injury and fibrosis and are
a late finding. Testing at each clinic visit is recommended to evaluate
the course of the pulmonary involvement and allow for early intervention when clinically significant decrements are documented—an acute
drop in FEV1 is probably the most sensitive indicator of a pulmonary
exacerbation that should be treated with systemic antibiotics.

Microbiologic Studies

H. influenza and S. aureus are the most common organisms recovered
in young children (Fig. 454.9). Pseudomonas may be acquired early
and is an organism of key significance. P. aeruginosa appears to have
a special propensity for the CF airway and over time characteristically develops a biofilm associated with a mucoid appearance in the
microbiology lab and which correlates with more rapid progression of
lung disease. Once P. aeruginosa develops a mucoid phenotype, it is
extremely difficult to eradicate from the airway. A wide range of other
organisms are frequently recovered, particularly in advanced lung disease; they include a variety of gram-­negative rods, including the B.
cepacia complex, which may be associated with a fulminant downhill
course (cepacia syndrome); Stenotrophomonas maltophilia and Achromobacter xylosoxidans; assorted fungi, especially Aspergillus fumigatus,
which is most important because of the relatively common development of allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis; and nontuberculous mycobacterial species, especially Mycobacterium avium complex
and Mycobacterium abscessus. Airway cultures are obtained regularly,
most typically using oropharyngeal swabs in young children, and then
sputum (which may be induced) in older children capable of expectoration. Oropharyngeal swabs typically give a good indication of the
lower airway flora, but fiberoptic bronchoscopy may be used to gather
lower respiratory tract secretions of infants and young children who do
not expectorate if there is a concern for false-­negative cultures, especially regarding the presence of P. aeruginosa.
The CF airway microbiome consists of a large number of additional
organisms, especially anaerobes that are identified through antigen detection but not culture methods. The significance of this finding and its
therapeutic implications remain somewhat unclear, but it has long been
appreciated that response to antibiotic treatment of pulmonary exacerbations is not always predictable based on culture and sensitivity of airway
cultures.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 454 u Cystic Fibrosis

2671

Search for Frequent CFTR Pathogenic Variants and Sweat Testing

2 CF variants
and/or ST ≥ 60 mmol/L

0-1 CF variant and ST 30-59 mmol/L
1 CF variant and St < 30 mmol/L

0 variant
and ST < 30 mmol/L

Search for Rare CFTR variants

2 CF
variants

1 CF variant
1 CF variant
+1 CF? variant
+1 CFTR-RD variant
and ST < 60 mmol/L or 2 CFTR-RD variants
and ST < 60 mmol/L

NPD/ICM

Abnormal
NPD/ICM

CBAVD

0-1
CF/CFTR-RD
variant

Clinical Context

Bronchiectasis
Pancreatitis

NPD/ICM

normal NPD/ICM
and 1 CF/CFTR-RD variant
and ST < 30-59 mmol/L

Normal
NPD/ICM

normal NPD/ICM
and 0-1 CF/CFTR-RD variant
and ST < 30 mmol/L

Abnormal NPD/ICM

CF

Discuss the diagnosis
definition with the clinician

CFTR-RD

CF*

CFTR-RD unlikely

Fig. 454.10 2015 European Cystic Fibrosis Society recommended algorithm for diagnosis of CFTR-­RD. Global diagnostic algorithm for CF and

CFTR-­RD. A global flowchart of genetic and functional diagnostic testing in CF and CFTR-­RD is presented. CBAVD, Congenital bilateral absence
of the vas deferens; CF, cystic fibrosis; CF? pathogenic variant, pathogenic variant of unproven or uncertain clinical significance; CF*, diagnosis
of CF or consider this diagnosis; CFTR, cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator; CFTR-­RD, CFTR-­related disorders; ICM, intestinal
current measurement; NPD, nasal potential difference; ST, sweat test (repeated; false positive should be excluded/sought in a specialized center).
(From Bombieri C, Claustres M, De Boeck K, et al. Recommendations for the classification of diseases as CFTR-­related disorders. J Cyst Fibros.
2011;10[Suppl 2]:S86–102, Fig 1.)

MANIFESTATIONS OF REDUCED CFTR FUNCTION
THAT DO NOT MEET CRITERIA FOR CF
CFTR-­Related Metabolic Syndrome

There is a subset of infants with a positive newborn screen for CF who
have inconclusive diagnostic testing. The term for this condition, used in
the United States, is CFTR-­related metabolic syndrome (CRMS); in Europe,
the analogous term is CF screen positive, inconclusive diagnosis (CFSPID). Data from the CF Foundation National Patient Registry show that
approximately one infant is diagnosed with CRMS for every five cases of
CF. An infant is determined to have CRMS if they are asymptomatic with a
positive CF NBS test and either (1) sweat test <30 mmol/L and two CFTR
pathogenic variants, at least one of which has unclear phenotypic consequences, or (2) sweat test 30-­59 mmol/L and zero or one CF-­causing CFTR
pathogenic variant.
CRMS should be distinguished from CFTR-­related disorder (CFTR­RD), described later, in that CRMS is a diagnosis that arises only from
CF NBS in otherwise asymptomatic individuals.
Data on long-­term outcomes of infants with CRMS are limited
because universal CF NBS is relatively new and CRMS has only
recently been recognized. The majority of CRMS infants appear to have
normal growth and do not develop any pulmonary manifestations of
CF, although it is not unusual for them to grow P. aeruginosa from their
airways in the absence of any other clinical manifestations. However,
a small percentage (∼5–10%) will develop signs and symptoms of CF,
including measures of CFTR dysfunction such as a clinically elevated
sweat chloride or abnormalities in other CFTR functional assays. This
is a diagnosis that it is important for the general pediatrician to be
aware of, because these children are often lost to follow-­up by CF care
centers.

CFTR-­Related Disorder

The diagnosis of CFTR-­RD has been defined as a monosymptomatic
clinical entity associated with CFTR dysfunction that does not fulfill the
diagnostic criteria for CF. Common manifestations include CBAVD,
recurrent pancreatitis, chronic sinusitis, nasal polyposis, or bronchiectasis. This is more typically diagnosed in adults but sometimes might

appear in late adolescence. An approach to the evaluation of patients
with CFTR-­RD is seen in Figure 454.10.

TREATMENT
General Approach to Care

Initial efforts after diagnosis should be intensive and should include
baseline assessment, initiation of treatment to prevent pulmonary
involvement in young infants or reverse it in those diagnosed later,
nutritional maintenance or remediation, and education of the
patient and parents. Follow-­up evaluations are scheduled every 1-­3
months, depending on the age at diagnosis, because many aspects
of the condition require careful monitoring. An interval history and
physical examination should be obtained at each visit. A sputum
sample or, if that is not available, a lower pharyngeal swab taken
during or after a forced cough is obtained for culture and antibiotic susceptibility studies. Because irreversible loss of pulmonary
function from low-­grade infection can occur gradually and without acute symptoms, emphasis is placed on a thorough pulmonary
history and physical exam and routine pulmonary function testing.
Table 454.4 lists symptoms and signs that suggest the need for more
intensive antibiotic and physical therapy (PT). Protection against
exposure to MRSA, P. aeruginosa, B. cepacian, and other resistant
gram-­negative organisms is essential, including contact isolation
procedures and careful attention to cleaning of inhalation therapy equipment. A nurse, physical therapist, respiratory therapist,
social worker, and dietitian, as members of the multidisciplinary
care team, should evaluate children regularly and contribute to
the development of a comprehensive daily care plan. Considerable
education and programs to empower families and older children to
take responsibility for care are likely to result in the best adherence
to daily care programs. Screening patients and caregivers for anxiety and depression annually is expected to identify issues that can
interfere with adherence to daily care. Standardization of practice,
on the part of both caregivers and families, as well as close monitoring and early intervention for new or increasing symptoms, appears
to result in the best long-­term outcomes.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2672 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Because secretions of CF patients are not adequately hydrated,
attention in early childhood to oral hydration, especially during warm
weather or with acute gastroenteritis, may minimize complications
associated with impaired mucous clearance. Intravenous therapy for
dehydration should be initiated early.

Table 454.4  Symptoms and Signs Associated with
Exacerbation of Pulmonary Infection in
Patients with Cystic Fibrosis
SYMPTOMS
Increased frequency and duration of cough
Increased sputum production
Change in appearance of sputum
Increased shortness of breath
Decreased exercise tolerance
Decreased appetite
Feeling of increased congestion in the chest
SIGNS
Increased respiratory rate
Use of accessory muscles for breathing
Intercostal retractions
Change in results of auscultatory examination of chest
Decline in measures of pulmonary function consistent with the
presence of obstructive airway disease
Fever and leukocytosis
Weight loss
New infiltrate on chest radiograph
From Ramsey B. Management of pulmonary disease in patients with cystic fibrosis. N
Engl J Med. 1996;335:179.

The goal of therapy is to maintain a stable condition for prolonged
periods. This can be accomplished for most patients by interval evaluation and adjustments of the home treatment program. Some children
have episodic acute or low-­grade chronic lung infection that progresses. For these patients, intensive inhalation and airway clearance
and intravenous antibiotics are indicated. Improvement is most reliably
accomplished in a hospital setting; selected patients have demonstrated
successful outcomes while completing these treatments at home. Intravenous antibiotics may be required infrequently or as often as every 2-­3
months. The goal of treatment is to return patients to their previous
pulmonary and functional status.
The basic daily care program varies according to the age of the child,
the degree of pulmonary involvement, other system involvement, and
the time available for therapy. The major components of this care are
pulmonary and nutritional therapies. Because therapy is medication
intensive, iatrogenic problems frequently arise. Monitoring for complications is also an important part of management.

Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane Conductance
Regulator Modulator Therapies

CFTR modulator therapies are small molecules taken orally that correct
the processing and function of the variant CFTR protein in multiple organs
and reduce or correct manifestations of disease. They have been developed
to target specific classes of pathogenic variants (see Fig. 454.2). Ivacaftor
is a small-­molecule potentiator of the CFTR pathogenic variant G551D
(present in ∼5% of patients). Ivacaftor activates the CFTR-­G551D variant
protein, a class III CFTR pathogenic variant that results in protein localized to the plasma membrane but loss of chloride channel function (Table
454.5; Fig. 454.11). Ivacaftor therapy results in improvement in FEV1 by an
average of 10.6%, decreases the frequency of pulmonary exacerbations by

Table 454.5  Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane Regulator Modulators for Cystic Fibrosis
DRUG

FDA-­APPROVED INDICATION

FORMULATIONS

USUAL DOSAGE

Ivacaftor

4 mo with a responsive
pathogenic variant*

25, 50, 75 mg granule packets†
150 mg tablets

<6 yr: weight-­based dosing‡;
≥6 yr: 150 mg q12h

Lumacaftor/ivacaftor

≥2 yr, F508del-­homozygous

100/125, 200/125 mg tabs;
100/125, 150/188 mg granule
packets†

6-­11 yr: 200/250 mg q12h
≥12 yr: 400/250 mg q12h§

Tezacaftor/ivacaftor

≥6 yr, F508del-­homozygous or
F508del-­heterozygous with
another responsive pathogenic
variant||

Tablets: tezacaftor once per day
and ivacaftor twice per day q12h

6-­11 yr, <30 kg;
am: 50 mg tezacaftor
+ 75 mg ivacaftor
pm: 75 mg ivacaftor
6-­11 yr, ≥30 kg and 12 yr:
am: 100 mg tezacaftor + 150 mg
tab ivacaftor
pm: 150 mg tab ivacaftor

Elexacaftor/tezacaftor/ivacaftor

≥6 yr, one copy of F508del

Tablets: 2 triple-­combination
tablets (orange) in am and one
ivacaftor tablet (blue) in pm

2 yr - <6 yr, one copy of F508del

ELX 80 or 100 mg
TEZ 40 or 50 mg
IVA 60 or 75 mg

6-­11 yr, <30 kg;
am: elexacaftor 50 mg/tezacaftor
25 mg/ivacaftor 37.5 mg
(2 combination tablets)
pm: ivacaftor 75 mg
6-­11 yr, ≥30 kg and 12 yr:
am: elexacaftor 100 mg/tezacaftor
50 mg/ivacaftor 75 mg (2
combination tablets)
pm: ivacaftor 150 mg
<14 kg: am: ELX 80 / TEZ 40
am and pm: IVA 60
≥14 kg: am: ELX 100 / TEZ 50
am and pm: IVA 75

*Approved pathogenic variants: G551D, S549N, G1244E, G178R, S1251N, G551S, G1349D, S1255P, R117H, E56K, K1060T, P67L, E193K, A1067T, R74W, L206W, G1069R, D110E,
R347H, D579G, R1070Q, D1270N, D110H, R352Q, S945L, R1070W, R117C, A455E, S977F, F1074L, F1052V, D115H; 3849 þ 10 kb C>T, 2789 þ5G>A, 3273-­26A>G, 711þ3A>G, E831X.
†The granules should be mixed with 5 mL of room-­temperature or cold soft food or liquid and consumed within 1 hr.
‡In patients 4 mo to 6 yr old, the recommended dosage is 25 mg every 12 hr for weight 5 kg to <7 kg, 50 mg every 12 hr for those weighing <14 kg, and 75 mg every 12 hr for those weighing ≥14 kg.
§In patients 2-­5 yr old, the recommended dosage is 100/125 mg every 12 hr for those weighing <14 kg and 150/188 mg every 12 hr for those weighing ≥14 kg.
||F508del heterozygotes with the following pathogenic variants: E56K, K1060T, P67L, E193K, A1067T, R74W, L206W, D110E, D110H, R347H, D579G, R1070Q, D1270N, R352Q, S945L,
R1070W, R117C, A455E, S977F, F1074L, F1052V, D1152H, 3849þ10kb C>T, 2789 þ5G>A, 3273-­26A>G, 711þ3A>G.
Modified from The Medical Letter on Drugs and Therapeutics: Tezacaftor/Ivacaftor (Symdeko) for cystic fibrosis. Med Lett. 2018;60(1558):174–176, Table 3.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 454 u Cystic Fibrosis

2673

Fig. 454.11 Cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) pharmacologic modulators have different modes of action. A, Read-­
through compounds, which include aminoglycoside antibiotics (e.g., gentamicin, tobramycin), act by suppressing premature termination codons
(PTCs), thus permitting translation to continue to the normal termination of the transcript and thus increasing the total amount of complete CFTR
being produced in the cell. B, Correctors (e.g., VX-­809, also known as lumacaftor; VX-­661) potentially promote folding of variant CFTR protein, allowing it to escape ER degradation and reach the cell surface, thus increasing the number of channels present at the plasma membrane. C, Stabilizers
include compounds (e.g., hepatocyte growth factor) that enhance CFTR retention/anchoring at the cell surface, thus also contributing to increase the
number of channels present at the cell surface. D, Potentiators (e.g., VX-­770, also known as ivacaftor) activate CFTR, that is, increase the open probability (Po) of the channel by regulating its gating and possibly also the conductance. (From Bell SC, De Boeck K, Amaral MD. New pharmacological
approaches for cystic fibrosis: promises, progress, pitfalls. Pharmacol Therapeu. 2015;145:19–34, Fig. 4.)

55%, decreases sweat chloride by an average of 48 mEq/L, and increases
weight gain by an average of 2.7 kg. Ivacaftor is approved for patients older
than 2 years of age with class III and class IV pathogenic variants.
The combination of ivacaftor with lumacaftor, a corrector that stabilizes misfolded F508del and enables trafficking of the variant molecule
to the apical cell membrane where it is potentiated by ivacaftor, is available for patients older than 6 years of age who are homozygous for the
F508del pathogenic variant (see Fig. 454.11). This medication is associated with smaller increments in pulmonary and nutritional outcomes
but is an important proof-­of-­concept treatment.
Tezacaftor and ivacaftor is another combination indicated for
patients ≥6 years with one or two Phe508del alleles. This combination
improves predicted FEV1 and overall well-­being (see Table 454.5). VX-­
445 combined with tezacaftor-­ivacaftor adds another CFTR correction
agent; the triple combination improves predicted FEV1 and reduces
sweat chloride levels.
Elexacaftor/tezacaftor/ivacaftor, a triple combination therapy
for patients ≥6 years with at least one copy of Phe508del alleles was
approved in 2019 (see Table 454.5). This therapy is a highly effective
modulator, and 90% of patients with CF are eligible to use this treatment. In a phase 3 randomized, double-­blind trial for patients homozygous for Phe508del comparing elexacaftor/tezacaftor/ivacaftor to
tezacaftor/ivacaftor alone, patients on triple therapy had a significant
increase in FEV1 percent predicted of 10% and a dramatic decrease
in sweat chloride levels by 45 mM compared with double therapy at
4 weeks. In a phase 3 randomized, double-­blind, placebo-­controlled
clinical trial for patients with one copy of Phe508del, triple therapy was
associated with a decrease in sweat chloride by 41.8 mmol/L and a
marked increase in FEV1 percent predicted of 14% at 24 weeks. The
success of these highly effective CFTR modulator therapies, ivacaftor
for class III pathogenic variants and elexacaftor/tezacaftor/ivacaftor for
Phe508del, has been life-­changing. Ivacaftor and the triple combination therapy are being evaluated for therapeutic efficacy in younger
children and infants with CF.
However, at least 10% of patients with CF have pathogenic variants
that are not responsive to these highly effective modulator therapies.
Patients with class I pathogenic variants caused by premature termination codons and failure to translate CFTR protein will require new
approaches to therapy to acquire normal CFTR protein and function.
Gene therapy, gene editing, and antisense oligonucleotide therapeutic
approaches are currently being developed.

Inhalation Therapy

Pulmonary Therapy

Antibiotic Therapy

The object of pulmonary therapy is to clear secretions from airways
and to control infection. When a child is not doing well, every potentially useful aspect of therapy should be reconsidered.

Human recombinant Dnase (2.5 mg) enzymatically dissolves extracellular DNA released by neutrophils, a major contributor to the characteristically sticky and viscous CF airway secretions. Recombinant
human Dnase is usually given as a single daily aerosol dose; it improves
pulmonary function, decreases the number of pulmonary exacerbations, and promotes a sense of well-­being. Benefit for those with mild,
moderate, and severe lung disease has been documented. Improvement is sustained for 12 months or longer with continuous therapy.
Nebulized hypertonic saline, acting as a hyperosmolar agent, is
believed to draw water into the airway and rehydrate mucus and the
periciliary fluid layer, resulting in improved mucociliary clearance.
Seven percent hypertonic saline nebulized 2-­4 times daily increases
mucous clearance and reduces pulmonary exacerbation, with only a
slight short-­term improvement in pulmonary function.

Airway Clearance Therapy

Airway clearance treatment begins in infancy with chest percussion
(with or without postural drainage) and derives its rationale from the
idea that cough clears mucus from large airways, but chest vibrations
are required to shear secretions from the airway wall and move secretions from small airways, where expiratory flow rates are low. Chest
PT can be particularly useful for patients with CF because they accumulate secretions in small airways first, even before the onset of symptoms. Cessation of chest PT in children with mild to moderate airflow
limitation results in deterioration of lung function within 3 weeks, and
prompt improvement of function occurs when therapy is resumed, but
it is less clear which available modality is best. Airway clearance therapy is recommended 2-­4 times a day, depending on the severity of lung
dysfunction, and usually increased during acute exacerbations. Cough,
huffing, or forced expirations are encouraged intermittently throughout the session. Vest-­type mechanical percussors (high-­frequency chest
wall oscillation) are commonly used past infancy because of their convenience, as are a variety of oscillatory positive expiratory pressure
devices (such as Acapella and Aerobika) and other controlled breathing
techniques (e.g., autogenic drainage). Routine aerobic exercise appears
to slow the rate of decline of pulmonary function, and benefit has also
been documented with weight training. No one airway clearance technique can be shown to be superior to any other, so all modes should
be considered in the development of an airway clearance prescription.
Adherence to daily therapy is important but rarely achieved; therefore
airway clearance technique plans are individualized for each patient.
Antibiotics are the mainstay of therapy designed to control progression
of lung infection. The goal is to reduce the intensity of endobronchial
infection and to delay progressive lung damage. The usual guidelines

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2674 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Table 454.6  Antimicrobial Agents for Cystic Fibrosis Lung Infection
ROUTE

ORGANISMS

AGENTS

DOSAGE (mg/kg/24 hr)

NO. DOSES/24 hr

Oral

Staphylococcus aureus

Dicloxacillin

25-­50

4

Linezolid

20

2

Cephalexin

50

4

Clindamycin

10-­30

3-­4

Amoxicillin-­clavulanate

25-­45

2-­3

Haemophilus influenzae

Amoxicillin

50-­100

2-­3

Pseudomonas aeruginosa

Ciprofloxacin

20-­30

2-­3

Burkholderia cepacia

Trimethoprim-­
sulfamethoxazole

8-­10*

2-­4

Empirical

Azithromycin

10, day 1; 5, days 2-­5

1

Erythromycin

30-­50

3-­4

Nafcillin

100-­200

4-­6

Vancomycin

40

3-­4

Tobramycin

8-­12

1

Amikacin

15-­30

2-­3

Ticarcillin

400

4

Piperacillin

300-­400

4

Ticarcillin-­clavulanate

400†

4

Piperacillin-­tazobactam

240-­400‡

3

Meropenem

60-­120

3

Imipenem-­cilastatin

45-­100

3-­4

Ceftazidime

150

3

Aztreonam

150-­200

4

Chloramphenicol

50-­100

4

Meropenem

60-­120

3

Tobramycin (inhaled)

300§

2

Aztreonam (inhaled)

75

3

Intravenous

S. aureus

P. aeruginosa

B. cepacia

Aerosol

*Quantity of trimethoprim.
†Quantity of ticarcillin.
‡Quantity of piperacillin.
§In mg per dose.

for acute chest infections, such as fever, tachypnea, or chest pain, are
often absent. Consequently, all aspects of the patient’s history and
examination, including anorexia, weight loss, and diminished activity,
must be used to guide the frequency and duration of therapy. Antibiotic treatment varies from intermittent short courses of one antibiotic
to nearly continuous treatment with one or more antibiotics. Dosages
for some antibiotics are often 2-­3 times the amount recommended for
minor infections because patients with CF have proportionately more
lean body mass and higher clearance rates for many antibiotics than
other individuals. In addition, it is difficult to achieve effective drug
levels of many antimicrobials in respiratory tract secretions.

Oral Antibiotic Therapy

Indications for oral antibiotic therapy in a patient with CF include
the presence of respiratory tract symptoms, physical signs, or changes
in pulmonary function testing or chest x-­ray. Treatment is guided by
identification of pathogenic organisms in respiratory tract cultures and
in vitro sensitivity testing. Common organisms, including S. aureus
(MRSA or methicillin-­susceptible S. aureus [MSSA]), nontypeable H.
influenzae, P. aeruginosa, B. cepacian, and other gram-­negative rods,
are encountered with increasing frequency. The usual course of therapy

is 2 weeks, and maximal doses are recommended. Table 454.6 lists useful oral antibiotics. The quinolones are the only broadly effective oral
antibiotics for Pseudomonas infection, but resistance against these
agents may emerge. Macrolides may reduce the virulence properties of
P. aeruginosa, such as biofilm production, and contribute antiinflammatory effects. Long-­term therapy with azithromycin 3 times a week
improves lung function in patients with chronic P. aeruginosa infection.

Aerosolized Antibiotic Therapy

Aerosolized antibiotics are often used as part of daily therapy when the
airways are infected with P. aeruginosa. Aerosolized tobramycin inhalation solution or powder, or aztreonam inhalation solution used as a
suppressive therapy (on 1 month, off 1 month), may reduce symptoms,
improve pulmonary function, and decrease the occurrence of pulmonary exacerbations. Although these therapies are sometimes used in
acute pulmonary exacerbations, the evidence to support this application is limited.
Another important indication for aerosolized antibiotic therapy is to
eradicate P. aeruginosa in the airways after initial detection. Early infection may be cleared for months to several years in this way, although
eventual reinfection is common. Other antibiotics have been used via

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 454 u Cystic Fibrosis

2675

inhalation, including liposomal amikacin and levofloxacin for P. aeruginosa, and there was no inferiority of efficacy compared with inhaled
tobramycin.

guaifenesin do not effectively assist with the removal of secretions from
the respiratory tract. Inspiratory muscle training can enhance maximum oxygen consumption during exercise along with FEV1.

Intravenous Antibiotic Therapy

TREATMENT OF PULMONARY COMPLICATIONS
Atelectasis

For the patient who has not responded to oral antibiotics and intensive
home measures with return of signs, symptoms, and FEV1 to baseline,
intravenous antibiotic therapy is indicated. This therapy is usually initiated in the hospital but is sometimes completed on an ambulatory
basis if the likelihood of complete adherence to the therapeutic regimen is good. The ideal duration of treatment is unknown; although
many patients show improvement within 7 days, many CF physicians
believe that it is usually advisable to extend the period of treatment
to at least 14 days. Permanent intravenous access can be provided for
long-­term or frequent courses of therapy in the hospital or at home.
Thrombophilia screening should be considered before the use of totally
implantable intravenous devices or for recurring problems with venous
catheters.
Table 454.6 lists commonly used intravenous antibiotics. In general,
treatment of Pseudomonas infection is thought to require two-­drug
therapy. A third agent may be given for optimal coverage of S. aureus
or other organisms. Aminoglycosides are usually effective when given
every 24 hours to minimize toxicity and optimize convenience. Some
CF physicians use peak and trough levels to guide dosing, but most clinical pharmacists recommend measuring levels at other times, commonly
2 and 12 hours, to use pharmacokinetic calculations to guide dosing.
Changes in therapy should be guided by lack of improvement more than
by culture results; sensitivities do not always predict response to therapy,
and this may be because of the presence of other organisms that are not
detected by culture methods. If patients do not show improvement, complications such as right heart failure; asthma; or infection with viruses, A.
fumigatus (especially allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis, ABPA)
(see Chapter 283), nontuberculous mycobacteria (see Chapter 263), or
other unusual organisms should be considered. B. cepacia complex and
Acinetobacter are gram-­negative rods that may be particularly refractory
to antimicrobial therapy. Infection control in both the outpatient and
inpatient medical setting is critically important to prevent nosocomial
spread of resistant bacterial organisms between patients.

Bronchodilator Therapy

Reversible airway obstruction occurs in many children with CF, sometimes in conjunction with frank asthma or allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis. Reversible obstruction is conventionally defined as
improvement of ≥12% in FEV1 or FVC after inhalation of a bronchodilator. In many patients with CF, these may improve by only 5–10%
(physiologic response), but subjects may report subjective benefit.

Antiinflammatory Agents

Corticosteroids are useful for the treatment of allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis and severe asthma occasionally encountered in children with CF. Prolonged systemic corticosteroid treatment of CF lung
disease reduces the decline in lung function modestly but causes predictably prohibitive side effects. Inhaled corticosteroids have theoretical appeal, but there are contradictory and weak data regarding efficacy
unless the patient has clinically diagnosable asthma. Ibuprofen, given
chronically in high doses adjusted to achieve a peak serum concentration of 50-­100 μg/mL, is associated with a slowing of disease progression, particularly in younger patients with mild lung disease. However,
there are concerns regarding side effects of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs, so this therapy has not gained broad acceptance. Macrolide antibiotics have an antiinflammatory effect, and 3 days/week of
azithromycin has been shown to reduce the likelihood of the development of pulmonary exacerbations, especially in patients with chronic
Pseudomonas airway infection, so this is a commonly used therapy.

Other Therapies

Attempts to clear recalcitrant atelectasis and airway plugging with bronchopulmonary lavage and direct instillation of various medications are
sometimes used in exceptional cases; there is no evidence for sustained
benefit from repeated procedures. Expectorants such as iodides and

Lobar atelectasis occurs relatively infrequently; it may be asymptomatic
and noted only at the time of a routine chest radiograph. Aggressive
intravenous therapy with antibiotics and increased chest PT directed at
the affected lobe may be effective. If there is no improvement in 5-­7 days,
bronchoscopic examination of the airways may be indicated. If the atelectasis does not resolve, continued intensive home therapy is indicated
because atelectasis may resolve during a period of weeks or months.

Hemoptysis

Endobronchial bleeding usually reflects airway wall erosion into
hypertrophied bronchial vessels secondary to infection. Although
more common in patients with advanced disease, it is sometimes seen
in adolescents with relatively mild lung disease. Blood streaking of
sputum is particularly common. Small-­volume hemoptysis (<20 mL)
is usually viewed as a need for intensified antimicrobial therapy and
chest PT. Massive hemoptysis, defined as total blood loss of ≥250 mL
in a 24-­hr period, is rare in the first decade and occurs in <1% of adolescents, but it requires close monitoring and the capability to replace
blood losses rapidly. Bronchoscopy rarely reveals the site of bleeding.
Bronchial artery embolization can be useful to control persistent, significant hemoptysis.

Pneumothorax

Pneumothorax (see Chapter 461) is encountered uncommonly in children and teenagers with CF, although it may lead to significant compromise in lung function and occasionally may be life-­threatening. The
episode may be asymptomatic but is often attended by chest and shoulder pain, shortness of breath, or hemoptysis. A small air collection that
does not grow can be observed closely. Chest tube placement with or
without pleurodesis is often the initial therapy. Intravenous antibiotics are also begun on admission. Video-­assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) with plication of blebs, apical pleural stripping, and basal
pleural abrasion should be considered if the air leak persists. Surgical
intervention is usually well tolerated even in cases of advanced lung
disease. The thoracotomy tube is removed as soon as possible. Previous
pneumothorax with or without pleurodesis is not a contraindication to
subsequent lung transplantation.

Allergic Bronchopulmonary Aspergillosis

Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis occurs in 5–10% of patients
with CF and may manifest as wheezing, increased cough, shortness of
breath, and marked hyperinflation or, most commonly, a decrease in
FEV1 that does not respond to antibiotic therapy (see Chapter 283). In
some patients, a chest radiograph shows new focal infiltrates. A highly
elevated total serum immunoglobulin E (IgE) level (>1,000) is usually
the initial indication of the diagnosis. The presence of rust-­colored sputum, the recovery of Aspergillus organisms from the sputum, a positive skin test for A. fumigatus, the demonstration of specific IgE and
IgG antibodies against A. fumigatus, or the presence of eosinophils in
a fresh sputum sample supports the diagnosis. Treatment is directed
at controlling the inflammatory reaction with oral corticosteroids.
Oral antifungals are usually reserved for patients who relapse after initial steroid treatment. For refractory cases, omalizumab, humanized
monoclonal anti-­IgE, has been effective.

Nontuberculous Mycobacteria Infection

See Chapter 263.
Injured airways with poor clearance may be colonized by M. avium-­
complex but also M. abscessus, Mycobacterium chelonae, and Mycobacterium kansasii. Distinguishing endobronchial colonization (frequent)
from invasive infection (infrequent) is challenging. Persistent fevers
and new infiltrates or cystic lesions coupled with the finding of acid-­
fast organisms on sputum smear suggest infection. Infection with
these organisms, or at least its recognition, has become increasingly

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2676 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
common. Treatment is prolonged and requires multiple antimicrobial
agents. Symptoms may improve, but the nontuberculous mycobacteria
are not usually cleared from the lungs.

Sleep-­Disordered Breathing

Particularly with advanced pulmonary disease and during chest exacerbations, individuals with CF may experience more sleep arousals, less
time in rapid eye movement sleep, nocturnal hypoxemia, hypercapnia,
and associated neurobehavioral impairment. Nocturnal hypoxemia
may hasten the onset of pulmonary hypertension and right-­sided heart
failure. Efficacy of specific interventions for this complication of CF has
not been systematically assessed. Prompt treatment of airway symptoms and nocturnal oxygen supplementation or bilevel positive airway
pressure support should be considered in selected cases, especially in
patients with advanced lung disease.

Acute Respiratory Failure

Acute respiratory failure (see Chapter 86) rarely occurs in patients with
mild to moderate lung disease and is usually the result of a severe viral
or other infectious illness. Because patients with this complication can
regain their previous status, intensive therapy is indicated. In addition
to aerosol, postural drainage, and intravenous antibiotic treatment,
oxygen is required to raise the arterial Pao2. An increasing Pco2 may
require ventilatory assistance. Endotracheal or bronchoscopic suction
may be necessary to clear airway inspissated secretions and can be
repeated daily. Right-­sided heart failure should be treated vigorously.
High-­dose steroids have been anecdotally reported to be of benefit in
this setting. Recovery is often slow. Intensive intravenous antibiotic
therapy and postural drainage should be continued for 1-­2 weeks after
the patient has regained baseline status.

Chronic Respiratory Failure

Patients with CF acquire chronic respiratory failure after prolonged
deterioration of lung function. Although this complication can occur
at any age, it is seen most frequently in adult patients. Because a long-­
standing Pao2 <50 mm Hg promotes the development of right-­sided
heart failure, patients usually benefit from low-­flow oxygen to raise
arterial Po2 to ≥55 mm Hg. Increasing hypercapnia may prevent the
use of optimal fraction of inspired oxygen. Most patients improve
somewhat with intensive antibiotic and pulmonary therapy measures
and can be discharged from the hospital. Low-­flow oxygen therapy is
needed at home, especially with sleep. Noninvasive ventilatory support
can improve gas exchange and has been documented to enhance quality of life. Ventilatory support may be particularly useful for patients
awaiting lung transplantation. These patients usually display pulmonary hypertension and cor pulmonale, and this complication should be
treated. Caution should be exercised to avoid ventilation-­suppressing
metabolic alkalosis that results from CF-­related chloride depletion and,
in many cases, from diuretic-­induced bicarbonate retention. Chronic
pain (headache, chest pain, abdominal pain, and limb pain) is frequent
at the end of life and responds to judicious use of analgesics, including
opioids. Dyspnea has been ameliorated with nebulized fentanyl.

Pulmonary Hypertension and Cor Pulmonale

Individuals with long-­standing, advanced pulmonary disease, especially those with severe hypoxemia (Pao2 <50 mm Hg), often acquire
pulmonary hypertension and chronic right-­sided heart failure. Evidence for concomitant left ventricular dysfunction is often found. The
arterial Po2 should be maintained at >50 mm Hg, if possible, and hypercarbia corrected with noninvasive ventilation or intubation if necessary.
Intensive pulmonary therapy, including intravenous antibiotics, is most
important. Adjunctive therapy with salt restriction, diuretics, and pulmonary vasodilators may be indicated. The prognosis for heart failure
is poor, but a number of patients survive for ≥5 years after the appearance of heart failure. Heart-­lung transplantation may be an option.

Lung Transplantation

Lung transplantation is an option for end-­stage lung disease (see Chapter 492). Criteria for referral continue to be a subject of investigation
and ideally include estimates of longevity with and without transplant

based on lung function and exercise tolerance data. Survival and quality
of life after lung transplantation are better in patients with CF than other
chronic lung diseases, probably because of the relatively younger age of
recipients with CF, but the current estimated 5-­year survival is about
50%, somewhat reduced compared with that of other solid organ transplants. Because of bronchiolitis obliterans (see Chapter 443.1) and other
transplant-­related complications, transplanted lungs cannot be expected
to function for the lifetime of a recipient, and repeat transplantation is
increasingly common. The demand for donor lungs exceeds the supply,
and waiting lists and duration of waits continue to be a problem. Importantly, since the initiation of treatment with elexacaftor/tezacaftor/
ivacaftor, some patients with chronic lung disease have significantly
improved so that they no longer require listing for lung transplantation.

Nutritional Therapy

Up to 90% of patients with CF have loss of exocrine pancreatic function
leading to inadequate digestion and absorption of fats and proteins.
They require dietary adjustment and augmentation, pancreatic enzyme
replacement, and supplementary vitamins. In general, children with
CF need to exceed the usual required daily caloric intake to grow. Daily
supplements of the fat-­soluble vitamins are required.

Diet

Historically, at the time of diagnosis, many infants presented with
nutritional deficits; this situation has changed because of newborn
screening, but even at 2-­4 weeks, it is not uncommon to see that weight
gain has begun to fall off the standard curve.
Most children with CF have a higher-­than-­normal caloric need
because of malabsorption despite the use of pancreatic enzyme supplementation. Encouragement to eat high-­calorie foods is important
and often begins with more concentrated, high-­calorie formulas in
the first year. Even so, most mothers can breastfeed successfully. It is
vitally important to promote adequate weight gain in the early years,
both because of a clear relationship to later lung function and because
early deficiencies make later catch-­up growth more difficult. Not infrequently, feeding problems can negatively affect parent–child interactions at meal time, and behavioral interventions can improve caloric
intake. The liberal use of appetite stimulants, especially cyproheptadine,
in early childhood makes the struggle a bit easier. Poorly controlled
lung disease increases metabolism and decreases appetite and needs to
be considered when efforts to improve weight gain are unsuccessful.
Maintenance of good weight gain and body mass index in the first
year of life leads to better long-­term preservation of lung function, but
there is a strong correlation between body mass index and FEV1 that
persists through all ages in people with CF. Better nutrition also leads
to improved quality of life and psychologic well-­being and provides
better reserves when weight loss occurs in association with intermittent acute pulmonary exacerbations.
Malabsorption is an important contributor to nutritional deficiencies, and it is important to ensure that pancreatic enzyme dosing is
adequate and consistently being taken correctly with all meals and
feedings. Appetite stimulants when cyproheptadine is not successful
may include megestrol, oxandrolone, dronabinol, antidepressants such
as mirtazapine, and even growth hormone. CF-­related diabetes needs
to be ruled out.
When all these therapies fail, weight stabilization or gain can be
achieved with nocturnal feeding via nasogastric tube or gastrostomy
tube. These are most commonly resorted to in infants and adolescents,
the two age-­groups that have the most difficulty with weight gain
because of high-­normal demands.

Pancreatic Enzyme Replacement

Pancreatic exocrine replacement therapy given with ingested food
reduces, but does not fully correct, stool fat and nitrogen losses. Current products are enteric-­coated, pH-­sensitive enzyme microspheres
that come in capsules and are given to children before they can swallow by opening the capsule and mixing the beads in small amounts of
acidic foods such as applesauce. Strengths ranging from 3 to 40,000
IU of lipase/capsule are available. Administration of excessive doses
has been linked to fibrosing colonopathy and colonic strictures, so

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 454 u Cystic Fibrosis

2677

recommendations are for enzyme dosing to stay below 2,500 lipase
units/kg/meal in most circumstances. Snacks should also be covered.
Some enzyme replacement therapies provide bicarbonate in addition
to the enzymes, which may be helpful for a subset of patients to correct acid pH in the duodenum, which is caused by a lack of exocrine
pancreatic secretions; neutralization of duodenal pH permits optimal
activation of enteric-­coated pancreatic exocrine replacement therapy
granules. Some individuals prefer proton pump inhibitor therapy to
achieve the same effect.

treated with ursodeoxycholic acid, leading to a reduction in these values.
However, the evidence to support ursodeoxycholic acid’s effectiveness
in preventing the progression of CF-­related liver disease has not been
clearly documented. Portal hypertension with esophageal varices, hypersplenism, or ascites occurs in ≤8% of children with CF (see Chapter 415).
Obstructive jaundice in newborns with CF needs no specific therapy
once the etiology has been established. End-­stage liver disease is an indication for liver transplantation in children with CF (see Chapter 416).

Vitamin and Mineral Supplements

Recurrent pancreatitis is seen primarily in patients with pancreatic sufficiency, and it can lead to the development of pancreatic insufficiency.
Patients can be treated with pancreatic enzyme therapy and a low-­fat
diet (in well-­nourished patients) to rest the pancreas. Further treatment of this disorder is discussed in Chapter 399.

Because pancreatic insufficiency results in malabsorption of fat-­soluble
vitamins (A, D, E, K), vitamin supplementation is recommended. Several
vitamin preparations containing all four vitamins for patients with CF are
available. They should be taken daily. Despite this supplementation, vitamin D deficiency is common and should be treated with doses of cholecalciferol (vitamin D3) rather than ergocalciferol (vitamin D2). The CF
Foundation recommends that all individuals with CF, from birth to 12
months of age, be treated with an initial dose of 400-500 IU vitamin D3
per day, from 12 months to 10 years of age, an initial dose of 800 to 1000 IU
of vitamin D3 per day, and from 10 years of age and older, an initial dose
of 800 to 2000 IU of vitamin D3 per day. Higher doses are recommended
for those who are vitamin D deficient. Salt supplementation is also needed
during infancy and is started at the time of diagnosis. There may be additional vitamin and micronutrient needs if a child with CF required an
intestinal resection as a newborn as a result of meconium ileus.

TREATMENT OF INTESTINAL COMPLICATIONS
Meconium Ileus

When meconium ileus (see Chapter 135) is suspected, contrast enemas
with reflux of contrast material into the ileum not only confirm the
diagnosis but may also result in the passage of meconium and clearing of the obstruction. Children in whom this procedure fails require
operative intervention. Children who have had meconium ileus are at
greater risk for nutritional deficiency and are more likely to develop
problems with DIOS when older. Infants with meconium ileus should
be assumed to have CF unless proven otherwise.

Distal Intestinal Obstruction Syndrome and Other
Causes of Abdominal Symptoms

Despite appropriate pancreatic enzyme replacement, a number of patients
accumulate fecal material in the terminal portion of the ileum and in the
cecum, which may result in partial or complete obstruction. For intermittent symptoms, pancreatic enzyme replacement should be continued or
even increased, and stool hydrators such as polyethylene glycol should be
given. If this fails or symptoms are more severe, large-­volume bowel lavage
with a balanced salt solution containing polyethylene glycol may be taken
by mouth or by nasogastric tube. When there is complete obstruction, a
contrast enema, accompanied by large amounts of intravenous fluids, can
be therapeutic.

Rectal Prolapse

See Chapter 392.5.
Although uncommon, rectal prolapse occurs most often in infants with
CF and less frequently in older children with the disease. It was much more
frequently seen in the past among undiagnosed young children with steatorrhea, malnutrition, and repetitive cough. The prolapsed rectum can usually be replaced manually by continuous gentle pressure with the patient in
the knee-­chest position. To prevent an immediate recurrence, the buttocks
can be temporally taped closed. Adequate pancreatic enzymes, stool softener, and control of pulmonary infection result in improvement. On very
rare occasions, a patient may continue to have rectal prolapse and may
require referral to a pediatric surgeon.

Hepatobiliary Disease

A wide range of hepatobiliary complications are observed in CF, including asymptomatic elevations in liver function tests, biliary cirrhosis,
and portal hypertension. Often liver function abnormalities (elevations
in aspartate aminotransferase [AST], alanine aminotransferase [ALT],
gamma-­glutamyl transferase [GGT]) associated with biliary cirrhosis are

Pancreatitis

Cystic Fibrosis–Related Hyperglycemia and Diabetes

Onset of hyperglycemia occurs most frequently after the first decade.
Approximately 20% of young adults are treated for hyperglycemia,
although the incidence of CF-­related diabetes may be up to 50% in
adults with CF. Ketoacidosis is rarely encountered. The pathogenesis
includes both impaired insulin secretion and insulin resistance. Routine screening consisting of an annual 2-­hour OGTT is recommended
in children older than 10 years of age, although some cases may begin
earlier. Although glucose intolerance with blood sugars that remain
less than 200 are not treated unless nutrition is compromised or lung
function seems affected, recent data suggest the prediabetic state
is associated with clinical decline, so close monitoring is warranted.
The development of significant hyperglycemia favors acquisition of
P. aeruginosa and B. cepacia in the airways and may adversely affect
pulmonary function. Thus careful control of blood glucose level is an
important goal. When treatment is indicated, insulin should be instituted, as it is the only therapy shown to improve the nutritional and
metabolic outcomes in CFRD. In addition to insulin therapy, patients
are often encouraged to exercise, which has been shown to reduce postprandial glycemic excursions. Medical nutritional therapy for CFRD
differs from that recommended in type 1 diabetes and type 2 diabetes,
as patients are encouraged to continue the nutritional therapy needed
to manage CF, that is a higher-­caloric diet that is high in fat and salt and
not carbohydrate restricted. Strict carbohydrate counting with adjustments in insulin dosing is essential for good glycemic control. Patients
with CFRD are at risk for microvascular complications, including retinopathy, nephropathy, and neuropathy, providing an additional rationale for good control of blood glucose levels. These long-­term vascular
complications of diabetes are more commonly observed in adults with
CFRD, as they occur more commonly after a decade of the disease.

Bone and Joint Complications

Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy causes elevation of the periosteum over the distal portions of long bones and bone pain, overlying edema, and joint effusions. Acetaminophen or ibuprofen may
provide relief. Control of lung infection usually reduces symptoms.
Intermittent arthropathy unrelated to other rheumatologic disorders occurs occasionally, has no recognized pathogenesis, and usually responds to nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents. Back pain or
rib fractures from vigorous coughing may require pain management
to permit adequate airway clearance. These and other fractures may
stem from diminished bone mineralization, the result of reduced
vitamin D absorption, corticosteroid therapy, diminished weight-­
bearing exercises, and perhaps other factors. There may be a bone
phenotype in CF that is unrelated to therapies or nutritional status
and may be related to CFTR dysfunction.

OTHER COMPLICATIONS
Nasal Polyps

Nasal polyps (see Chapter 427) occur in 15–20% of patients with CF and
are most prevalent in the second decade of life. Local corticosteroids and
nasal decongestants occasionally provide some relief. When the polyps
completely obstruct the nasal airway, rhinorrhea becomes constant, or
widening of the nasal bridge is noticed, surgical removal of the polyps is

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2678 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
indicated; polyps may recur promptly or after a symptom-­free interval
of months to years. Polyps inexplicably stop developing in many adults.

Median FEV1, percent predicted, by age and birth cohort

110

2012–2016

Rhinosinusitis

Salt Depletion

Salt losses from sweat in patients with CF can be high, especially in
warm arid climates. Children should have free access to salt, especially
when thirsty in hot weather. Salt supplements are often prescribed to
newborns and to children who live in hot weather climates. Hypochloremic alkalosis should be suspected in any patient who feels unwell in
hot weather or who has had symptoms of gastroenteritis, and prompt
fluid and electrolyte therapy should be instituted as needed.

2007–2011

1997–2001
1992–1996
90

80

Anxiety and Depression

The stress and emotional impact of caring for CF is significant. Studies have found high rates of depression and anxiety in both patients and
their parent caregivers, 2-­3 times that of the general population. Positive
screening for depression in particular is associated with decreased lung
function, lower body mass index, worse adherence, worse health-­related
quality of life, more frequent hospitalizations, and increased mortality.
Annual screening for anxiety and depression, with psychologic and/or
pharmacologic interventions and follow-­up, is therefore indicated.

2002–2006

100
FEV1 % predicted

Opacification of paranasal sinuses is universal in CF and is not an indication for intervention. Acute or chronic sinus-­related symptoms are
treated initially with antimicrobials, with or without maxillary sinus
aspiration for culture. Functional endoscopic sinus surgery has anecdotally provided benefit.

70

6

8

10

12

14

A

16 18 20
Age (years)

22

24

26

28

Median FEV1 percent predicted in 18-year-olds from 1991–2021
1991

2001

2011

2021

Surgery

Patients with good or excellent pulmonary status can tolerate general
anesthesia without any intensive pulmonary measures before the procedure but should be adherent to their usual prescribed airway clearance therapy. Those with moderate or severe pulmonary infection
usually do better with a 1-­to 2-­week course of intensive antibiotic treatment and increased airway clearance before surgery. If this approach is
impossible, prompt intravenous antibiotic therapy is indicated once it
is recognized that major surgery is required. General anesthesia may
provide an opportunity to perform bronchoscopy to evaluate the airway and obtain good cultures, and this should be considered in any
child with CF who will undergo surgery for any indication.
After major surgery, cough should be encouraged, and airway clearance
treatments should be reinstituted as soon as possible, usually within 24
hours.

PROGNOSIS

CF remains a life-­limiting disorder, although survival has dramatically
improved (Figs. 454.12 and 454.13). With exceptions, most children
remain relatively healthy into adolescence or adulthood. The slow progression of lung disease eventually does reach disabling proportions. Life table
data indicate a median cumulative survival of more than 40 years, and the
expectation is younger children with the disease have a life expectancy
far in excess of this estimate. Outcomes are variable and related to CFTR
pathogenic variant class, modifier genes, biologic and chemical exposures,
disease management, and socioeconomic status. With the advent of highly
effective CFTR modulator therapies, the landscape is expected to change
even more dramatically. Not only will quality of life and longevity further
improve, but investigations have begun into how the burden of care may be
lessened by a decrease in the current dependence on onerous daily airway
clearance therapies and the need for recurrent hospitalizations for pulmonary exacerbations.
Children with CF should not be restricted in their activities. A high
percentage eventually attend and graduate from college. Most adults
with CF find satisfactory employment, and an increasing number marry.
Transitioning care from pediatric to adult care centers by 21 years of age
is an important objective and requires a thoughtful, supportive approach
involving both the pediatric and internal medicine specialists.
With increasing life span for patients with CF, a new set of psychosocial considerations has emerged, including the impact of anxiety and depression, dependence-­independence issues, self-­care, peer

B

FEV1 severe (<40%)

FEV1 moderate (40–69%)

FEV1 mild (70–89%)

FEV1 Normal (90%)

Fig. 454.12 Median FEV1, percent predicted, by age and birth cohort

(A), and in 18-­yr-­olds from 1991 to 2021 (B). (From the Cystic Fibrosis
Patient Registry 2021. Annual Data Report. pp. 42–43. © 2022 Cystic
Fibrosis Foundation. Bethesda, Maryland. https://www.cff.org/sites/def
ault/files/2021-­11/Patient-­Registry-­Annual-­Data-­Report.pdf)

relationships, sexuality, reproduction, substance abuse, educational
and vocational planning, medical care costs and other financial burdens, and anxiety concerning health and prognosis. Many of these
issues are best addressed in an anticipatory fashion, before the onset
of psychosocial dysfunction. With appropriate medical and psychosocial support, children and adolescents with CF generally cope well.
Achievement of an independent and productive adulthood is a realistic goal for many.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 455 u Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia (Immotile Cilia Syndrome, Kartagener Syndrome)

2679

Median predicted survival age (years)

60
56
52
48
44
40
36
32
28

90

–9
91 4
–9
92 5
–9
93 6
–9
94 7
–9
95 8
–9
96 9
–0
97 0
–0
98 1
–0
99 2
–0
00 3
–0
01 4
–0
02 5
–0
03 6
–0
04 7
–0
05 8
–0
06 9
–1
07 0
–1
08 1
–1
09 2
–1
10 3
–1
11 4
–1
12 5
–1
13 6
–1
14 7
–1
15 8
–1
16 9
–2
17 0
–2
1

24

Year

Fig. 454.13 Median predicted survival age, 1990–2021 in 5-­yr increments. Created using the currently recommended method for calculating

median predicted survival. For more information about the methodology, please see the Technical Supplement available at cff.org. (From the Cystic
Fibrosis Patient Registry 2021. Annual Data Report. p. 70. © 2022 Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. Bethesda, Maryland. https://www.cff.org/sites/default/
files/2021-­11/Patient-­Registry-­Annual-­Data-­Report.pdf)

Chapter 455

Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia
(Immotile Cilia Syndrome,
Kartagener Syndrome)
Thomas W. Ferkol Jr.

A

B

Fig. 455.1 Electron photomicrographs showing an airway epithelium
See also Chapter 101.3.
Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) is an inherited disorder characterized by ciliary dysfunction leading to chronic sinopulmonary disease,
persistent middle ear effusions, laterality defects, and infertility. The
reported prevalence in the general population varies, ranging between
1 in 2,200 and 40,000 live births, but in children with repeated respiratory infections, it has been estimated to be as high as 5%.

NORMAL CILIARY ULTRASTRUCTURE AND
FUNCTION

Three types of cilia exist in humans: motile cilia, primary (sensory)
cilia, and nodal cilia. The respiratory epithelium in the nasopharynx,
middle ear, paranasal sinuses, and larger airways are lined by a ciliated, pseudostratified columnar epithelium that is essential for mucociliary clearance. A mature ciliated epithelial cell has approximately
200 uniform motile cilia, hairlike organelles that move fluids, mucus,
and inhaled particulates vectorially from conducting airways (Fig.
455.1). Motile cilia are anatomically and functionally oriented in the
same direction, moving with intracellular and intercellular synchrony.
Anchored by a basal body to the apical cytoplasm and extending from
the apical cell surface into the airway lumen, each cilium is a complex,
specialized structure, composed of hundreds of proteins. A cilium contains a central fibrillar structure, or axoneme, that consists of helical
protofilaments made of alpha-­and beta-­tubulin monomers. A circular

grown in primary culture showing ciliated and nonciliated cells (A) and
a normal motor cilium (B).

array of peripheral microtubular doublets are arranged around a central pair, leading to the characteristic “9+2” arrangement seen on cross-­
sectional views on transmission electron microscopy (see Fig. 455.1).
Distinct inner and outer dynein arms are attached to the A microtubule. Each dynein arm is a multimer, containing multiple adenosine
triphosphatases, called dyneins, that serve as motors of the cilium and
promote microtubule sliding, which is converted into bending. The
inner dynein arm influences the bend shape of the cilium, whereas the
outer dynein arm controls beat force and frequency. The inner dynein
arm and radial spokes are also parts of the dynein regulatory complex,
a key regulator of motor activity. Nexin links connecting adjacent outer
microtubular doublets limit the degree of sliding between microtubules. All these structures lead to synchronized ciliary beating, resulting in a ciliary stroke and coordinated beating at a frequency constant
throughout the airway, ranging between 8 and 14 hertz, but this can be
negatively affected by several factors, such as anesthetics and dehydration. Alternatively, beat frequency may be accelerated by exposure to
irritants or bioactive molecules, including β-­adrenergic agents, acetylcholine, and serotonin. Cilia beat frequency can be increased through
the activity of nitric oxide synthases that are localized in the apical
cytoplasm. The coordinated wavelike pattern of ciliary motion has

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2680 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
important functions in fluid and cell movement, and any disturbance
in the precise, orchestrated movement of the cilia can lead to disease.
Primary (sensory) cilia are solitary, immotile organelles present
during interphase on most cell types. These cilia lack a central microtubule doublet and dynein arms, thus creating a “9+0” arrangement
(Fig. 455.2). Once considered nonfunctional vestigial remnants, primary cilia are important signaling organelles that sense the extracellular environment. They are mechanoreceptors, chemosensors, and
osmosensors and, in specialized cases, detect changes in light, temperature, and gravity. Primary cilia defects (ciliopathies) are linked to
wide-­ranging pediatric conditions, such as various polycystic kidney
diseases, nephronophthisis, Bardet-­Biedl syndrome, Meckel-­Gruber
syndrome, Joubert syndrome, Alström syndrome, Ellis-­van Creveld
syndrome, and Jeune thoracic dystrophy (see Chapter 101.3).
The third type of cilia exists only during a brief period of embryonic development. Nodal cilia have a “9+0” microtubule arrangement
similar to that of primary cilia, but they exhibit a whirling, rotational
movement (see Fig. 455.2), resulting in leftward flow of extracellular
fluid that establishes body sidedness. Nodal cilia defects result in body
orientation abnormalities, such as situs inversus totalis, situs ambiguus, and heterotaxy associated with congenital heart disease, asplenia,
and polysplenia (see Chapter 480.11).

GENETICS OF PRIMARY CILIARY DYSKINESIA

PCD is a genetically heterogeneous disorder, usually inherited by an
autosomal recessive pattern, but autosomal dominant and X-­linked
inheritance are known. Pathogenic variants in any of the hundreds of
proteins that are involved in ciliary assembly, structure, or function
could theoretically cause disease. Indeed, 50 different genes have been
linked to PCD (Fig. 455.3), including those that encode proteins integral to the outer dynein arm, dynein regulatory complex, radial spoke,
and central apparatus proteins. Pathogenic variants in genes coding
several cytoplasmic proteins not part of the cilia axoneme have also
been identified, leading to defective protein transport and cilia assembly. Over 70% of all people with PCD tested have pathogenic variants
in one of these genes. In addition, motile ciliopathies distinct from
classical PCD have been described. Children with biallelic variants in
CCNO and MCIDAS, two proteins required for centriole production,
have oligocilia and clinical features similar to PCD.
Insights into the genetic bases of motile ciliopathies have also
yielded greater understanding of genotype-­phenotype relationships

Central complex
Outer dynein arm
Inner dynein arm

Sensory cilium (9+0)
Monocilium
Immotile

Radial spoke

Nexin

Motor cilium (9+2)
Planar motion
Multiple cilia
Nodal cilium (9+0)
Monocilium
Rotary motion

Fig. 455.2 Schemata showing the three general classes of normal

cilia: motile cilia (motile “9+2”), nodal cilia (motile “9+0”), and primary
cilia (nonmotile “9+0”), which demonstrate the complex structure and
arrangement of the ciliary axoneme.

in PCD. For instance, cross-­sectional and longitudinal studies showed
that children with the inner dynein arm–microtubular disorganization defect, primarily the result of biallelic pathogenic variants in
CCDC39 or CCDC40, had more severe lung disease. In contrast, people with pathogenic variants in RSPH1 appear to have milder respiratory phenotypes.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS OF PRIMARY CILIARY
DYSKINESIA

PCD has several characteristic clinical features (Table 455.1). Neonatal
respiratory distress (NRD) is a common feature, and most affected
term newborns develop increased work of breathing, tachypnea, and
upper and middle lobe atelectasis on chest radiographs. The association of respiratory distress in term neonates with PCD has been underappreciated. Often diagnosed with transient tachypnea of the newborn
or pneumonia, PCD infants frequently require supplemental oxygen
flow for days to weeks.
Chronic, year-­round productive (wet) cough that begins before 6
months of age is another characteristic feature of PCD. Bacterial cultures of sputum or lavage fluid frequently yield nontypeable Haemophilus influenzae (see Chapter 240), Staphylococcus aureus (see Chapter
227.1), Streptococcus pneumoniae (see Chapter 228), and Pseudomonas
aeruginosa (see Chapter 251.1). Persistent airway infection and inflammation lead to bronchiectasis, even in preschool children (see Chapter
452). Children with PCD also have a higher prevalence of pectus excavatum and scoliosis.
Roughly 80% of patients with PCD have chronic rhinosinusitis,
manifested by daily nasal congestion and copious, watery nasal

Normal

ODA structural protein
DNAH1
DNAH9
DNAH11
DNAH17
LRRC56
GAS2L2
Central pair protein
HYDIN
CFAP221
SPEF2
STK36
Nexin-link protein
CCDC164 (DRC1)
CCDC65 (DRC2)
GAS8 (DRC4)

ODA defect

Radial spoke protein
RSPH1
RSPH3
RSPH4A
RSPH9
DNAJB13
Microtubular protein
CFAP53 (CCDC11)
Cytoplasmic assembly factor
TTC12
Cilia kinase
NEK10
Syndromic
OFD1

Structural proteins
DNAH5
DNAI1
DNAI2
DNAL1
NME8 (TXNDC3)
Docking protein
CCDC114
CCDC151
ARMC4
TTC25
Attachment factor
CCDC103

IDA defect with MTD

Oligocilia

ODA and IDA defect

Cytoplasmic assembly factors
DNAAF1 (LRRC50)
DNAAF2 (KTU)
DNAAF3
LRRC6
HEATR2
ZMYND10
DYX1C1
SPAG1

Nexin-dynein
regulatory complex
CCDC39
CCDC40

Ciliary biogenesis
CCNO
MCIDAS

Disoriented cilia
Shortened cilia
X-linked

CFAP300 (C11orf70)
CFAP298 (C21orf59)

Fig. 455.3 Classification of genes associated with primary ciliary dys-

kinesia based on ultrastructural findings. IDA, Inner dynein arm; MTD,
microtubular disorganization; ODA, outer dynein arm.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 455 u Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia (Immotile Cilia Syndrome, Kartagener Syndrome)
Table 455.1   Clinical Features of Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia
LOWER RESPIRATORY
Unexplained respiratory distress in term neonate
Daily productive (wet) cough since early infancy
Chronic bronchitis
Bronchiectasis
UPPER RESPIRATORY
Chronic otitis media and persistent middle ear effusions
Conductive hearing loss
Sensorineural hearing loss
Daily nonseasonal rhinosinusitis since early infancy
Chronic rhinosinusitis
Nasal polyposis
CARDIAC
Situs inversus totalis
Heterotaxy
Congenital cardiac defects
GENITOURINARY
Male subfertility
Female subfertility
MUSCULOSKELETAL
Pectus excavatum
Scoliosis
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
Retinitis pigmentosa
Hydrocephalus (rare)

discharge that begins early in infancy and persists into childhood.
Inadequate innate mucous clearance leads to chronic sinusitis (see
Chapter 429) and nasal polyposis. Middle ear disease occurs in
many children with PCD, with varying degrees of chronic otitis
media with effusion. Both conductive and sensorineural hearing
loss occur at increased frequency in people with PCD, though the
former is more common. Middle ear findings may be most helpful
in distinguishing PCD from cystic fibrosis (CF) (see Chapter 454)
or other causes of chronic lung disease.
Left-­right laterality defects (e.g., situs inversus totalis) are found in
∼50% of all children with PCD. Without functional nodal cilia in the
embryonic period, thoracoabdominal orientation is random. Approximately 25% of children who have situs inversus totalis have PCD. Thus
situs inversus totalis alone does not establish the diagnosis. Other laterality defects, such as heterotaxy, are also associated with PCD and may
coexist with congenital cardiac defects, asplenia, or polysplenia. PCD
should be strongly considered in term infants who have unexplained
NRD and situs anomalies.
Most males with PCD have dysmotile spermatozoa because flagellar and ciliary ultrastructure is similar. Male infertility or subfertility is
typical but not always found in this disease. Subfertility has also been
reported in affected women, possibly related to ciliary dysfunction in
the fallopian tubes.
A few case reports have associated neonatal hydrocephalus with
PCD. The ependyma of the brain ventricles are lined by ciliated epithelium and are important for cerebrospinal fluid flow through the
ventricles and aqueduct of Sylvius. The finding of enlarged brain ventricles on sonograms, when linked with situs inversus totalis, has been
proposed as a prenatal diagnostic marker for PCD.
Several conditions have overlapping features of motile and primary
ciliopathies. X-­linked retinitis pigmentosa has been associated with
recurrent respiratory infections in families with RPGR gene pathogenic
variants. Intraflagellar transport proteins are essential for photoreceptor assembly and, when mutated, lead to apoptosis of the retinal pigment epithelium (see Chapter 670).

2681

Table 455.2   Consensus-­Based Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia
(PCD) Diagnostic Criteria by Age
NEWBORNS (0-­1 MO OF AGE)
Situs inversus totalis and unexplained neonatal respiratory distress
(NRD) at term birth, plus at least one of the following:
• Diagnostic ciliary ultrastructure on electron micrographs
• Two pathogenic variants in PCD-­associated gene
CHILDREN (1 MO TO 5 YR)
Two or more major PCD clinical criteria (NRD,* daily wet cough,
persistent nasal congestion, laterality defect), plus at least one
of the following (nasal nitric oxide not included in this age-­group
because it is not yet sufficiently tested):
• Diagnostic ciliary ultrastructure on electron micrographs
• Two pathogenic variants in one PCD-­associated gene
• Persistent and diagnostic ciliary waveform abnormalities on
high-­speed videomicroscopy on multiple occasions
CHILDREN (5-­18 YR OF AGE) AND ADULTS
Two or more PCD clinical criteria (NRD,* daily productive cough or
bronchiectasis, persistent nasal congestion, laterality defect), plus
at least one of the following:
• Nasal nitric oxide during plateau <77 nL/min on two occasions,
>2 mo apart (with CF excluded)
• Diagnostic ciliary ultrastructure on electron micrographs
• Two pathogenic variants in one PCD-­associated gene
• Persistent and diagnostic ciliary waveform abnormalities on
high-­speed videomicroscopy on multiple occasions
*In term neonates.

DIAGNOSIS OF PRIMARY CILIARY DYSKINESIA

The diagnosis of PCD has been challenging. A high index of suspicion
is necessary, but pediatricians should only perform testing in children
who have clinical manifestations consistent with the disease. PCD
has four criteria-­defined features that should be used to screen at-­risk
children: unexplained NRD in full-­term infants, left-­right laterality
defects, persistent rhinitis that begins before 6 months of age, and daily
wet or productive cough that also starts before 6 months of age (Table
455.2). Even though chronic otitis media is common in PCD, many
unaffected infants and toddlers also have chronic middle ear involvement, which makes this feature less useful in distinguishing children
with PCD from others.
Imaging studies show extensive involvement of the paranasal sinuses.
Chest radiographs frequently demonstrate bilateral lung overinflation,
peribronchial infiltrates, and lobar atelectasis. Computed x-­ray tomography of the chest often reveals bronchiectasis, often involving the
anatomic right middle lobe or lingula, even in young children. Situs
inversus totalis in a child who has chronic respiratory tract symptoms
is highly suggestive of PCD, but this configuration occurs in only 50%
of people with the condition. Pulmonary function tests may be normal
early but demonstrate obstructive airway disease as the disease progresses. Typical findings include decreased forced expiratory volume in
1 second (FEV1), reduced expiratory flow rates, and increased residual
volume. Bronchodilator responsiveness is variable. Longitudinal analyses of children with PCD show wide variation in intrathoracic airway
obstruction.
No single test will diagnose every person with PCD. Historically,
transmission electron microscopy has been the gold standard to assess
structural defects within the cilium. These ultrastructural defects are
found in cilia throughout the upper and lower airways and oviduct and
in sperm flagella. Curettage from the nasal epithelium or endobronchial brushing can provide an adequate specimen for review. Identification of a specific, previously established defect in the ciliary structure
with concurrent phenotypic features is sufficient to make the diagnosis. There are several characteristic ciliary abnormalities: outer dynein
arm defects, combined inner and outer dynein arm defects, and inner

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2682 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
dynein arm defects with microtubular disorganization (see Fig. 455.3).
Inner dynein arm defects alone are largely artifactual. It is important
to note that ultrastructural examination of cilia as a diagnostic test for
PCD has limitations. First, the absence of axonemal defects does not
exclude PCD; nearly 30% of affected individuals have normal ciliary
ultrastructure. Other children with symptoms consistent with PCD
have been found to have ciliary aplasia or few motile cilia on the
epithelial surface (see Fig. 455.3)
Careful interpretation of the ultrastructural findings is necessary
because ciliary defects can be acquired. Nonspecific changes (e.g., compound cilia or blebs) may be seen in relation to exposure to environmental pollutants or infection. Frequently, the diagnosis of PCD can
be delayed or missed because of inadequate tissue collection or sample
processing or misinterpretation of ciliary defects. Some investigators
have advocated culturing of airway epithelial cells and allowing the
secondary changes to resolve. Alternatively, immunofluorescent staining for axonemal protein markers may overcome some limitations of
transmission electron microscopy.
Another useful approach has exploited the observation that nasal
nitric oxide concentrations are reduced in subjects with PCD. Because
nasal nitric oxide measurements are relatively easy to perform and noninvasive, this method is a valuable screen for PCD. When compared to
other diagnostic tools, nasal nitric oxide can be sensitive and specific
for PCD in cooperative older children and adults. Unfortunately, few
studies in children under 5 years have been reported, and the accuracy
of nasal nitric oxide measurements in infants has not been established.
It is important to note that children who have pathogenic variants in
some PCD-­associated genes can have nondiagnostic nasal nitric oxide
concentrations. Conversely, people with CF (see Chapter 454) or primary immunodeficiencies (see Chapter 165), conditions that have clinical features that overlap with PCD, can have reduced nasal nitric oxide
levels. Thus reduced nasal nitric oxide concentrations alone are never
sufficient to make the diagnosis of PCD.
Qualitative tests to assess ciliary function have been used to screen
for PCD. Ciliary beat frequency measurements using standard light
microscopy have been used as a screen, but this approach can be misleading and should never be used as a diagnostic tool. High-­resolution,
high-­speed digital imaging of ciliary motion in multiple planes permits
comprehensive analysis of cilia beating, which has shown that certain
beat patterns are associated with specific ultrastructural defects. This
technique is available only at specialized centers, primarily in Europe,
and requires sophisticated software and expertise.
PCD is highly heterogenic owing to the large number of proteins
involved in cilia assembly, structure, and function. Advances in gene
sequencing techniques have led to the identification of a growing number of disease-­associated genes. Genetic testing has become increasingly available and is considered a first-­line test for PCD, incorporated
into published diagnostic algorithms. Nevertheless, current, commercially available testing for pathogenic variants in at least 30 genes will
only identify approximately 70% of affected children (see Fig. 455.3).

TREATMENT

No therapies have been shown to correct ciliary dysfunction in PCD.
Many of the treatments applied to children with the condition are similar to those used in other chronic suppurative lung diseases characterized by impaired airway clearance and bronchiectasis, such as CF (see
Chapter 454), but few have been adequately studied to demonstrate
efficacy in PCD.
Strategies to enhance mucociliary clearance are central to PCD therapy, and routine airway clearance techniques using postural drainage,
percussion vests, positive expiratory pressure devices, or other techniques should be instituted daily. Because ciliary function is impaired,
cough becomes a critical mechanism for mucous clearance and should
not be suppressed. Exercise can enhance airway clearance in people

with PCD and should be encouraged. Inhaled hypertonic saline and
mucolytic agents are often used in CF care, but only small case series or
single-­site clinical trials showed any improvement in people with PCD
after treatment. Thrice-­weekly azithromycin as an antiinflammatory
agent is reported to reduce the frequency of pulmonary exacerbations
but has no effect on lung function or quality-­of-­life measures.
When children with PCD develop increasing respiratory symptoms
consistent with infection, antimicrobial therapy should be instituted
based on respiratory culture results and bacterial sensitivities. Maintenance therapy with inhaled or oral antibiotics can be used cautiously
in patients with PCD who have bronchiectasis or frequent respiratory
exacerbations. Immunizations against pertussis, influenza, and pneumococci are cornerstones of care. Additional preventive measures
include avoidance of cigarette or marijuana smoke, electronic cigarette
aerosols, and other airway irritants.
Rarely, surgical resection of bronchiectatic lung has been performed
on people with PCD, typically in cases of localized disease with severe
hemoptysis or intractable infections. It is unclear whether surgical
interventions provide reduction in symptoms or survival benefit.
Progression to end-­stage lung disease and respiratory failure has
been reported in people with PCD. Adults have undergone successful
heart-­lung, double-­lung, or living-­donor lobar lung transplantation.
Situs inversus totalis complicates the procedure because of anatomic
considerations. Otherwise, survival is similar to that for other transplant recipients.
Treatment of chronic otitis media and middle ear effusions in people
with PCD is controversial. Myringotomy tubes are frequently placed
in affected children, and some studies reported enhanced hearing in
children with chronic conductive hearing loss after the procedure.
However, others did not find improvement in hearing acuity. Intractable mucoid otorrhea, tympanosclerosis, and permanent membrane
perforation are known complications of myringotomy tubes in people
with PCD, leading some to recommend against surgical management.
Although hearing tends to improve with time, children and adolescents with PCD should be routinely screened and hearing aids used
when necessary.
Chronic rhinitis and sinusitis are frequent clinical manifestations
of PCD. No treatments have been shown to be effective, although
patients are often treated with nasal washes, paranasal sinus lavage,
and systemic antibiotics when they are symptomatic. As with any
overuse of antimicrobial agents, the development of resistant organisms is a concern. When nasal symptoms are severe or refractory to
medical management, endoscopic sinus surgery can be used to promote drainage or local delivery of medications, but the benefit may
be short lived.

PROGNOSIS

Although signs and symptoms related to upper respiratory involvement predominate early in PCD, clinical manifestations of lower respiratory tract disease tend to increase with age and become the leading
cause of morbidity and mortality in patients with PCD. It is believed
that progression and extent of lung disease can be slowed with early
diagnosis and therapy. Routine surveillance studies recommended the
following for the care of children with PCD: (1) regular spirometry to
monitor pulmonary function, (2) chest imaging, and (3) sputum or
oropharyngeal cultures to assess respiratory flora.
Children with PCD usually have a slower decline in pulmonary
function than those with CF, and its prognosis and long-­term survival
are better. Many can have a normal or near-­normal life span, whereas
others experience progressive bronchiectasis and respiratory deterioration at a younger age.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 456 u Diffuse Lung Diseases in Childhood

2683

genes encode SP-­B (SFTPB), SP-­C (SFTPC), TTF-­1 (NKX2-­1), and
ABCA3 (ABCA3), which are located on human chromosomes 2, 8, 14,
and 16, respectively. Inherited disorders of SP-­B, SP-­C, ABCA3, and
TTF-­1 have been recognized in humans and are collectively termed
surfactant dysfunction disorders (Table 456.1). Variants in SFTPD
have not been associated with disease, and pathogenic variants in the
genes encoding SP-­A have only been found in adults with idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis or lung cancer.

Chapter 456

Diffuse Lung Diseases
in Childhood

PATHOLOGY

See also Chapter 448.

456.1 Inherited Disorders of Surfactant
Metabolism
Jennifer A. Wambach, Lawrence M. Nogee,
Aaron Hamvas, and F. Sessions Cole III
Pulmonary surfactant is a mixture of phospholipids and proteins synthesized, packaged, and secreted by alveolar type II pneumocytes (AEC2s)
that line the distal air spaces. This mixture forms a monolayer at the
air-­liquid interface that lowers surface tension at end expiration of the
respiratory cycle, preventing atelectasis and ventilation-­perfusion mismatch. Four surfactant-­associated proteins have been characterized:
surfactant proteins A and D (SP-­A, SP-­D) participate in host defense in
the lung, whereas surfactant proteins B and C (SP-­B, SP-­C) contribute
to the surface tension–lowering activity of pulmonary surfactant. The
adenosine triphosphate–binding cassette protein member A3, ABCA3,
is a transporter located on the limiting membrane of lamellar bodies,
the intracellular storage organelle for surfactant within AEC2s, and has
an essential role in surfactant phospholipid metabolism. The proper
expression of the surfactant proteins and ABCA3 is dependent on a
number of transcription factors, particularly thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-­1). Two genes for SP-­A (SFTPA1, SFTPA2) and one gene for
SP-­D (SFTPD) are located on human chromosome 10, whereas single

These disorders share a unique constellation of features, including
AEC2 hyperplasia, alveolar macrophage accumulation, interstitial
thickening and inflammation, and alveolar proteinosis. A number of
different descriptive terms have historically been applied to these disorders, including ones borrowed from adult forms of interstitial lung
disease (desquamative interstitial pneumonia, nonspecific interstitial
pneumonia) and a disorder unique to infancy (chronic pneumonitis of infancy). These diagnoses in infants and children are strongly
indicative of surfactant dysfunction disorders but do not distinguish
which gene is responsible. Because the prognosis and inheritance patterns differ depending on the gene involved, genetic testing should be
offered when one of these conditions is reported in the lung biopsy or
autopsy of an infant or child. Other disorders, including genetic causes
of pulmonary alveolar proteinosis (see Chapter 456.2), and disorders
of immune dysregulation can be associated with similar pathologies.

DEFICIENCY OF SURFACTANT PROTEIN B
(SURFACTANT METABOLISM DYSFUNCTION,
PULMONARY, 1; SMDP1; OMIM #265120)
Clinical Manifestations

Infants with an inherited deficiency of SP-­B present in the immediate neonatal period with respiratory failure. This autosomal recessive
disorder is clinically and radiographically similar to the respiratory
distress syndrome (RDS) of premature infants (see Chapter 126) but
typically affects full-­term infants. The initial degree of respiratory
distress is variable, but the disease is progressive and is refractory to

Table 456.1  Comparison of Surfactant Dysfunction Disorders
SP-­B DEFICIENCY

SP-­C DISEASE

ABCA3 DEFICIENCY

TTF-­1 DISORDERS

Gene name

SFTPB

SFTPC

ABCA3

NKX2-­1

Age of onset

Birth

Birth to adulthood

Birth to childhood; rarely
adult

Birth to childhood

Inheritance

Recessive

Dominant/sporadic

Recessive

Sporadic/dominant

Mechanism

Loss of function

Gain in toxic function or
dominant negative

Loss of function

Loss of function
Gain in function

Natural history

Lethal

Variable

Generally lethal, may be
chronic

Variable

Absence of SP-­B and
presence of incompletely
processed proSP-­C

None

None

None

Genetic (DNA)

Sequence SFTPB

Sequence SFTPC

Sequence ABCA3; copy
number variant detection

Sequence NKX2-­1; copy
number variant detection

Ultrastructural (lung
biopsy–electron
microscopy)

Disorganized lamellar
bodies

Not specific; may have
dense aggregates

Small dense lamellar bodies
with eccentrically placed
dense cores

Variable

Treatment

Lung transplantation or
compassionate care

Supportive care, lung
transplantation if
progressing

Lung transplantation or
compassionate care
for infants with biallelic
null variants; lung
transplantation for other
variants if progressing

Supportive care; treat
coexisting conditions
(hypothyroidism)

DIAGNOSIS
Biochemical (tracheal
aspirate)

SP, Surfactant protein.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2684 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
mechanical ventilation, surfactant replacement therapy, and glucocorticoid administration. Almost all affected infants have died without
lung transplantation, but prolonged survival is possible in cases of partial deficiency of SP-­B. Humans heterozygous for loss-­of-­function variants in SFTPB are clinically healthy as adults but may be at increased
risk for obstructive lung disease if they also have a history of smoking.

Genetics

Multiple loss-­of-­function variants in SFTPB have been identified. The
most common is a net two base-­pair insertion in codon 133 (originally
termed 121ins2, currently termed c.397delCinsGAA, p.Pro133Glufs*95)
that results in a frameshift, an unstable SP-­B messenger RNA (mRNA)
transcript, and absence of SP-­B protein production. This pathogenic
variant has accounted for 60–70% of the alleles found to date in infants
identified with SP-­B deficiency and is present in approximately 0.07%
of European-­descent individuals in large-­scale sequencing projects.
Most other pathogenic variants have been family-­specific. A large deletion encompassing two exons of SFTPB has also been reported.

Diagnosis

A rapid, definitive diagnosis can be established with sequence analysis of SFTPB, which is available through clinical laboratories (Genetic
Testing Registry, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gtr). Sequencing of
SFTPB is usually performed as part of a multigene panel using next-­
generation sequencing (NGS) methods that includes genes for other
surfactant dysfunction disorders and can be designed to detect deletions or duplications of one or more exons (copy number variants). For
families in which SFTPB variants were previously identified, antenatal diagnosis can be established by preimplantation genetic diagnosis
(PGD) or molecular assays of DNA from chorionic villous biopsy or
amniocytes, which permit advanced planning of a therapeutic regimen. Other laboratory tests remain investigational, including analysis
of tracheal aspirate (effluent) for the presence or absence of SP-­B protein and for incompletely processed precursor proSP-­C peptides that
have been identified in SP-­B–deficient human infants. Immunostaining of lung biopsy tissue for the surfactant proteins can also support
the diagnosis, although immunohistochemical assays for SP-­B and
SP-­C are also generally available only on a research basis. Staining for
SP-­B is usually absent, but robust extracellular staining for proSP-­C
because of incompletely processed proSP-­C peptides is observed and
is diagnostic for SP-­B deficiency. Such studies require a lung biopsy in
a critically ill infant but may be performed on lung blocks acquired at
the time of autopsy, allowing for retrospective diagnosis. With electron
microscopy, a lack of tubular myelin, disorganized lamellar bodies, and
an accumulation of abnormal-­appearing multivesicular bodies suggest
abnormal lipid packaging and secretion.

SURFACTANT PROTEIN C–ASSOCIATED
INTERSTITIAL LUNG DISEASE (SURFACTANT
METABOLISM DYSFUNCTION, PULMONARY, 2;
SMDP2; OMIM #610913)

SP-­C is a very low molecular weight, extremely hydrophobic protein
that, along with SP-­B, enhances the surface tension–lowering properties of surfactant phospholipids. The mature SP-­C protein (35 amino
acids) is derived from proteolytic processing of a larger precursor protein (proSP-­C).

Clinical Manifestations

The clinical presentation of patients with SFTPC pathogenic variants is
quite variable. Some patients present at birth with symptoms, signs, and
radiographic findings typical of RDS. Others present later in life, ranging from early infancy until well into adulthood, with gradual onset of
respiratory insufficiency, hypoxemia, failure to thrive, and chest radiograph findings of interstitial lung disease, or as pulmonary fibrosis
in the fifth or sixth decade of life. The age and severity of disease vary
even within families with the same SFTPC variant. The natural history
is also quite variable, with some patients improving either spontaneously or as the result of therapy or prolonged mechanical ventilation,
some with persistent respiratory insufficiency, and some progressing to

the point of requiring lung transplantation. This variability in presentation, severity, and course of the disease does not appear to correlate
with the specific SFTPC variant and also hinders accurate assessment
of prognosis.

Genetics

Multiple pathogenic variants in SFTPC have been identified in association with acute and chronic lung disease in patients ranging in age
from newborn to adult. A pathogenic variant on only one SFTPC allele
is sufficient to cause disease. Approximately half of these variants arise
spontaneously, resulting in sporadic disease, but the remainder are
inherited as a dominant trait. SFTPC pathogenic variants have been
identified in diverse racial and ethnic groups. A threonine substitution
for isoleucine in codon 73 (termed p.I73T or p.Ile73Thr) has accounted
for 25–35% of the cases identified to date but is rare (not identified in
gnomAD in ∼140,000 individuals). Pathogenic variants in SFTPC are
thought to cause disease because of a toxic gain in function resulting
from the production of misfolded or abnormal proSP-­C that accumulates within the AEC2 and causes cellular injury or alters the normal
intracellular routing of proSP-­C. Lung tissue from individuals with
pathogenic variants in SFTPC demonstrates accumulation of pro-­SPC.
Many pathogenic SFTPC variants are located in the carboxy-­terminal
domain of pro-­SP-­C, which has a similar homology to other members
of the BRICHOS family of membrane proteins, the abnormal aggregation of which have been implicated in the pathophysiology of familial
dementia and some cancers. Pathogenic variants within the BRICHOS
domain (amino acid residues 90-­197) of SFTPC result in aggregation
of misfolded protein in the endoplasmic reticulum, activation of the
unfolded protein response, inflammation, and subsequent fibrosis.
Non-­BRICHOS domain pathogenic variants result in mistrafficking
of pro-­SPC to the plasma membrane and endosomes rather than the
lamellar bodies, a late block in macroautophagy, inflammation, and
subsequent fibrosis. The different underlying pathogenic mechanisms
of SFTPC variants do not appear to correlate with the clinical presentation and may necessitate different therapeutic approaches.

Diagnosis

Sequencing of SFTPC, the only definitive diagnostic test, is available
usually as part of an NGS multiple-­gene panel in clinical laboratories.
Because most SFTPC pathogenic variants are missense variants, distinguishing true disease-­causing variants from rare yet benign sequence
variants may be difficult. Immunostaining of lung tissue may demonstrate proSP-­C aggregates but is available only on a research basis.

DISEASE CAUSED BY PATHOGENIC VARIANTS
IN ABCA3 (SURFACTANT METABOLISM
DYSFUNCTION, PULMONARY, 3; SMDP3; OMIM
#610921)
Clinical Manifestations

Lung disease caused by pathogenic variants in ABCA3 generally presents as either a severe, lethal form that manifests in the immediate newborn period, clinically similar to SP-­B deficiency, or a chronic form that
appears most typically in the first year of life with interstitial lung disease similar to SP-­C–associated interstitial lung disease. Infants who
are homozygous or compound heterozygous for null variants, that is,
the variant is predicted to result in the absence of protein expression
(i.e., nonsense or frameshift variants), typically present with lethal
neonatal respiratory failure, whereas infants with missense, in-­frame
insertion/deletions or splicing variants have more variable age of onset
and outcomes. Heterozygosity for an ABCA3 variant may contribute to
the risk for RDS in late preterm and term infants, who, in contrast to
ABCA3-­deficient infants with variants on both alleles, may eventually
completely recover from their initial lung disease.

Genetics

Recessive variants in ABCA3 were first described among infants who
presented with lethal RDS in the newborn period, but now have been
identified in older infants and children with interstitial lung disease.
There is considerable allelic heterogeneity: more than 400 variants

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 456 u Diffuse Lung Diseases in Childhood
scattered throughout the gene have been identified, most of which
are family-­specific. The presence of null variants on both alleles that
are predicted to preclude any ABCA3 production has been associated with early-­onset disease and a uniformly fatal prognosis without
lung transplant. A missense variant that results in a valine substitution for glutamine in codon 292 (p.Glu292Val or p.E292V) in association with a second ABCA3 variant has been found in children with
severe neonatal respiratory failure and in older children with interstitial lung disease and is present in approximately 0.7% of European-­
descent individuals. ABCA3 variants have been identified in diverse
racial and ethnic groups. The precise frequency of disease is unknown;
large-­scale sequencing projects indicate that the overall carrier rate
for ABCA3 variants may be as high as 1 in 50 to 1 in 70 individuals.
However, many ABCA3 variants are private, have not been previously
identified in affected individuals, and functional data are only available
for a limited number of disease-­associated variants, thereby limiting
these estimates. Two mechanistic classes of ABCA3 variants have been
identified: those that disrupt intracellular trafficking of ABCA3 to the
lamellar bodies with retention of the variant protein in the endoplasmic reticulum and those that traffic normally but impair adenosine triphosphate (ATP)–mediated phospholipid transport into the lamellar
bodies. ABCA3 deficiency may contribute to a substantial proportion
of unexplained fatal lung disease in term infants and of interstitial lung
disease in older children.

Diagnosis

Sequence analysis of ABCA3 is available in clinical laboratories, usually as part of an NGS multiple-­gene panel, and is the most definitive
approach for diagnosis. Considerable variation in ABCA3 necessitates
careful interpretation regarding the functionality of an individual
variant and its contribution to the clinical presentation. Additionally,
sequence analysis is not 100% sensitive, as functionally significant variants may exist in untranslated regions that are not generally analyzed.
As large deletions spanning one or more exons have been identified, it
is important that the gene panel be able to detect such variants. In situations when the sequence analysis results are inconclusive, lung biopsy
with electron microscopy to examine lamellar body morphology may
be a useful adjunct to the diagnostic approach. Small lamellar bodies
that contain electron-­dense inclusions may be observed in association
with ABCA3 pathogenic variants. These findings support the hypothesis that ABCA3 function is necessary for lamellar body biogenesis.
There are no biochemical markers to establish the diagnosis.

DISEASE CAUSED BY PATHOGENIC VARIANTS
IN NKX2-­1 (THYROID TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR
1, CHOREOATHETOSIS, HYPOTHYROIDISM,
AND NEONATAL RESPIRATORY DISTRESS, OMIM
#600635)
Clinical Manifestations

A large deletion of the region of chromosome 14 (14q13.3) encompassing the NKX2-­1 locus was first recognized in an infant with hypothyroidism and neonatal RDS. Multiple large deletions involving the
NKX2-­1 locus and contiguous genes as well as missense, frameshift,
nonsense, and small insertion or deletion variants scattered throughout the gene have been reported in individuals with hypothyroidism,
lung disease, and neurologic symptoms, including benign familial chorea. Manifestation of dysfunction in all three organ systems has been
referred to as brain-­thyroid-­lung syndrome, but disease may manifest
in only one or two organ systems. The lung disease can range from
severe and eventually lethal neonatal respiratory distress to chronic lung
disease in childhood and adulthood. Recurrent pulmonary infections
have been reported, likely caused by reduced expression of the pulmonary collectins, SP-­A and SP-­D, but could also result from decreased
expression of other NKX2-­1 transcriptionally regulated proteins. No
clear genotype-­phenotype correlations have emerged, but children
harboring complete gene deletions have generally had more severe
and earlier-­onset disease. This observation could also be related to the
deletion of other adjacent genes. Although limited data are available,
the pulmonary phenotype may depend on the expression of which

2685

NKX2-­1 target genes are most affected. Children with decreased SP-­B
or ABCA3 expression may present with acute neonatal respiratory failure, whereas those with decreased SP-­C or pulmonary collectin expression are more likely to have chronic lung disease.

Genetics

The NKX2-­1 gene is small, spanning less than 3,000 bases, with only
three exons. TTF-­1 is expressed not only in the lung but also in the thyroid gland and in the central nervous system. In the lung it is important
for the expression of a wide variety of proteins, including the surfactant proteins, ABCA3, club cell secretory protein, and many others.
Two transcripts that differ depending on whether the transcriptional
start site is in the first or second exon have been recognized, although
the shorter transcript is the predominant transcript in the lung. Most
NKX2-­1 pathogenic variants are thought to result in a loss of function,
with the mechanism of disease thus being haploinsufficiency, but discordant effects on different target genes have been reported. Loss-­of-­
function variants in NKX2-­1 are rare in large sequencing projects, but
the prevalence of disease is unknown. Pathogenic variants in diverse
ethnic groups have been recognized. Most reported variants and deletions have occurred de novo, resulting in sporadic disease, but familial
disease transmitted in a dominant manner has been recognized.

Diagnosis

Sequence analysis of the NKX2-­1 gene is available through clinical
laboratories, usually as part of an NGS multiple-­gene panel, and is the
preferred method for diagnosis. Because large deletions comprise a significant fraction of reported variant alleles, specific methods to assess for
deletions should also be performed, such as a chromosomal microarray or gene-­targeted deletion/duplication analysis. A pathogenic variant
on one allele is sufficient to cause disease. Although isolated pulmonary
disease has been recognized, the majority of reported affected individuals have manifestations in two or more other organ systems. Thus the
presence of hypothyroidism or neurologic abnormality in a proband or
a family history of chorea should prompt consideration of the diagnosis.
The most specific neurologic finding is chorea, but hypotonia, developmental delay, ataxia, and dysarthria have been reported. In very young,
nonambulatory infants the neurologic symptoms may not be evident, or
muscle weakness or hypotonia may be attributed to the severity of lung
disease or a result of the hypothyroidism. Affected individuals may not
be overtly hypothyroid but have compensated hypothyroidism with borderline low thyroxine (T4) and high thyroid-­stimulating hormone levels.
The lung pathology associated with NKX2-­1 pathogenic variants may
be typical of that of other surfactant dysfunction disorders, but because
NKX2-­1 is important for lung development, growth abnormalities and
arrested pulmonary development also may be seen. Immunostaining
studies of surfactant protein expression have yielded variable results,
with decreased expression of one or more surfactant-­related proteins
observed in some patients. No characteristic electron microscopy findings have been identified.

TREATMENT OF SURFACTANT DYSFUNCTION
DISORDERS

Virtually all patients with SP-­B deficiency die within the first year of
life. Conventional neonatal intensive care interventions can maintain
extrapulmonary organ function for a limited time (weeks to several
months). Replacement therapy with commercially available surfactants is ineffective. Lung transplantation has been successful, but the
pretransplantation, transplantation, and posttransplantation medical
and surgical care is highly specialized and available only at pediatric
pulmonary transplantation centers. Prompt recognition is critical if
patients are to be considered for lung transplantation. Palliative care
consultation is helpful.
No specific treatment is available for patients with lung disease caused
by pathogenic variants in SFTPC or ABCA3. Therapeutic approaches
used for interstitial lung diseases, such as the use of corticosteroids,
quinolones, and macrolide antibiotics, have been reported but not systematically evaluated (Fig. 456.1). Infants with severe and progressive
respiratory failure attributable to ABCA3 deficiency may be candidates

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2686 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
18
16
Good

Number of patients

14

Moderate

12

None

10

Not tried

8
6
4

Secondary Alveolar Proteinosis

2
0

adults. Most cases of primary PAP in older children and adults are mediated by neutralizing autoantibodies directed against GM-­CSF, which can
be detected in serum and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid. These autoantibodies block binding of GM-­CSF to its receptor, thereby inhibiting
alveolar macrophage maturation and function and surfactant clearance.
Variants in the genes encoding both the α and β subunits of the GM-­CSF
receptor (CSF2RA, CSFR2B) in children with PAP account for a genetic
basis for some cases of primary PAP in childhood.

Surfactant

Steroids Hydroxychloroquine Colchicine General response
to all treatments

Fig. 456.1 Response to therapies for 17 patients with SFTPC variants.

(Data from Kröner C, Reu S, Teusch V, et al. Genotype alone does not
predict the clinical course of SFTPC deficiency in paediatric patients.
Eur Respir J. 2015;46:197–206.)

for lung transplantation. The variable natural history of patients with
SFTPC variants and older children with ABCA3 deficiency makes
predictions of prognosis difficult. Lung transplantation is reserved for
patients with progressive and refractory respiratory failure who would
otherwise qualify for transplantation irrespective of their diagnosis.
Treatment for patients with NKX2-­1 variants is largely supportive.
Hypothyroidism, if present, should be treated with thyroid hormone
replacement. Corticosteroids and other agents used for other types
of surfactant dysfunction have not been formally evaluated. Some
individuals have progressive lung disease and have undergone lung
transplantation. The variable progression of disease and presence of
extrapulmonary disease may make evaluation and selection of subjects
for transplantation particularly difficult.
Parents of children with surfactant dysfunction disorders should be
offered genetic counseling to inform recurrence risk for future pregnancies, to present antenatal diagnostic options and offer delivery at a
center with neonatal intensive care, and to facilitate discussions regarding whether testing should be offered to other family members who
may not be symptomatic.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

456.2 Pulmonary Alveolar Proteinosis
Jennifer A. Wambach, Lawrence M. Nogee,
F. Sessions Cole III, and Aaron Hamvas
Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis (PAP) is a rare syndrome characterized
by the intraalveolar and terminal airway accumulation of surfactant
leading to progressive hypoxemic respiratory failure. PAP can result
from abnormalities in surfactant production or surfactant clearance.
Histopathologic examination shows distal air spaces are filled with a
granular, eosinophilic material that stains positively with periodic
acid–Schiff reagent and is diastase resistant. This material contains
large amounts of surfactant proteins and lipids, and the primary
mechanism for its accumulation is impaired catabolism by alveolar
macrophages. PAP is classified as either primary due to disruption of
granulocyte-­macrophage colony-­stimulating factor (GM-­CSF) signaling or secondary due to several different diseases that reduce alveolar
macrophage number or function (Table 456.2). A fulminant, usually
lethal, form of PAP manifesting shortly after birth has been termed
congenital alveolar proteinosis, but because this condition is caused
by disrupted surfactant metabolism or surfactant dysfunction within
alveolar type II cells, the disease is included under inherited disorders
of surfactant metabolism (see Chapter 456.1).

ETIOLOGY AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Primary Alveolar Proteinosis

Disordered signaling of GM-­CSF leading to impaired alveolar macrophage
maturation is the major underlying cause of primary PAP in children and

Alveolar proteinosis has also been reported in children, including
young infants, with lysinuric protein intolerance, a rare autosomal
recessive disorder caused by pathogenic variants in the cationic amino
acid transporter SLC7A7 (see Chapter 105.14). These children generally present with vomiting, hyperammonemia, and failure to thrive,
although their pulmonary disease may prove fatal. A case of recurrence
of the disease after lung transplantation supports a primary role for
alveolar macrophage dysfunction in the pathogenesis of PAP associated with lysinuric protein intolerance. PAP is also a prominent feature in patients with biallelic variants in the gene encoding methionyl
tRNA synthetase (MARS), who have a multiorgan phenotype that also
includes liver disease as a prominent feature and is prevalent among
individuals on Reunion Island. The mechanism for PAP in patients
with MARS variants is unknown. Heterozygous variants in the gene
encoding the transcription factor GATA2 have also been associated
with a phenotype that includes PAP, as well as immune deficiencies,
myelodysplasia, and lymphatic abnormalities. The mechanism for PAP
in patients with such variants likely is related to the role of GATA2
in alveolar macrophage development. Heterozygous gain-­in-­function
variants in the OAS1 gene have been identified in infants and children
with a phenotype that includes PAP, hypogammaglobulinemia, and
immune dysfunction. OASl gene products are important in the innate
immune response to viral infection, and gene activation leads to inhibition of protein synthesis and apoptosis, with apoptosis of alveolar macrophages likely resulting in PAP. PAP may also be associated with some
subtypes of Niemann-­Pick disease (see Chapter 106.4).
Secondary alveolar proteinosis also may occur in association with
infection, particularly in immunocompromised individuals. However,
because the same pathologic process occurs in severely immunodeficient
mice raised in a pathogen-­free environment, it is not clear whether this
phenotype results from a secondary infection or the underlying immunodeficiency. Environmental exposures to dust, silica, and chemicals
and chemotherapeutic agents; hematologic disorders (myelodysplastic
syndrome); and nonhematologic malignancies have also been associated
with the development of secondary alveolar proteinosis.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Infants and children with PAP present with dyspnea, fatigue, cough, weight
loss, chest pain, or hemoptysis. In the later stages, cyanosis and digital
clubbing may be seen. Pulmonary function changes include decreased diffusing capacity of carbon monoxide, lung volumes with a restrictive abnormality, and arterial blood gas values indicating marked hypoxemia and/or
chronic respiratory acidosis. Alveolar proteinosis in infants and children is
rare, and males are affected three times as often as females.

DIAGNOSIS

Histopathologic examination of lung biopsy specimens currently
remains the gold standard for diagnosis of PAP in children, although
this is likely to change as molecular tests become available. Immunohistochemical staining reveals abundant quantities of alveolar and
intracellular surfactant proteins A, B, and D. Latex agglutination tests
for the presence of anti–GM-­CSF antibodies in BAL fluid or blood
are highly sensitive and specific for the autoimmune forms of alveolar
proteinosis. Elevations of GM-­CSF in peripheral blood suggest a GM-­
CSF receptor defect, and molecular analysis of these genes should be
pursued. The examination of sputum or BAL fluid for surfactant components has been used for diagnosis in adults, but these methods have
not been validated in children. Examination of peripheral blood and/
or bone marrow for clonogenic stimulation of monocyte-­macrophage

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 456 u Diffuse Lung Diseases in Childhood

2687

Table 456.2   Comparison of Pulmonary Alveolar Proteinosis Syndromes

AUTO-­
IMMUNE
Gene(s)

GM-­CSF
RECEPTOR
DEFICIENCY

LYSINURIC
PROTEIN
­INTOLERANCE

MARS
DEFICIENCY

GATA2
DEFICIENCY

OAS1-­ASSOCIATED
POLYMORPHIC
AUTOINFLAMMATORY
IMMUNODEFICIENCY

CSFR2A,
CSFR2B

SLC7A7

MARS

GATA2

OAS1

Age of onset

Adult > child

Childhood to
adult

Childhood

Childhood to
adult

Childhood to adult

Infancy

Inheritance

NA

Recessive

Recessive

Recessive

Sporadic/dominant

Sporadic/dominant

Mechanism

Neutralizing
antibodies to
GM-­CSF

Loss of function

Loss of function

Loss of function

Loss of function;
haploinsufficiency

Gain in function

Emesis; failure to
thrive

Liver disease;
hypothyroidism

Immune deficiency;
myelodysplasia

Systemic inflammation,
including fever,
dermatitis, diarrhea,
leukocytosis,
splenomegaly

Other
manifestations

DIAGNOSIS
Biochemical

Detection
of serum
GM-­CSF
autoantibody

Elevated serum
GM-­CSF levels

Increased cationic
amino acids in
urine, especially
lysine

None

None

Hypogammaglobulinemia

Genetic (DNA)

NA

Sequence
CSFR2A,
CSFR2B

Sequence SLC7A7

Sequence MARS

Sequence GATA2

Sequence OAS1

Treatment

Whole lung
lavage;
inhaled GM-­
CSF

Whole lung
lavage;
hematopoietic
stem cell
transplantation

Whole lung
lavage, dietary
protein
restriction,
administration
of citrulline
and nitrogen
scavenging drugs

Whole lung
lavage

Whole lung lavage;
hematopoietic
stem cell
transplantation

Whole lung lavage,
intravenous
immunoglobulin (IVIG),
hematopoietic stem
cell transplantation

GM-­CSF, Granulocyte-­macrophage colony-­stimulating factor.

precursors, GM-­CSF receptor and ligand expression, and GM-­CSF
binding and signaling studies are available through research protocols.

TREATMENT

The natural history of primary PAP is highly variable, making prognostic
and therapeutic decisions difficult. Total lung lavage has been associated
with prolonged remission of PAP in adults and remains a therapeutic
option for patients with childhood PAP (Fig. 456.2). Younger infants
with PAP may be more likely to have genetic mechanisms underlying
their disease, and the role of repeated BAL in children has not been well
studied, nor is it likely to be effective. It may provide a temporizing measure in some circumstances and may benefit patients with autoimmune
or secondary PAP. Subcutaneous or inhaled administration of recombinant GM-­CSF may improve pulmonary function in some adults with
later-­onset PAP. The role of exogenous GM-­CSF treatment in children
has not been well studied, although successful treatment with inhaled
recombinant GM-­CSF (molgramostim) has been reported in adults with
autoimmune-­mediated PAP. Because children with GM-­CSF receptor
defects generally have high serum levels of GM-­CSF, exogenous GM-­
CSF seems unlikely to be effective in most such cases. Depending on the
nature of the variant(s) responsible for the deficiency, some responsiveness of the receptor may be retained such that a response to exogenous
GM-­CSF is possible. Because the primary defect for PAP resides in the
alveolar macrophage, which is a bone marrow–derived cell, lung transplantation would not be expected to correct primary PAP.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

A

C

B

D

Fig. 456.2 A and B, Severe pulmonary alveolar proteinosis in a

5-­year-­old child before therapeutic lung lavage. A, Chest radiograph
shows diffuse alveolar and interstitial infiltrates. B, CT scan demonstrates major air space opacities and crazy-­paving pattern. C and D,
Same patient after 12 therapeutic lung lavages. C, Chest radiograph
demonstrates improvement of alveolointerstitial infiltrates. D, CT scan
shows regression of the air space opacities with a residual micronodular pattern. (From De Blic J. Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis in children.
Paediatr Respir Rev. 2004;5:316–322.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2688 Part XVII u The Respiratory System

Chapter 457

Pulmonary Hemosiderosis
Mary A. Nevin
Pulmonary hemorrhage may be characterized as focal or diffuse based
on the location(s) of bleeding (see Chapter 458.2). The diagnosis of
pulmonary hemosiderosis refers to the subset of patients with diffuse
alveolar hemorrhage (DAH). Bleeding in DAH occurs as a result of
injury to the microvasculature of the lung and may be slow and insidious because of the low-­pressure pulmonary circulation. Pulmonary
hemosiderosis has classically been characterized by the triad of iron-­
deficiency anemia, hemoptysis, and radiographic evidence of alveolar infiltration. However, many of those affected, particularly young
patients, are likely to present atypically, and a high index of suspicion
for this condition must be maintained. Pulmonary hemosiderosis can
exist in isolation, but more commonly occurs in association with an
underlying condition. Defining a precise etiology for hemorrhage may
be elusive. A diagnosis of idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis (IPH)
is made when DAH occurs in isolation and an exhaustive evaluation
for an underlying pathologic etiology is found to be unrevealing or
nondiagnostic.

ETIOLOGY

The pathogenesis of pulmonary hemosiderosis is diverse, but DAH
may be classified based on histopathologic examination. Three histopathologic patterns have been described: pulmonary capillaritis,
bland pulmonary hemorrhage, and diffuse alveolar damage. Of
these, pulmonary capillaritis is most frequently encountered and
appears to carry a negative prognosis in those affected with DAH.
The histopathologic finding of pulmonary capillaritis is characterized by neutrophilic inflammation of the alveolar interstitium, endothelial edema, and fibrinoid necrosis. DAH with pulmonary capillaritis
is frequently associated with an underlying systemic vasculitic process
or collagen vascular disease.
Disorders associated with pulmonary capillaritis include systemic
lupus erythematosus (SLE; see Chapter 199), drug-­induced capillaritis, anti–glomerular basement membrane (GBM) antibody syndrome
(Goodpasture syndrome), IgA vasculitis (Henoch-­Schönlein purpura)
(see Chapter 210), and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)–
associated vasculitis, including granulomatosis with polyangiitis
(formerly Wegener granulomatosis), microscopic polyangiitis (MPA;
see Chapter 210), and eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis
(Churg-­Strauss syndrome). Additional etiologies of pulmonary capillaritis include primary antiphospholipid antibody syndrome, rheumatoid arthritis, hypocomplementemic urticarial vasculitis, and acute
lung transplant rejection. DAH in individuals with ANCA-­associated
vasculitis (granulomatosis with polyangiitis and microscopic polyangiitis) is frequently associated with pathologic evidence of pulmonary
capillaritis. In patients with Goodpasture syndrome, antiphospholipid
syndrome, and SLE, DAH has been reported with pathologic evidence
of capillaritis, but bland hemorrhage has also been described. Isolated pulmonary capillaritis may also be seen in the absence of ANCA
positivity.
Drugs, including propylthiouracil, aspirin, hydralazine, and tumor
necrosis factor alpha (TNF-­α) antagonists, have been implicated as an
etiology for pulmonary capillaritis and DAH. Finally, alveolar hemorrhage with capillaritis has been increasingly described as a complication of hematopoietic cell transplantation
Pulmonary hemosiderosis with the histopathologic finding of bland
hemorrhage is found when there is an absence of alveolar capillary
inflammation or endothelial and cellular disruption. Both anti-­GBM
disease and SLE may be associated with bland hemorrhage, although

the finding of capillaritis is more typical. Other causes of bland hemorrhage include cardiac or cardiopulmonary derangements (pulmonary
hypertension, mitral stenosis, mitral regurgitation, arteriovenous malformation), disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), coagulopathies, and anticoagulant therapy. Bland hemorrhage is also described
in IPH.
Diffuse alveolar damage (DAD) is characterized by diffuse alveolar and interstitial edema with hyaline membrane formation. It is
the pathognomonic finding in acute respiratory distress syndrome
(ARDS) and is seen with a variety of infections, including opportunistic pathogens in immunocompromised individuals. Drug toxicity (sirolimus, nitrofurantoin, amphetamines, vaping), radiation
therapy, and pulmonary embolus and infarction are other described
etiologies for DAD with pulmonary hemorrhage. Table 457.1 provides a summary and classification of the diagnoses that may manifest with recurrent or chronic pulmonary hemorrhage.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Disorders that present as DAH are highly variable in their severity and in their associated symptomatology and identifiable

Table 457.1  Diffuse Alveolar Hemorrhage Syndromes
DISORDERS WITH PULMONARY CAPILLARITIS
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener granulomatosis)
Microscopic polyangiitis
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
Systemic sclerosis
Polymyositis
Anti-­GBM antibody syndrome (Goodpasture)
Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome
IgA vasculitis (Henoch-­Schönlein purpura)
Hypocomplementemic urticarial vasculitis
Rheumatoid arthritis
Immunoglobulin A nephropathy
Behçet syndrome
Cryoglobulinemia
Endocarditis
Drug-­induced capillaritis (retinoic acid, propylthiouracil, etanercept,
infliximab, hydralazine)
Idiopathic pulmonary-­renal syndrome
Acute lung transplant rejection
Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Churg-­Strauss
syndrome)
Hematopoietic cell transplantation
DISORDERS WITH BLAND HEMORRHAGE
Anti-­GBM antibody syndrome (Goodpasture)
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
Idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis
Heiner syndrome
Acute idiopathic pulmonary hemorrhage of infancy
Thrombocytopenia syndromes (ITP, TTP)
Hemolytic uremic syndrome
Mitral stenosis
Celiac disease (Lane-­Hamilton syndrome)
Nonaccidental trauma
Drugs (anticoagulation, toxins)
DISORDERS WITH DIFFUSE ALVEOLAR DAMAGE
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
Polymyositis
Immunodeficiency and opportunistic infection
Pulmonary infarction
Radiation therapy
Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)
Pulmonary hypertension
Pulmonary edema
Drugs (amphetamines, propylthiouracil, penicillamine, vaping)
Modified from Susarla SC, Fan LL. Diffuse alveolar hemorrhage syndromes in children.
Curr Opin Pediatr. 2007;19:314–320.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 457 u Pulmonary Hemosiderosis
abnormalities in laboratory testing; the diagnosis may be significantly delayed, making frequency estimates unreliable. Similarly,
the prevalence of IPH is largely unknown. Of children and young
adults diagnosed with IPH in the past, it has been postulated that
the etiology of the hemorrhage might have been discovered if they
had been studied with the newer and more advanced diagnostics available today; specific serologic testing has vastly improved
our ability to appreciate immune-­mediated disease. Estimates of
prevalence obtained from Swedish and Japanese retrospective case
analyses vary from 0.24 to 1.23 cases per million. Children and
adolescents have traditionally accounted for 30% of cases. The ratio
of affected males:females is 1:1 in the childhood diagnosis group,
and males are only slightly more affected in the group diagnosed as
young adults. In pediatric and adolescents undergoing allogeneic
hematopoietic cell transplantation, pulmonary hemorrhage has
been described in 2% of the population.

PATHOLOGY

DAH has been associated with diffuse inflammation, cytokine activation, and autoimmune responses. Elevations of both ferritin and
interleukin (IL)-­6 have been described as key factors in the exaggerated inflammatory response seen in pulmonary hemorrhage.
In pulmonary capillaritis, key histologic features include (1) fibrin
thrombi, which occlude capillaries, (2) fibrin clots adherent to
interalveolar septae, (3) fibrinoid necrosis of capillary walls, and (4)
interstitial erythrocytes and hemosiderin. Illustrative but nonspecific pathologic findings, such as vascular smooth muscle hypertrophy (pulmonary hypertension) or thrombosis (vascular thrombosis
with infarction), may be found in those disorders that cause DAH
without pulmonary capillaritis. The finding of blood in the airways
or alveoli is representative of a recent hemorrhage. With repeated
episodes of pulmonary hemorrhage, lung tissue appears brown
secondary to this presence of hemosiderin. The presence of persistent blood in three bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) specimens from
the same lobe is highly suggestive of the diagnosis. Hemosiderin-­
laden macrophages (HLMs) are seen with recovering, recurrent,
or chronic pulmonary hemorrhage and are identifiable both in BSL
fluid and in pathologic specimens of lung tissue. Approximately
48 hours is necessary for the alveolar macrophages to convert iron
from erythrocytes into hemosiderin. In a murine model, HLMs
appear 3 days after a single episode of pulmonary hemorrhage and
peak at 7-­10 days. HLMs may be detectable for weeks to months
after a hemorrhagic event. Other nonspecific pathologic findings
include thickening of alveolar septa, goblet cell hyperplasia, and
hypertrophy of type II pneumocytes. Fibrosis may be seen with
chronic disease.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Diffuse Alveolar Hemorrhage Associated with
Pulmonary Capillaritis

Granulomatosis with polyangiitis is a recognized etiology for
DAH in children (see Chapter 448.3). This disease is classically
characterized by necrotizing granuloma formation (with or without
cavitation) of the upper and lower respiratory tract and by a necrotizing glomerulonephritis and small vessel vasculitis. In children,
presentations attributable to the upper airway, including subglottic
stenosis, may suggest the diagnosis. The presence of ANCAs may
be helpful in diagnosis and management, but the clinician must
be aware that other ANCA-­positive vasculitides, such as MPA and
eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis, may share this
nonspecific laboratory finding. In small vessel vasculitides, ANCAs
cause an inflammatory reaction that results in injury to the microvasculature. Antiproteinase-­3 antibodies (cANCAs) are classically
associated with granulomatosis with polyangiitis, whereas antimyeloperoxidase antibodies (pANCAs) are typically found in patients
with MPA.
Patients with MPA (previously the microscopic variant of polyarteritis nodosa) demonstrate a systemic necrotizing vasculitis with a

2689

predilection for small vessels (venules, arterioles, capillaries) but without necrotizing granuloma formation. This diagnosis is precluded by
the finding of immune complex deposition in order to differentiate
MPA from other diseases (Henoch-­Schönlein purpura, cryoglobulinemic vasculitis) that are associated with immune complex–mediated
small vessel vasculitis.
Anti-­GBM antibody syndrome (Goodpasture disease) is an
immune complex–mediated disease in which anti-­GBM antibody
binds to the basement membrane of both the alveolus and the glomerulus. GBM antibodies attach to type IV collagen contained in the
vascular endothelium. At the alveolar level, immunoglobulin (Ig)
G, IgM, and complement are deposited at alveolar septa. Electron
microscopy shows disruption of basement membranes and vascular
integrity, which allows blood to escape into alveolar spaces.
Although alveolar hemorrhage is a relatively uncommon complication in SLE, its occurrence is often severe and potentially life-­
threatening; mortality rates exceed 50% in some cohorts, and early
recognition is crucial to allow timely implementation of immunomodulatory therapies.
In IgA vasculitis (Henoch-­Schönlein purpura), pulmonary hemorrhage is a rare but recognized complication. Pathologic findings have
included transmural neutrophilic infiltration of small vessels, alveolar
septal inflammation, and intraalveolar hemorrhage. Vasculitis is the
proposed mechanism for hemorrhage.
Pulmonary renal syndromes are defined as those where pulmonary
and renal disease manifestations are predominant. These include the
aforementioned granulomatosis with polyangiitis, anti-­GBM antibody
syndrome, SLE, and MPA. As Henoch-­Schönlein purpura may also
have renal involvement, it has been suggested for inclusion as a pulmonary renal syndrome.

Pulmonary Hemorrhage in Infancy

An infant’s neonatal course may be complicated by pulmonary
hemorrhage. The most common diagnoses in infants with DAH are
congenital heart disease (including pulmonary hypertension) and
prematurity. Additional diagnostic considerations in an infant with
pulmonary hemorrhage include congenital or acquired lung disease
(congenital diaphragmatic hernia, sepsis), congenital or acquired
coagulopathies (extracorporeal membrane oxygenation [ECMO],
liver failure), and infection. Pulmonary hemorrhage in infants may
be unrecognized if the volume of blood is insufficient to reach the
proximal airways. Even with more significant blood loss, the tussive force of an infant may be insufficient to produce hemoptysis.
Because the radiographic findings in pulmonary hemorrhage may
be appreciated instead as a worsening picture of respiratory distress syndrome, edema, or infection, a high index of suspicion is
required.

Acute Idiopathic Pulmonary Hemorrhage of Infancy

In 1994 and 1997, case reports suggested clusters of infantile pulmonary hemorrhage in association with environmental exposure
to Stachybotrys chartarum. A review by the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention did not support an association between
exposure to the mold and infantile pulmonary hemorrhage. Acute
idiopathic pulmonary hemorrhage of infancy (AIPHI) has been
defined as pulmonary hemorrhage in a previously healthy infant
who is less than 1 year of age and born at a gestational age of greater
than 32 weeks. Three criteria must simultaneously be met; these
include (1) the sudden onset of bleeding or “frank” evidence of
blood in the airway; (2) severe presentation leading to respiratory
distress or failure and resulting in hospitalization in intensive care
with intubation and mechanical ventilation; and (3) diffuse bilateral
pulmonary infiltrates found on chest radiographs or computerized
tomographic imaging. AIPHI is believed to be a rare diagnosis, and
an exhaustive search for an identifiable etiology of pulmonary hemorrhage is advocated.
Pulmonary hemosiderosis in association with non-­IgE–mediated cow’s milk hypersensitivity is characterized by variable and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2690 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
reversible (with elimination of cow’s milk protein) symptoms of
milk intolerance in infants and young children. Symptoms can
include grossly bloody or occult heme-­positive stools, vomiting,
failure to thrive, gastroesophageal reflux, upper airway congestion,
and iron-­deficiency anemia. Association with pulmonary hemorrhage has remained controversial, but multiple case series have provided support for the anecdotal association.
A number of case reports and case series have suggested an association between celiac disease (see Chapter 384) and DAH. In these
reports, a resolution of intestinal and pulmonary symptoms along with
resolution of radiographic disease has been seen after the adoption of
a gluten-­free diet. Consideration of testing for celiac disease in those
patients with pulmonary hemorrhage and suggestive gastrointestinal
symptomatology may be warranted.
DAH has been described in association with numerous other conditions. These are typically noninflammatory in nature and may be
diversely attributable to cardiac, vascular, lymphatic, or hematologic
etiologies. DAH has also rarely been attributed to nonaccidental
trauma.
The diagnosis of IPH is a diagnosis of exclusion and is only made
when there is evidence of chronic or recurrent DAH and when
exhaustive evaluations for primary or secondary etiologies have
negative results. Renal and systemic involvement should be absent,
and a biopsy specimen should not reveal any evidence of granulomatous disease, vasculitis, infection, infarction, immune complex deposition, or malignancy. Some patients initially diagnosed
with IPH will later be found to have Goodpasture syndrome, SLE,
or MPA; therefore some cases of IPH may represent unrecognized
immune-­mediated disorders.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The clinical presentation of pulmonary hemosiderosis is highly
variable. In most symptomatic cases, DAH is heralded by symptoms of hemoptysis and dyspnea with associated hypoxemia and
the finding of alveolar infiltration on chest radiograph. The diagnosis may be problematic, as young children often lack the ability to effectively expectorate and may not present with hemoptysis.
Because the presence of blood in the lung is a trigger for airway irritation and inflammation, the patient may present after an episode
of hemorrhage with wheezing, cough, dyspnea, and ventilatory
derangements, reflecting bronchospasm, edema, mucus plugging,
and inflammation; this presentation may result in an incorrect
diagnosis of asthma or bronchiolitis. A lack of pulmonary symptoms does not preclude the diagnosis of DAH, and children may
present only with chronic fatigue or pallor. In particular, young
infants and children with DAH may come to attention with entirely
nonspecific and nonpulmonary symptomatology such as failure to
thrive or jaundice.
Primary or reported symptoms may reflect an underlying and associated disease process or comorbid condition. Presentations can vary
widely from a relative lack of symptoms to shock or sudden death.
Bleeding may occasionally be recognized from the presence of alveolar
infiltrates on a chest radiograph alone. It should be noted, however,
that the absence of an infiltrate does not rule out an ongoing hemorrhagic process.
On physical examination, the patient may be pale with tachycardia
and tachypnea. During an acute exacerbation, children are frequently
febrile. Examination of the chest may reveal retractions and differential
or decreased aeration, with crackles or wheezes. The patient may present in shock with respiratory failure from massive hemoptysis.

LABORATORY FINDINGS AND DIAGNOSIS

Bronchoscopic evaluation is an important tool in the diagnosis of
pulmonary hemosiderosis. The yield is highest if performed within
the first 48-­72 hours after an acute hemorrhage. Cultures should
be sent for bacterial, viral, fungal, and mycobacterial pathogens.

In addition, the evaluation of BAL fluid with silver stain for pneumocystis is advocated. When the pulmonologist recovers persistent
or worsening blood with repeated BAL of the same lung segment,
the diagnosis of DAH is supported. The presence of greater than
20% HLMs in BAL fluid is considered diagnostic. In the absence of
bronchoscopy, sputum or pulmonary secretions should be analyzed
for significant evidence of blood or HLMs and may provide supportive evidence in a patient who is able to adequately expectorate
secretions from the lower airway. Gastric secretions may also reveal
HLMs.
Pulmonary hemorrhage is classically associated with a microcytic,
hypochromic anemia. Reduced serum iron levels, a decreased or normal total iron-­binding capacity, and normal to increased ferritin levels
may be found with chronic disease. The reticulocyte count is frequently
elevated. Patients with pulmonary capillaritis have lower hematocrits
and higher erythrocyte sedimentation rates. The anemia of IPH can
mimic a hemolytic anemia. Elevations of plasma bilirubin are caused
by absorption and breakdown of hemoglobin in the alveoli. Any or all
of these hematologic manifestations may be absent in the presence of
recent hemorrhage.
White blood cell count and differential should be evaluated for
evidence of infection and eosinophilia. A peripheral smear and
direct Coombs test may suggest a vasculitic process. A stool specimen positive for occult blood may suggest associated gastrointestinal disease but can also reflect swallowed blood. Renal and liver
functions should be reviewed. A urinalysis should be obtained to
assess for evidence of a pulmonary-­renal syndrome. A coagulation
profile, quantitative immunoglobulins (including IgE), and complement studies are recommended. Testing for von Willebrand disease
is also indicated.
Testing for ANCA (cANCA, pANCA), antinuclear antibody, anti–
double-­stranded DNA, rheumatoid factor, antiphospholipid antibody
(APL), myeloperoxidase, lupus anticoagulant, anticardiolipin antibody,
and anti-­GBM antibody evaluates for a number of immune-­mediated
and vasculitic processes that may be associated with pulmonary
capillaritis.
Chest x-­rays may reveal evidence of acute or chronic disease. Hyperaeration is frequently seen, especially during an acute hemorrhage.
Infiltrates are typically symmetric and may spare the apices of the lung.
Atelectasis may be appreciated. With chronic disease, fibrosis, lymphadenopathy, and nodularity may be seen. High-­resolution CT imaging
may reveal diffuse ground-­glass opacification and alveolar opacification. With large bleeds, a fluid collection may be appreciated.
The presence of a cardiac murmur, cardiomegaly on x-­ray, or a clinical suspicion of congenital or acquired heart disease suggests the need
for a complete cardiac evaluation, including electrocardiogram and
echocardiogram.
Pulmonary function tests generally reveal obstructive lung disease in the acute period. With more chronic disease, fibrosis and
restrictive disease tend to predominate. Oxygen saturation levels
may be decreased. Lung volumes may reveal air trapping acutely and
decreases in total lung capacity chronically. The diffusing capacity
of carbon monoxide may be low or normal in the chronic phase
but is likely to be elevated in the setting of an acute hemorrhage,
because carbon monoxide binds to the hemoglobin in extravasated
red blood cells.
Lung biopsy is warranted when DAH occurs without discernible
etiology, extrapulmonary disease, serologic evidence of vasculitis, or
circulating GBM antibodies. When surgically obtained, pulmonary tissue should be evaluated for evidence of immune complex deposition,
inflammatory change in the pulmonary vascular bed, and granulomatous disease. Transbronchial biopsy is not generally recommended,
as the lung involvement in DAH is frequently nonhomogeneous and
“patchy” in character.
Many have supported a diagnosis of IPH without lung biopsy if
the patient has a typical presentation with diffuse infiltration on

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 457 u Pulmonary Hemosiderosis
radiography, anemia, HLMs in BAL, sputum or gastric aspirate,
absence of systemic disease, and negative serology for immune-­
mediated disease. However, a number of patients meeting these criteria have been proven to have pulmonary capillaritis on review of
pathologic lung tissue specimens. Therefore a lung biopsy may be
recommended in an effort to guide therapy or determine prognosis
in an individual with DAH of unknown etiology.

TREATMENT

Supportive therapy, including volume resuscitation, ventilatory
support, supplemental oxygen, and transfusion of blood products,
may be warranted in the patient presenting acutely with pulmonary
hemorrhage. In the presence of ARDS, high oxygen concentrations
and high positive end-­expiratory pressure (PEEP) may be required.
Surgical or medical therapy should be directed at any treatable
underlying condition. High-­dose systemic corticosteroids are frequently used as first-­line treatment and are expected to be of particular benefit in the setting of immune-­mediated disease. Steroids
inhibit the acute inflammatory response (neutrophil influx, cytokine storm) associated with hemorrhage and may decrease progression toward fibrotic disease. High-­dose steroids may contribute to
morbidity and mortality in patients who have an infectious etiology
for their hemorrhage and in those who are immunocompromised.
A thorough evaluation for immunocompetence and pan-­cultures
for infectious organisms are therefore strongly advocated.
Medication dosing may vary with regard to primary diagnosis, age,
comorbidities, and other factors. Clinical-­pharmacologic correlation
is advocated. Low-­to moderate-­dose treatment regimens may be provided in the form of methylprednisolone 2-­4 mg/kg/day divided every
6-12 hours or in the form of prednisone 0.5-­1 mg/kg daily and decreased
to every other day after resolution of acute symptoms. High-­dose
corticosteroid therapy generally uses 10-­30 mg/kg/day of IV methylprednisolone for 3-­5 days and is followed by a tapering dose over
4-­6 weeks. Successful treatment is also associated with the use of pulse
steroid therapy; methylprednisolone may be given at a dose of 10-­30
mg/kg (maximum 1 g) infused over 1 hour for 3-­5 consecutive days
and repeated weekly or monthly. Early treatment with corticosteroids
appears to decrease episodes of hemorrhage, but high doses of steroids
carry the risk of renal disease, immunosuppression, and potentially
fatal infections.
A variety of steroid-­sparing and alternative immunosuppressive
agents, including cyclophosphamide, Cytoxan, azathioprine, hydroxychloroquine, methotrexate, 6-­mercaptopurine, and IVIG, have all been
used successfully as adjunctive therapy in patients with severe, chronic,
unremitting, or recurrent hemorrhage.
Plasmapheresis is a recognized adjunctive therapy for DAH with
pulmonary capillaritis in ANCA-­associated vasculitis, SLE, and
anti-­GBM antibody disease. Pheresis is generally performed daily
or every other day for 14 days. In each plasma exchange, the total
volume of plasma is replaced with fresh-­frozen plasma (FFP) or
albumin. In recent analyses, the long-­term efficacy of plasmapheresis as compared with corticosteroid therapy has been questioned.
At this time, treatment guidelines suggest the use of plasmapheresis
in patients with ANCA-­associated vasculitis who are critically ill
with hypoxemic respiratory failure.
Rituximab has evolved as an additional adjunctive therapeutic
option. It is a monoclonal antibody that targets CD-­20 and has been
found to be an effective option for individuals with connective tissue
and autoimmune disorders.
Any coagulopathic disorders should be corrected in an effort to
achieve hemostasis. Cryoprecipitates, FFP, and platelets may be transfused depending on the identified deficiency. Vitamin K may also be
supplemented.

2691

Prothrombotic factors, including antifibrinolytics such as
tranexamic acid (TXA), thrombin, and factor VIIa, have been used
in the treatment of DAH. TXA acts by preventing the conversion
of plasminogen into plasmin and hinders fibrinolysis. Inhalational
TXA has been associated with favorable treatment outcomes in
children with DAH. TXA has been described as being less efficacious in those with hematologic malignancies and those individuals with massive or recurrent bleeding. Further study is indicated
to define associated risk and populations expected to benefit most
consistently from this therapy.
Recombinant factor VIIa (FVIIa) may be used in an effort to
achieve hemostasis in those with massive hemorrhage. A therapeutic response to low doses of FVIIa has been reported with direct
intrapulmonary instillation, but the use of this agent is still anecdotal outside of hemophilia. Factor VIIa appears to decrease the
requirement for transfusions and to be an effective adjunctive therapy for critically ill children with massive hemorrhage. The efficacy
of FVIIa in neonates and infants less than 1 year of age is yet to be
established.
In the most critically ill children, additional life-­sustaining interventions may be required; ECMO combined with immunosuppression was reported to be successful in allowing recovery from a severe
hemorrhage with hypoxemic respiratory failure in the setting of
pANCA-­positive MPA. In neonatal and infantile pulmonary hemorrhage, clinical improvement in blood gas and ventilatory requirements
have been described with intrapulmonary administration of exogenous
surfactant.
The potential adverse effects of these pharmacologic and therapeutic interventions should be recognized, and treated patients must
be closely monitored for drug-­related complications. Cushing syndrome, systemic hypertension, diabetes, and immunodeficiency are
well-­recognized complications of chronic steroid therapy. Thrombocytopenia in association with low-­dose cyclophosphamide has also
been reported. Chronically immunosuppressed patients are at risk
for opportunistic infection; Legionella pneumonia infection has been
described in a survivor of IPH.
In chronic disease, progression to debilitating pulmonary fibrosis has been described. Lung transplantation has been performed in
patients with IPH refractory to immunosuppressive therapy. In one
reported case study, IPH recurred in the transplanted lung.

PROGNOSIS

The outcome of patients suffering from DAH is multideterminant;
underlying disease process, recurrence patterns, severity of hemorrhage, and delays in presentation are recognized prognostic factors.
Some conditions respond well to immunosuppressive therapies,
and remissions of disease are well documented. Other syndromes,
especially those associated with pulmonary capillaritis, carry a
poorer prognosis. In IPH, mortality is generally attributable to massive hemorrhage or, alternatively, to progressive fibrosis, respiratory
insufficiency, and right-­sided heart failure.
The long-­term prognosis in patients with IPH varies among studies. Initial case study reviews suggested an average survival after symptom onset of only 2.5 years. Subsequent reviews have demonstrated
vastly improved 5-­year (86%) and 8-­year (93%) survival in association
with the use of immunosuppressive therapies. In IPH, the presence of
hypoxia at clinical presentation and a positive antinuclear antibody
have been demonstrated to be risk factors for recurrence.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2692 Part XVII u The Respiratory System

Chapter 458

Pulmonary Embolism,
Infarction, and
Hemorrhage
458.1 Pulmonary Embolus and Infarction
Mary A. Nevin
Venous thromboembolism (VTE) is a term that describes both deep
venous thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism (PE). PE is
defined as obstruction of a pulmonary artery, typically as a result of
thrombus formation. Although VTE remains relatively rare in occurrence, these events have become recognized as increasingly prevalent
clinical problems and are associated with significant morbidity and
mortality in the pediatric population. An increased incidence of VTE
has been described in infants, children, and adolescents; this has been
attributed to multiple factors, including increased survival from previously fatal critical and chronic illnesses, the increased use of central
venous catheters, and improved diagnostic tools. Pulmonary emboli
are more likely to be silent or to present atypically in infants and children as compared to adults, and a delay in diagnosis is commonly
encountered. A diagnosis of PE may only be discovered on postmortem examination. In a retrospective study of PE found at the time of
autopsy, the investigators discovered antemortem consideration of
the diagnosis in only 15% of cases. Although children are more likely
than their adult counterparts to have one or more predisposing factors
favoring VTE (Table 458.1), a PE is often the first presenting symptom,
and a high index of suspicion is needed to allow timely and accurate
recognition as well as optimal management of PE in children.

ETIOLOGY

In the adult population, PE and VTE may be idiopathic in ∼30% of
patients. Children with DVT and PE are much more likely to have one
or more identifiable conditions or circumstances placing them at risk. At
least one identifiable risk factor for PE and VTE has been found in ≥80% of
affected children. Most children have multiple and coexisting risk factors.
In the pediatric population, the most common risk factors for VTE include
the presence of an indwelling central venous catheter, congenital heart
disease or vascular anomalies, trauma, immobility, recent surgery, malignancy, congenital and acquired thrombophilia, obesity and pregnancy, or
hormonal drug therapies, including oral contraceptives. Individuals with
nephrotic syndrome, inflammatory bowel disease, systemic lupus erythematosus, and sickle cell disease are also recognized as being at increased
risk for thromboembolic disease. Both SARS-­CoV-­2/COVID-­19 infection
and the COVID-­19–associated multisystem inflammatory syndrome in
children (MIS-­C) have been associated with a hypercoagulable state and
increased risk for VTE, particularly in children and young adults who are
critically ill with respiratory complications.
Although an embolus can also consist of air, septic material, amniotic fluid, or neoplastic tissue, emboli most commonly originate from
thrombus formation. The most common risk factor for VTE in children
is the presence of a central venous catheter (CVC); these indwelling
lines are used for long-­term administration of chemotherapy, antibiotics, and parental nutrition. The presence of a catheter in a vessel lumen,
as well as instilled medications, can induce endothelial damage and
favor thrombus formation. The use of a CVC is associated with ∼90% of
recognized VTE in neonates and ∼30–60% of VTE in children. Septic
emboli are rare in children but have been seen in osteomyelitis, endocarditis, Lemierre syndrome, and individuals with cellulitis.
Children with malignancy are recognized as being at high risk for VTE.
Thromboembolic disease has been described in 7–16% of those with soft
tissue sarcoma and in 5.2% of individuals with acute lymphocytic leukemia

(ALL). A child with malignancy may have numerous risk factors that relate
to both the primary disease process and therapeutic interventions. Infection related to chronic immunosuppression, indwelling catheters, and
the hypercoagulable state of malignancy itself are additional factors that
favor VTE. Chemotherapeutic agents such as L-­asparaginase have been
implicated as conferring risk for VTE. In addition, steroids may contribute
to the risk of VTE by increasing factor VIII. In a retrospective cohort of
patients with VTE, pediatric malignancy was the chronic medical condition most strongly associated with recurrent VTE.
In the neonatal period, VTE is frequently associated with the presence of
an indwelling CVC. Comorbid medical conditions often confer additional
risk for thromboembolic disease in the neonate; the most common associated diagnoses are congenital heart disease and sepsis. Another known
contributor is the relative immaturity of newborn infant coagulation;
plasma concentrations of vitamin K–dependent coagulation factors (II,
VII, IX, X); factors XII, XI, and pre-­kallikrein and high molecular weight
kininogen are physiologically lower in neonates and children (see Chapter
524). Infants with congenitally acquired homozygous deficiencies of antithrombin, protein C, and protein S may also present with thromboembolic
disease in the neonatal period. Testing for these acquired thrombophilias is
frequently problematic in this age-­group, as physiologic levels of protein S
and antithrombin are not seen until 6 months of age, and mature levels of
protein C may not occur until a child reaches adolescence. Furthermore,
coagulant proteins may be artificially low in the setting of acute VTE (see
Chapter 527).
Pulmonary air embolism is a defined entity in the newborn or
young infant and is attributed to the conventional ventilation of critically ill (and generally premature) infants with severe pulmonary disease. Usually, the pulmonary air embolism is preceded by an air-­leak
syndrome. Infants may become symptomatic and critically compromised by as little as 0.4 mL/kg of intravascular air; these physiologic
derangements are thought to be secondary to the effects of nitrogen.
Thrombophilia may be inherited or acquired and may manifest in neonates and in older infants, children, and adolescents. Inherited thrombophilias include deficiencies of antithrombin, protein C, and protein S,
as well as pathogenic variants of factor V Leiden (FVL) and prothrombin
G20210 pathogenic variant (see Chapter 527). The most frequent inherited
thrombophilia is the FVL pathogenic variant. It is more common in people of European descent and relatively uncommon in those of African and
Asian heritage. Acquired thrombophilic conditions include the presence
of lupus anticoagulant (may be present without the diagnosis of systemic
lupus erythematosus), anticardiolipin antibody, and anti–β2-­glycoprotein
1 antibody. Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) pathogenic
variants associated with high levels of plasma homocysteine have also been
hypothesized to be a risk factor for VTE, but the prognostic significance
is unclear, and an isolated MTHFR pathogenic variant is not an absolute
indication for VTE prophylaxis. Diagnostic testing for thrombophilic disorders is unlikely to be beneficial in the acute management of VTE but
may be indicated to determine risk of recurrent VTE in both the index case
and their relatives. Avoidance of prothrombotic risk factors such as oral
contraceptive agents may also be recommended in those individuals with
an inherited thrombophilia.
Sickle cell disease is associated with an increased risk for PE and
pulmonary infarction. The primary risk factor for VTE in sickle cell
disease is the presence of an indwelling CVC. Other risk factors for
thrombosis include infection, splenectomy, and immobility.
The incidence of VTE in female adolescents 12-­18 years of age is ∼3
per 10,000. In patients with known exposure to estrogen-­containing long-­
acting reversible contraception (LARC), more than 96% also had one
or more comorbidities. Over 50% of those with VTE had four or more
comorbidities. The most common comorbid conditions were obesity and
tobacco use. Although estrogen is a known procoagulant, VTE in female
adolescents does not appear attributable solely to estrogen-­containing
LARC, and additional risk factors should be sought in affected individuals.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

A wide range of incidence of PE has been described in both hospitalized
(8.6-­57 per 100,000) children and in the general population (0.14-­0.9 per
100,000). There is a suggestion that the incidence of PE has increased over
time. The etiology for these increases in pediatric thromboembolism is

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 458 u Pulmonary Embolism, Infarction, and Hemorrhage
Table 458.1  Risk Factors for Pulmonary Embolism
ENVIRONMENTAL
Long-­haul air travel (>4 hr)
Obesity
Cigarette smoking
Hypertension
Immobility
WOMEN’S HEALTH
Oral contraceptives, including progesterone-­only and, especially,
third-­generation pills
Pregnancy or puerperium
Hormone replacement therapy
Septic abortion
MEDICAL ILLNESS
Personal or family history of prior pulmonary embolism or deep
venous thrombosis
Cancer
L-­Asparaginase therapy
Heart failure
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Diabetes mellitus
Inflammatory bowel disease
Antipsychotic drug use
Long-­term indwelling central venous catheter
Permanent pacemaker
Internal cardiac defibrillator
Stroke with limb paresis
Spinal cord injury
Nursing home confinement or current or repeated hospital
admission
SURGICAL
Trauma, including fractures
Orthopedic surgery
General surgery
Neurosurgery, especially craniotomy for brain tumor
Vascular anomalies
May-­Turner syndrome
THROMBOPHILIA
Factor V Leiden mutation
Prothrombin gene (20210G A) pathogenic variant
Hyperhomocysteinemia (including pathogenic variant in
methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase)
Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome
Deficiency of antithrombin III, protein C, or protein S
High concentrations of factor VIII or XI
Increased lipoprotein (a)
Heparin-­induced thrombocytopenia
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
Nephrotic syndrome
NONTHROMBOTIC
Air
Foreign particles (e.g., hair, talc, as a consequence of intravenous
drug misuse)
Amniotic fluid
Bone fragments, bone marrow
Fat
Tumors (Wilms tumor)
Modified from Goldhaber SZ. Pulmonary embolism. Lancet. 2004;363:1295–1305.

regarded as multifactorial, with increased survival from chronic and critical illnesses, increased frequency of indwelling CVCs, increased clinical
suspicion, and more precise imaging and diagnostic techniques being
cited as contributing factors. The 2-­year mortality rate from PE in two
studies was ∼8.5%, with the highest mortality rates occurring in infants.
In other analyses, inpatient VTE has been estimated to increase the risk of
mortality by two to six times. Massive PE has historically been associated
with death in up to 30% of cases. Currently, the mortality from PE in children approximates the rates of mortality from VTE. In survivors of VTE,
chronic complications, increased healthcare use, and increased healthcare
costs are recognized.

2693

The incidence of pediatric VTE is recognized as having a bimodal distribution, with peaks occurring in infants less than 1 year of age and in
adolescence. Males are statistically more likely to have VTE, except for the
13-­to 18-­year-­old age-­group, where females are affected more frequently.
Pediatric deaths from isolated pulmonary emboli are rare. The
source of the emboli may be lower or upper extremity veins as well
as the pelvis and right heart. In adults, the most common location for
DVT is the lower leg. However, one pediatric VTE/PE registry found
∼65% of DVTs occurring in the upper extremity.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

Favorable conditions for thrombus formation include injury to the vessel endothelium, hemostasis, and hypercoagulability. In the case of PE,
a thrombus is dislodged from a vein, travels through the right atrium,
and lodges within the pulmonary arteries. VTE is most common in
segmental pulmonary arteries (52%), with central arteries being
obstructed less frequently (6%). In children, emboli that obstruct <50%
of the pulmonary circulation are generally clinically silent unless there
is significant coexistent cardiopulmonary disease. When greater than
50% of the pulmonary circulation is obstructed, right ventricular afterload is increased, with resultant right ventricular dilation and increases
in right ventricular and pulmonary arterial pressures. In severe cases, a
reduction of cardiac output and hypotension may result from concomitant decreases in left ventricular filling. In rare instances of death from
massive pulmonary embolus, marked increases in pulmonary vascular
resistance and heart failure are usually present.
Arterial hypoxemia results from unequal ventilation and perfusion;
the occlusion of the involved vessel prevents perfusion of distal alveolar
units, thereby creating an increase in dead space and hypoxia with an
elevated alveolar-­arterial oxygen tension difference (see Chapter 421).
The vascular supply to lung tissue is abundant, and pulmonary infarction is unusual with PE but may result from distal arterial occlusion
and alveolar hemorrhage.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The presentation of VTE is highly variable and more likely to present atypically or silently in the pediatric age-­group. A high index of suspicion is
therefore necessary. The symptoms reported most in association with PE
include chest pain, hypoxia (cyanosis), dyspnea, tachycardia, tachypnea,
and syncope. A tenderness, swelling, or palpable cord may be palpated at
the location of a DVT. Hemoptysis may also be a presenting symptom.
Pleuritic chest pain is the most common presenting symptom in adolescents (84%). Massive PE may manifest as cardiopulmonary (hypotension)
failure. Confirmatory testing should follow a clinical suspicion for PE.
In older adolescents and adults, clinical prediction rules have been
published and are based on risk factors, clinical signs, and symptoms
(Table 458.2). The Pulmonary Embolism Rule Out Criteria (PERC) and
Wells criteria are clinical prediction rules that are commonly used in
adults but lack reliability in the pediatric population. The Wells score has
a sensitivity of 72–86% and a specificity of 60% when applied to children.
The PERC tool has a higher sensitivity but a specificity of only 24% in
children. When the PERC tool is applied in the pediatric setting, a high
false-­positive rate is seen, with over 75% of patients without PE having a
positive PERC result. In a population at high risk from exposure to ionizing radiation, more discerning tools have been sought for this age-­group.
In children and adolescents less than 22 years of age, the risk of PE
is low (1.3%) in children who were not receiving estrogen therapy or in
those who did not present with tachycardia or hypoxia (SpO2 <95%);
the prediction model reported a sensitivity of 89% and a specificity of
56%. Another clinical prediction model for the diagnosis of PE in adolescents and young adults identified five risk factors, including immobilization, hypercoagulability, exposure to estrogen-­containing drugs,
indwelling CVC, and a prior history of PE and/or DVT; the probability
of PE as demonstrated by computed tomography pulmonary angiography (CTPA) with the presence of any three or more risk factors was
89%, and the probability of PE was extremely low (0.5%) when none of
these risk factors were identified. These data and prediction tools may
allow risk stratification and optimal use of diagnostic testing, including
CTPA, but require prospective analysis and clinical validation.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2694 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Table 458.2   Scores to Assess the Clinical Probability of Venous Thromboembolism
WELLS SCORE FOR DEEP VEIN THROMBOSIS

POINTS

Active cancer

+1

Paralysis, paresis, or recent plaster cast on lower extremities

+1

Recent immobilization >3 days or major surgery within past 4 wk

+1

Localized tenderness of deep venous system

+1

Swelling of entire leg

+1

Calf swelling >3 cm compared with asymptomatic side

+1

Unilateral pitting edema

+1

Collateral superficial veins

+1

Previously documented deep vein thrombosis

+1

Alternative diagnosis at least as likely as deep vein thrombosis

−2

Clinical pretest probability
Unlikely

Total score ≤2 (prevalence 4%)

Likely

Total score >2 (prevalence 27%)
WELLS SCORE FOR PULMONARY EMBOLISM

Original
Alternative diagnosis less likely than pulmonary embolism

+3

Clinical signs and symptoms of deep vein thrombosis

+3

Heart rate >100 beats per min

+1.5

Previous deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism

+1.5

Immobilization or surgery within the past 4 wk

+1.5

Active cancer

+1

Hemoptysis

+1

Clinical Pretest Probability
Low

Total score ≤1 (prevalence 4%)

Intermediate

Total score 2-­6 (prevalence 21%)

High

Total score >6 (prevalence 67%)

Unlikely

Total score ≤4 (prevalence 8%)

Likely

Total score >4 (prevalence 41%)

Simplified
Alternative diagnosis less likely than pulmonary embolism

+1

Clinical signs and symptoms of deep vein thrombosis

+1

Heart rate >100 beats per min

+1

Previous deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism

+1

Immobilization or surgery within the past 4 wk

+1

Active cancer

+1

Hemoptysis

+1

Clinical Pretest Probability
Unlikely

Total score ≤1 (prevalence 11%)

Likely

Total score >1 (prevalence 36%)
REVISED GENEVA SCORE FOR PULMONARY EMBOLISM

Original
Heart rate ≥95 beats per min

+5

Heart rate 75-­94 beats per min

+3

Pain on lower-­limb deep venous palpation and unilateral edema

+4

Unilateral lower-­limb pain

+3

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 458 u Pulmonary Embolism, Infarction, and Hemorrhage

2695

Table 458.2  Scores to Assess the Clinical Probability of Venous Thromboembolism—cont’d
REVISED GENEVA SCORE FOR PULMONARY EMBOLISM
Previous deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism

+3

Active cancer

+2

Hemoptysis

+2

Surgery or fracture within the past 4 wk

+2

Age >65 yr

+1

Clinical Pretest Probability
Low

Total score <4 (prevalence 9%)

Intermediate

Total score 4-­10 (prevalence 28%)

High

Total score >10 (prevalence 72%)

Simplified
Heart rate ≥95 beats per min

+2

Heart rate 75-­94 beats per min

+1

Pain on lower-­limb deep venous palpation and unilateral edema

+1

Unilateral lower-­limb pain

+1

Previous deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism

+1

Active cancer

+1

Hemoptysis

+1

Surgery or fracture within the past 4 wk

+1

Age >65 yr

+1

Clinical Pretest Probability
Unlikely

Total score ≤2 (prevalence 13%)

Likely

Total score >2 (prevalence 42%)
YEARS CRITERIA FOR PULMONARY EMBOLISM

Clinical signs of deep vein thrombosis

+1

Hemoptysis

+1

Pulmonary embolism is the most likely diagnosis

+1

Clinical Pretest Probability
Low

Total score 0 (prevalence 3%)
Total score ≥1 (prevalence 23%)

High

PULMONARY EMBOLISM RULE-­OUT CRITERIA
Age <50 yr

—

Heart rate <100 beats per min

—

Pulse oximetry reading on room air >94%

—

No unilateral leg swelling

—

No hemoptysis

—

No recent trauma or surgery

—

No history of venous thromboembolism

—

No oral hormone use

—

Pulmonary embolism can be considered excluded in patients with all Pulmonary Embolism Rule-­Out Criteria and a low clinical pretest probability, assessed by gestalt, or in clinical
settings with a low (<5%) prevalence of pulmonary embolism. If any criterion applies, pulmonary embolism cannot be ruled out in these patients. Prevalence estimates correspond
to emergency department settings. Vital signs should be age adjusted.
Modified from Khan F, Tritschler T, Kahn SR, Rodger MA. Venous thromboembolism. Lancet. 2021;398:64–77.

LABORATORY FINDINGS AND DIAGNOSIS

Blood gas analysis is expected to reveal hypoxemia with an abnormal A-­a gradient. Lower-­than-­normal Paco2 levels may also be seen
secondary to hyperventilation, a finding that may persist even when
oxygenation is optimized. Abnormalities of oxygenation and ventilation are likely to be less significant in the pediatric population, in

the setting of less underlying cardiopulmonary disease and greater
reserve. The results of an electrocardiogram and chest radiograph
are expected to be nonspecific. ECG findings may include ST-­T segment changes, tachycardia, right axis deviation, and right bundle
branch block. Chest radiographs are frequently abnormal (88%);
the most common finding is cardiomegaly (27%) and pleural

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2696 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
effusion (23%). These studies lack sensitivity and specificity in the
diagnosis of PE.
A review of results of a complete blood count and coagulation profile is warranted. Prothrombotic diseases should be highly suspected
based on medical or family history; additional laboratory evaluations
include fibrinogen assays, protein C, protein S, and antithrombin III
studies and analysis for FVL pathogenic variant, along with evaluation
for lupus anticoagulant and anticardiolipin antibodies.
Echocardiograms may be used to assess ventricular size and function. An echocardiogram is indicated if there is any suspicion of intracardiac thrombi or endocarditis.
Noninvasive venous ultrasound testing with Doppler flow can be
used to confirm DVT in the lower extremities; in pediatrics, the utility
of ultrasonography is limited, as it may not detect thrombi in the upper
extremities or pelvis (Fig. 458.1A).
In children, D-­dimer levels demonstrate reasonable sensitivity but
poor specificity for venous thrombosis because D-­dimer levels are also
increased in infectious, inflammatory, and neoplastic disorders, all of
which are also risk factors for PE. Other studies have suggested that
D-­dimer may be a sensitive tool for PE in adolescents when a level of
>750 mg/mL is seen; these data have not been found to be applicable to
younger children or neonates.
In the evaluation of a suspected PE, a ventilation–perfusion (V̇−Q̇)
radionuclide scan is a safe diagnostic study associated with exposure to
low levels of ionizing radiation. With a definitive or high-­probability
scan, the likelihood of PE is 85%. With low-­probability results, there
is still a 20% chance of PE. In addition, children may have difficulty
cooperating with the ventilation portion of the V̇−Q̇ scan.
Although conventional pulmonary angiography had been considered
the gold standard for detection of PE, the invasive nature of this study,
the high exposure to radiation, and the risk of complications have limited its use. Computed tomography/multidetector CT with pulmonary
angiography has become the diagnostic study of choice for PE (see
Fig. 458.1B). The criteria for PE include two or more consecutive images
revealing a complete or partial filling defect of a pulmonary artery. CT
studies detect emboli in lobar and segmental vessels with acceptable sensitivities. Poorer sensitivities may be encountered in the evaluation of the
subsegmental pulmonary vasculature. Dual-­energy scanning provides
additional functional and anatomic information without additional
radiation exposure. In most institutions, dose reduction techniques can
be employed to limit a child’s radiation exposure.
Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) is also considered a viable
diagnostic option for patients with VTE. High-­resolution 3D contrast-­
enhanced MRA and time-­resolved MRA are sensitive and specific for
PE. The lack of ionizing radiation is attractive, but longer imaging times
and the need for general anesthesia in most children may limit its use.

TREATMENT

In the acute management of VTE, careful monitoring and support of cardiopulmonary stresses are crucial. Once the affected individual has been
stabilized, the primary approach to treatment of VTE is with anticoagulation. Appropriate and timely treatment with anticoagulation may prevent thrombus extension and recurrence. It is also indicated to prevent
embolization.
Evaluations for prothrombotic disease must precede anticoagulation.
Acute-­phase anticoagulation therapy may be provided with unfractionated heparin (UFH) or low molecular weight heparin (LMWH). UFH
binds reversibly to antithrombin III and potentiates its ability to inhibit
thrombin and coagulation factor Xa. LMWH has become the drug of
choice for both short-­term and longer-­term anticoagulation in children;
enoxaparin is the LMWH most used in the pediatric population. It acts
similarly to inhibit factor Xa but can be administered subcutaneously,
and the need for serum monitoring is decreased. The risk of heparin-­
induced thrombocytopenia is also decreased with LMWH as compared
to UFH. UFH may still be chosen in patients who have an elevated risk of
bleeding, as UFH has a shorter half-­life than LMWH. UFH is also used
preferentially in patients with compromised renal function.
In monitoring of drug levels, laboratories must be aware of the drug
chosen in order to use the appropriate assay. For UFH, the therapeutic
range is 0.3-­0.7 anti-­Xa activity units/mL. In LMWH, the therapeutic

A

B
Fig. 458.1 A, Compression ultrasound. Top images, from left to

right, representation of vein and artery without and with (arrow) gentle
compression with the echocardiographic probe. Bottom images, corresponding echocardiographic findings. The third image from the left
shows a thrombus in the vein (vein not compressible by the probe).
B, CT angiography showing several emboli (arrows) in the main right
pulmonary artery and in left lobar and segmental arteries. A, Artery; V,
vein. (From Goldhaber SZ, Bounameaux H. Pulmonary embolism and
deep vein thrombosis. Lancet. 2012;379:1835–1844, Fig. 2, p. 1838.)

range is 0.50-­1.0 units/mL. When the anti-­Xa assay is not available, the
activated partial thromboplastin time may be used, with a goal of 60-­85
seconds, or approximately 1.5-­2 times the upper limit of age-­appropriate
normal values. The recommended duration of heparinization during acute
treatment is 5-­10 days; this length of therapy has been extrapolated from
adult data. Long-­term therapy with heparin should be avoided whenever
possible. Side effects include heparin-­induced thrombocytopenia, bleeding, and osteoporosis.

THERAPEUTIC OPTIONS

Extension of anticoagulation therapy occurs in the subacute phase and
may use LMWH, LMWH analogues, or warfarin. Warfarin is a vitamin K antagonist that may be used in children and adolescents; use
is generally initiated after establishing effective anticoagulation with
heparin because severe congenital deficiencies of protein C may be
associated with warfarin skin necrosis. When the international normalized ratio (INR) is measured between 1.0 and 1.3, the starting dose for
warfarin in children is recommended as 0.2 mg/kg administered orally
once daily. Titration of dosing may be needed to achieve a therapeutic
INR of 2 to 3. Dosing requirements may vary, and clinical pharmacologic
correlation is required. The INR is generally monitored 5 days after initiating therapy or a similar period after dose changes and weekly thereafter
until stable. The INR should be obtained with any evidence of abnormal bleeding and should be discontinued at least 5 days before invasive
procedures. The use of an anticoagulation team and/or established treatment algorithms is recommended in order to optimize patient safety.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 458 u Pulmonary Embolism, Infarction, and Hemorrhage
With the first occurrence of VTE, anticoagulation is recommended for
3-­6 months in the setting of an identifiable, reversible, and resolved risk
factor (e.g., postoperative state). Longer treatment is indicated in patients
with idiopathic VTE (6-­12 months) and in those with chronic clinical
risk factors (12 months to lifelong). In the setting of a congenital thrombophilic condition, the duration of therapy is often indefinite. Inhibitors
of factor Xa (e.g., enoxaparin) may become an alternative therapy for
both acute PE and long-­term treatment (Table 458.3).
In adults with DVT or PE, subsequent therapy with apixaban, dabigatran, edoxaban, or rivaroxaban (direct oral anticoagulants [DOACs]) is
recommended over vitamin K antagonists. Some pediatric centers have
adapted this therapy, particularly for adolescent patients. The recommended duration of such therapy for uncomplicated patients is 3 months.
Thrombolytic agents such as recombinant tissue plasminogen activator
by peripheral vein may be used in combination with anticoagulants in the
early stages of treatment; their use is most likely to be considered in children with hemodynamically significant PE (hypotension, echocardiogram
evidence of right ventricular dysfunction) or other severe potential clinical
sequelae of VTE. Combined therapy may reduce the incidences of progressive thromboembolism, PE, and postthrombotic syndrome. The mortality rate appears to be unaffected by additional therapies; nonetheless,
the additional theoretical risk of hemorrhage limits the use of combination
therapy in all but the most compromised patients. The use of thrombolytic
agents in patients with active bleeding, recent cerebrovascular accidents, or
trauma is contraindicated.
Catheter-­assisted thrombus removal (thrombectomy) should be
limited to those with large emboli that result in persistent hemodynamic compromise refractory to standard therapy. Catheter-­assisted

2697

thrombus removal (less often, surgical embolectomy) is indicated in
patients with hypotension who are a high bleeding risk or have failed
systemic thrombolysis or are in life-­threatening shock before systemic thrombolysis can be effective (within hours of thrombolysis).
Surgical embolectomy is indicated with embolic Wilms tumor.
In adults with acute proximal DVT of the leg, inferior vena cava filters
are used only if there is a contraindication to anticoagulation therapy.

PROGNOSIS

Mortality in pediatric patients with PE is likely to be attributable to
an underlying disease process rather than to the embolus itself. Short-­
term complications include major hemorrhage (either because of the
thrombosis or secondary to anticoagulation). Chronic complications
include recurrence and pulmonary hypertension with the risk of cor
pulmonale. Conditions associated with a poorer prognosis include
malignancy, infection, and cardiac disease. The mortality rate in children from PE is 2.2%. An exhaustive evaluation for underlying pathology is advocated in an effort to prevent recurrence and progressive
disease. Postthrombotic syndrome is a recognized complication of
pediatric thrombotic disease. Venous valvular damage can be initiated
by the presence of DVT and may result in persistent venous hypertension with ambulation and valvular reflux. Symptoms include edema,
pain, increases in pigmentation, and ulcerations. Affected pediatric
patients may suffer lifelong disability.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Table 458.3   Anticoagulant Therapies for Deep Vein Thrombosis and Pulmonary Embolism
INITIAL
TREATMENT
DOSING

MAINTENANCE
TREATMENT
DOSING

EXTENDED
TREATMENT
DOSING

ROUTE

RENAL
CLEARANCE (%)

Unfractionated
heparin (UFH)

Intravenous

∼30

∼1.5 hr

Maintain aPTT 1.5
times upper limit
of normal

Low molecular
weight heparin
(LMWH)

Subcutaneous

∼80

3-­4 hr

Weight-­based
dosing

Weight-­based
dosing*

Fondaparinux

Subcutaneous

100

17-­21 hr

Weight-­based
dosing

Weight-­based
dosing

Vitamin K
antagonists

Oral

Negligible

Acenocoumarol
8-­11 hr;
warfarin 36 hr;
phenprocoumon
160 hr

Target at INR at
2.0-­3.0 and give
parallel heparin
treatment for at
least 5 days

Maintain INR at
2.0-­3.0

Maintain INR at
2.0-­3.0

Dabigatran

Oral

∼80†

14-­17 hr

Requires at least
5 days heparin
lead-­in

150 mg twice a
day

150 mg twice a
day

Rivaroxaban

Oral

∼33‡

7-­11 hr

15 mg twice a day
for 3 wk

20 mg once a day

20 mg once a day

Apixaban

Oral

∼25‡

8-­12 hr

10 mg twice a day
for 1 wk

5 mg twice a day

2.5 mg twice a day

Edoxaban

Oral

∼35‡

6-­11 hr

Requires at least
5 days heparin
lead-­in

60 mg once a day§

60 mg once a day§

Aspirin

Oral

∼10

15 min

HALF-­LIFE

80-­100 mg once
a day

*Treatment with low molecular weight heparin is recommended for patients with active cancer and pregnant women.
†Dabigatran is contraindicated in patients with a creatinine clearance below 30 mL/min.
‡Apixaban, edoxaban, and rivaroxaban are contraindicated in patients with a creatinine clearance below 15 mL/min.
§The recommended edoxaban dose is 30 mg once a day for patients with a creatinine clearance of 30-­50 mL/min, a body weight less than or equal to 60 kg, or for those on certain
strong P-­glycoprotein inhibitors.
Medication dosing may vary with regard to primary diagnosis, age, comorbidities, and other factors. Clinical-­pharmacologic correlation is advocated.
aPTT, Activated partial thromboplastin time; INR, international normalized ratio.
From Di Nisio M, van Es N, Büller HR. Deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism. Lancet. 2016;388:3060–3069, Table 2.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2698 Part XVII u The Respiratory System

458.2 Pulmonary Hemorrhage and
Hemoptysis
Mary A. Nevin

Hemoptysis may be defined as the expectoration of blood from the lower
respiratory tract. Infants and small children lack the tussive force to expectorate blood, and if blood from the lower airway is expectorated, it is frequently swallowed. Pulmonary hemorrhage in children and adolescents
is uncommon but represents a serious and potentially fatal occurrence in
children.

ETIOLOGY

Table 458.4 and Table 457.1 in Chapter 457 present conditions that can
manifest as pulmonary hemorrhage or hemoptysis in children. The most
common etiologies for pulmonary hemorrhage in the neonate and infant
are congenital heart disease, premature lung disease, and coagulopathy
(congenital or acquired with liver failure or anticoagulant medications).
Infection and foreign body aspiration are the most common etiologies for
hemoptysis in children. The chronic presence of a foreign body can lead to
localized airway inflammation and hemorrhage. Secondary infection may
also be present if the foreign body has been in the airway for days to weeks.
Bleeding is more likely to occur in association with a chronically retained
foreign body of vegetable origin.
Hemorrhage may be related to chronic airway inflammation and
infection with bronchiectasis in the setting of cystic fibrosis (CF). Non­CF bronchiectasis may also be seen in children with chronic aspiration
disorders, immunodeficiency syndromes, primary ciliary dyskinesia with

Table 458.4   Etiology of Pulmonary Hemorrhage
(Hemoptysis)
FOCAL HEMORRHAGE
Bronchitis and bronchiectasis (especially cystic fibrosis related)
Infection (acute or chronic), pneumonia, abscess
Tuberculosis
Trauma
Pulmonary arteriovenous malformation (with or without hereditary
hemorrhagic telangiectasia)
Foreign body (chronic)
Neoplasm, including hemangioma and metastatic disease
Pulmonary embolus with or without infarction
Bronchogenic cysts
DIFFUSE HEMORRHAGE
Idiopathic of infancy
Congenital heart disease (including pulmonary hypertension,
venoocclusive disease, and congestive heart failure)
Prematurity
Cow’s milk hyperreactivity (Heiner syndrome)
Goodpasture syndrome
Collagen vascular diseases (systemic lupus erythematosus,
rheumatoid arthritis)
IgA vasculitis (Henoch-­Schönlein purpura) and other vasculitic
disorders
Granulomatous disease (granulomatosis with polyangiitis)
Celiac disease
Coagulopathy (congenital or acquired)
Malignancy
Immunodeficiency
Exogenous toxins, especially inhaled
Hyperammonemia
Pulmonary hypertension
Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis
Idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis
Tuberous sclerosis
Lymphangiomyomatosis or lymphangioleiomyomatosis
Physical injury or abuse
Catamenial
Vaping
See also Table 457.1.

or without Kartagener syndrome, HIV, and other infections. Hemoptysis
attributable to inflammation and erosion of bronchial and bronchiolar
airways may therefore occur in these clinical settings as well. Pulmonary
hemorrhage caused by infection is also seen in patients with cavitary disease in association with tuberculosis. Hemoptysis may also occasionally
reflect the intense inflammation of an acute pulmonary infection such as
bronchitis or bronchopneumonia.
Bleeding is frequently encountered in patients with tracheostomies
and is often attributable to suction trauma or friable granulation tissue. In these situations, bleeding tends to be limited and responsive to
modifications of the care regimen. Rarely, bleeding from a tracheostomy may be brisk and bright red. In this case, otolaryngology should
evaluate for the presence of a tracheo-­innominate artery fistula.
Cardiopulmonary disease is associated with hemoptysis in children
and adolescents. Associated conditions include mitral stenosis, pulmonary edema in the setting of congestive heart failure, high-­altitude
pulmonary edema (HAPE), pulmonary venous obstructive disease,
and pulmonary hypertension. Although early corrective surgical intervention has been associated with improved hemodynamics, collateral
circulations may contribute to bleeding.
Traumatic injury to the airway and pulmonary contusion may result
from motor vehicle crashes or other direct-­force injuries. Children who
have been victims of nonaccidental trauma or deliberate suffocation can
also be found to have blood in the mouth or airway (see Chapter 17). Factitious hemoptysis may rarely be encountered in the setting of self-­inflicted
trauma to the oral mucosa by biting or in the setting of factitious disorder
by proxy (formerly Munchausen by proxy; see Chapter 17.2).
Rare causes for hemoptysis include tumors and vascular anomalies such
as arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) (Fig. 458.2). Congenital vascular
malformations in the lung may be seen in the setting of hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT). Symptoms and signs of pulmonary AVM
include dyspnea, hemoptysis, poor exercise tolerance, digital clubbing, and
cyanosis. A high index of suspicion is needed, as more than half of children with pulmonary AVM may be asymptomatic. AVMs in individuals
with HHT may be associated with severe complications, including massive
hemoptysis, hemothorax, and stroke. In individuals with HHT, pulmonary
AVMs are prevalent (60%) and can occur at any age. Any tumors or lesions
must be cautiously investigated when encountered with a flexible fiberoptic bronchoscope, as bleeding may be massive and difficult to control.
Bronchial Dieulafoy disease has been recognized as a rare etiology for
pulmonary hemorrhage. The classic bronchoscopic appearance is a small,
submucosal bronchial lesion with a white cap. Massive hemorrhage may
ensue. If nonsurgical bronchial artery embolization is not able to achieve
hemostasis, surgical resection of the affected lung segment or lobe may be
considered.

A

B

Fig. 458.2 A, Volume-­
rendering reconstruction of the contrast-­
enhanced spiral CT showing a large arteriovenous fistula in the left
upper lobe (lingula). B, Volume-­
rendering reconstruction of the
contrast-­enhanced spiral CT showing an arteriovenous fistula in the
right upper lobe. (From Grzela K, Krenke K, Kulus M. Pulmonary arteriovenous malformations: clinical and radiological presentation. J Pediatr.
2011;158:856, Figs. 1 and 2.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 458 u Pulmonary Embolism, Infarction, and Hemorrhage

2699

Syndromes associated with vasculitic, autoimmune, and idiopathic
disorders may be associated with diffuse alveolar hemorrhage (see Chapter 457).

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The frequency with which pulmonary hemorrhage occurs in the pediatric population is difficult to define. The difficulties in timely diagnosis
are primarily related to the variability in disease presentation. As such,
the incidence of pulmonary hemorrhage may be significantly underestimated. Chronic bronchiectasis as seen in CF (see Chapter 454) or
ciliary dyskinesia (see Chapter 455) can cause hemoptysis, but usually
occurs in children older than 10 years of age.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

The vascular supply of the lung has two components. The pulmonary
artery provides blood to the bronchi to the level of the terminal bronchioles and to the alveolar capillary bed. The pulmonary circulation is
characterized by low pressure and high volume. Conversely, the bronchial circulation originates from the aorta or intercostal arteries. The
pressure in the bronchial artery circulation is systemic. This circulation provides blood the conducting airways. Hemoptysis may occur
from either the pulmonary or bronchial circulation. Bleeding from the
pulmonary circulation is expected to be insidious; slow bleeding in the
lower airways typically manifests with anemia, fatigue, and dyspnea,
and hemoptysis may be absent. Syndromes associated with diffuse
alveolar hemorrhage are discussed in Chapter 457. Bleeding from the
bronchial circulation may be massive and associated with rapid exsanguination. Blood that comes from the lung is frequently difficult to differentiate from blood that originates at the nasopharynx, mouth, or
gastrointestinal (GI) tract. The blood that originates from the airway is
classically bright red or rust colored. Alveolar blood may have a frothy
appearance. Blood originating from the GI tract is typically brownish
in color. The pH of pulmonary blood is alkaline, whereas blood from
the GI tract is expected to be acidic.
In patients with CF, chronic endobronchial infection, inflammation,
mucus plugging, and thickening of the airway surface layer predispose to
growth and dilation of the bronchial arteries. Blood in the airway is highly
irritative and initiates an influx of neutrophils and inflammatory mediators that serve to exacerbate the already vibrant inflammatory response.
As such, pulmonary hemorrhage may be recurrent in late-­stage CF. Massive and life-­threatening hemorrhage may occur. With repeated or chronic
hemorrhage, pulmonary fibrosis can become a prominent pathologic
finding.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The presenting symptoms and signs of pulmonary hemorrhage are highly
variable in the pediatric population. Older children and young adults
experiencing focal hemorrhage may be able to localize the bleeding by a
sensation of “warmth” or “bubbling” in the chest. This can occasionally aid
the clinician in locating the area involved. Rapid and large-­volume blood
loss manifests as hypoxemic and hypercarbic respiratory failure and hypovolemic shock. Chronic, insidious blood loss may manifest as anemia,
fatigue, dyspnea, or poor exercise tolerance. Severely anemic individuals
may present with syncope. Radiographic infiltrates may be seen in a focal
or diffuse distribution on chest radiograph. The presence of a cavitary
lesion or radiopaque foreign body suggests tubercular or fungal infection
and foreign body aspiration, respectively.

LABORATORY FINDINGS AND DIAGNOSIS

A patient with suspected hemorrhage should have a laboratory evaluation with complete blood count and coagulation studies. The complete
blood count result may demonstrate a microcytic, hypochromic anemia but may be normal in acute blood loss. The diagnosis of pulmonary
hemorrhage is best confirmed by bronchoscopy with direct visualization of bleeding and/or a bronchoalveolar lavage specimen that confirms the presence of hemosiderin-­laden macrophages on Prussian
blue staining. Within 48-­72 hours of an episode of bleeding, alveolar
macrophages convert the iron from erythrocytes into hemosiderin.
It may take weeks to clear these hemosiderin-­laden macrophages

Fig. 458.3 Radiographic appearance of acute idiopathic pulmonary

hemorrhage in infancy. (From Brown CM, Redd SC, Damon SA, Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention. Acute idiopathic pulmonary hemorrhage among infants: recommendations from the Working Group for
Investigation and Surveillance. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2004;53:1–12.)

Fig. 458.4 Diffuse pulmonary hemorrhage that was thought to be the
result of idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis in a 3-­yr-­old child. Frontal radiograph reveals bilateral air space consolidation that is patchy.
Tracheal washing contained large numbers of macrophages filled with
hemosiderin. Ten days later, most of the consolidative changes in the
lungs had cleared. The patient’s anemia was successfully treated with
blood transfusion. (Courtesy Bertram Girdany, MD, Pittsburgh, PA; from
Slovis T, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2008.)

completely from the alveolar spaces, thereby allowing differentiation
between acute and chronic hemorrhage.
Chest radiographs may demonstrate fluffy bilateral densities, as seen
in acute idiopathic pulmonary hemorrhage of infancy (Fig. 458.3) or
the patchy consolidation seen in idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis (Fig. 458.4). Alveolar infiltrates seen on chest radiograph may be
regarded as a representation of recent bleeding, but their absence does
not rule out the occurrence of pulmonary hemorrhage. Infiltrates,
when present, are often symmetric and diffuse and may be preferentially located in the perihilar regions and lower lobes. The costophrenic
angles and lung apices are frequently spared. CT may be indicated to
assess for underlying disease processes.
Lung biopsy is rarely necessary unless bleeding is chronic or an etiology cannot be determined with other methods. Pulmonary function
testing, including a determination of gas exchange, is important to assess
the severity of the ventilatory defect. In older children, spirometry may
demonstrate evidence of predominantly obstructive disease in the acute

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2700 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
period. Restrictive disease secondary to fibrosis is typically seen with more
chronic disease. Diffusion capacity of carbon monoxide measurements are
typically elevated in the setting of pulmonary hemorrhage because of the
strong affinity of the intraalveolar hemoglobin for carbon monoxide.

TREATMENT

In mild to moderate hemoptysis (>5 mL blood), potential irritants to
the lung (hypertonic saline, DNase, chest physiotherapy, and inhaled
antibiotics) are typically held. In patients with CF, vitamin K may be
given empirically, given a predilection toward vitamin K deficiency
with comorbid pancreatic insufficiency.
In the setting of massive hemorrhage (>240 mL), emergent circulatory and ventilatory support is provided and a requirement for volume
resuscitation and transfusion of blood products should be anticipated. If
respiratory failure ensues, mechanical ventilatory support with high positive end-­expiratory pressure (PEEP) may tamponade a bleeding vessel and
improve oxygenation. If bleeding is unilateral, selective ventilation of the
unaffected lung may be recommended. Rigid bronchoscopy may be used
for localization of bleeding and for removal of debris, but active bleeding
may be exacerbated by airway manipulation. In patients with CF who are
unstable with massive hemorrhage, proceeding directly to bronchial artery
embolization (BAE) has been advocated. Improved outcomes of BAE have
been seen when the bleeding vessel is identified by multidetector CT imaging. Cessation of bleeding is achieved in approximately 80% of patients,
but bleeding may be recurrent, and more than one BAE may be required.
Rare complications include inadvertent embolization of spinal and mesenteric arteries, leading to paralysis and ischemic bowel, respectively. If
embolization fails, total or partial lobectomy may be required.
Antifibrinolytic therapy with tranexamic acid (TXA) has been used to
control bleeding in patients with hemophilia and in patients with CF, as well
as in other conditions (bronchiectasis, tuberculosis, allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis). This medication may be administered by inhaled, oral,
or parenteral routes. Inhaled TXA may be as effective as intravenous dosing;
the inhaled route has fewer systemic effects. The use of this medication is
currently off label.
Depending on institutional capabilities, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) and emergent listing for lung transplantation may also be
considered for patients with end-­stage disease.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 459

Atelectasis
Ranna A. Rozenfeld
Atelectasis is the incomplete expansion or complete collapse of air-­
bearing tissue, resulting from obstruction of air intake into the alveolar sacs. Segmental, lobar, or whole lung collapse is associated with
the absorption of air contained in the alveoli, which are no longer
ventilated.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

The causes of atelectasis can be divided into five groups (Table 459.1).
Respiratory syncytial virus (see Chapter 307) and other viral infections, including influenza viruses in young children, can cause multiple
areas of atelectasis. Mucous plugs are a common predisposing factor to
atelectasis. Massive collapse of one or both lungs is most often a postoperative complication but occasionally results from other causes, such
as trauma, asthma, pneumonia, tension pneumothorax (see Chapter
461), aspiration of foreign material (see Chapters 435 and 446), paralysis, or after extubation. Massive atelectasis is usually produced by a
combination of factors, including immobilization or decreased use of
the diaphragm and the respiratory muscles, obstruction of the bronchial tree, and abolition of the cough reflex.

Table 459.1   Anatomic Causes of Atelectasis
CAUSE

CLINICAL EXAMPLES

External compression on the
pulmonary parenchyma

Pleural effusion, pneumothorax,
intrathoracic tumors,
diaphragmatic hernia

Endobronchial obstruction
completely obstructing the
ingress of air

Enlarged lymph node, tumor,
cardiac enlargement,
foreign body, mucoid plug,
broncholithiasis

Intraluminal obstruction of a
bronchus

Foreign body, asthma,
granulomatous tissue,
tumor, secretions including
mucous plugs, bronchiectasis,
pulmonary abscess,
chronic bronchitis, acute
laryngotracheobronchitis,
plastic bronchitis

Intrabronchiolar obstruction

Bronchiolitis, interstitial
pneumonitis, asthma

Respiratory compromise or
paralysis

Neuromuscular abnormalities,
osseous deformities, overly
restrictive casts and surgical
dressings, defective movement
of the diaphragm, or restriction
of respiratory effort

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Symptoms vary with the cause and extent of the atelectasis. A small
area is likely to be asymptomatic. When a large area of previously normal lung becomes atelectatic, especially when it does so suddenly, dyspnea accompanied by rapid shallow respiration, tachycardia, cough,
and often cyanosis occurs. If the obstruction is removed, the symptoms
disappear rapidly. Although it was once believed that atelectasis alone
can cause fever, studies have shown no association between atelectasis and fever. Physical findings include limitation of chest excursion,
decreased breath sound intensity, and coarse crackles. Breath sounds
are decreased or absent over extensive atelectatic areas.
Massive atelectasis usually presents with dyspnea, cyanosis, and
tachycardia. An affected child is extremely anxious and, if old enough,
complains of chest pain. The chest appears flat on the affected side,
where decreased respiratory excursion, dullness to percussion, and
feeble or absent breath sounds are also noted. Postoperative atelectasis
usually manifests within 24 hours of operation but may not occur for
several days.
Acute lobar collapse is a frequent occurrence in patients receiving
intensive care. If undetected, it can lead to impaired gas exchange, secondary infection, and subsequent pulmonary fibrosis. Initially, hypoxemia may result from ventilation-­perfusion mismatch. In contrast to
atelectasis in adult patients, in whom the lower lobes and, in particular, the left lower lobe is most often involved, 90% of cases in children
involve the upper lobes and 63% involve the right upper lobe. There
is also a high incidence of upper lobe atelectasis and, especially, right
upper lobe collapse in patients with atelectasis being treated in neonatal intensive care units. This high incidence may be a result of the
movement of the endotracheal tube into the right mainstem bronchus,
where it obstructs or causes inflammation of the bronchus to the right
upper lobe.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of atelectasis can usually be established by chest radiograph. Typical findings include volume loss and displacement of fissures. Atypical presentations include atelectasis manifesting as a
masslike opacity and atelectasis in an unusual location. Lobar atelectasis may be associated with pneumothorax. Several studies have shown

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 459 u Atelectasis

2701

Table 459.2  Treatment for Atelectasis

A

CAUSE OF ATELECTASIS

TREATMENT

Pleural effusion or pneumothorax

Relieve compression

Mucous plug

Tracheal or bronchoscopic
aspiration
Continuous positive airway
pressure

Foreign body

Bronchoscopic examination

Asthma

Bronchodilator and
corticosteroid treatment
Recombinant human
deoxyribonuclease (off-­label
use)
Hypertonic saline with or without
bronchodilator

Neuromuscular diseases

Intermittent positive pressure
breathing
Mechanical insufflator-­exsufflator
Noninvasive bilevel positive
pressure ventilation

Cystic fibrosis

Airway clearance therapies
Hypertonic saline with or without
bronchodilator
Recombinant human
deoxyribonuclease

B

Fig. 459.1 A, Massive atelectasis of the right lung. The patient has

asthma. The heart and other mediastinal structures shift to the right
during the atelectatic phase. B, Comparison study after reaeration subsequent to bronchoscopic removal of a mucous plug from the right
mainstem bronchus.

lung ultrasound to be a viable alternative to chest radiograph when
diagnosing atelectasis, especially in patients with neuromuscular disease, to avoid radiation exposure.
In children with asthma, chest radiography demonstrates an abnormality rate of 44%, compared with a thorax high-­resolution CT scan
abnormality rate of 75%. Children with asthma and atelectasis have
an increased incidence of right middle lobe syndrome, acute asthma
exacerbations, pneumonia, and upper airway infections.
In foreign-­body aspiration, atelectasis is one of the most common
radiographic findings. The site of atelectasis usually indicates the site
of the foreign body (see Chapter 426.1). Atelectasis is more common
when diagnosis of foreign-­body aspiration is delayed for greater than 2
weeks. Bronchoscopic examination reveals a collapsed main bronchus
when the obstruction is at the tracheobronchial junction and may also
disclose the nature of the obstruction.
Massive atelectasis is typically diagnosed on chest radiograph. Typical findings include elevation of the diaphragm, narrowing of the intercostal spaces, and displacement of the mediastinal structures and heart
toward the affected side (Fig. 459.1).

TREATMENT

Treatment depends on the cause of the collapse (Table 459.2). If effusion or pneumothorax is responsible, the external compression must
first be removed. Often vigorous efforts at cough, deep breathing, and
percussion will facilitate expansion. Aspiration with sterile tracheal
catheters may facilitate removal of mucous plugs. Continuous positive
airway pressure may improve atelectasis.
Bronchoscopic examination is immediately indicated if atelectasis is
the result of a foreign body or any other bronchial obstruction that can
be relieved. For bilateral atelectasis, bronchoscopic aspiration should also
be performed immediately. It is also indicated when an isolated area of
atelectasis persists for several weeks. If no anatomic basis for atelectasis
is found and no material can be obtained by suctioning, the introduction
of a small amount of saline followed by suctioning allows recovery of
bronchial secretions for culture and, possibly, for cytologic examination.
Frequent changes in the child’s position, deep breathing, and chest physiotherapy may be beneficial. Intrapulmonary percussive ventilation is a
chest physiotherapy technique that is safe and effective. Oxygen therapy
is indicated when there is dyspnea or desaturation. Intermittent positive
pressure breathing and incentive spirometry are recommended when
atelectasis does not improve after chest physiotherapy.
In some conditions, such as asthma, bronchodilator and corticosteroid treatment may accelerate atelectasis clearance. Recombinant
human deoxyribonuclease, which is approved only for the treatment of
cystic fibrosis, has been used off-­label for patients without cystic fibrosis who have persistent atelectasis. This product reduces the viscosity
of purulent bronchial debris. In patients with acute severe asthma, diffuse airway plugging with thick viscous secretions frequently occurs,
with the resulting atelectasis often refractory to conventional therapy.
Recombinant human deoxyribonuclease is used in the nebulized

form for nonintubated patients with acute asthma and intratracheally
for atelectasis in intubated asthmatics, with resolution of atelectasis
unresponsive to conventional asthma therapies. Recombinant human
deoxyribonuclease is also used in ventilated infants and children with
atelectasis not caused by asthma.
Hypertonic saline solution increases mucociliary clearance in
patients with asthma, bronchiectasis, and cystic fibrosis and infants
with acute bronchiolitis. It is delivered via nebulization either via face
mask or endotracheal tube. It can be delivered alone or in combination
with a bronchodilator. This therapy is being used in the outpatient and
inpatient setting and in both the neonatal intensive care unit and the
pediatric intensive care unit to help facilitate airway clearance, though
studies of its use in bronchiolitis have had mixed results (see Chapter
439.1). Lobar atelectasis in cystic fibrosis is discussed in Chapter 454.
Atelectasis can occur in patients with neuromuscular diseases. These
patients tend to have an ineffective cough and difficulty expelling respiratory tract secretions, which lead to pneumonia and atelectasis. Several
devices and treatments are available to assist these patients, including intermittent positive-­pressure breathing, a mechanical insufflator-­exsufflator,
and noninvasive bilevel positive-­pressure ventilation via nasal mask or
full-­face mask. Patients with neuromuscular disease who have undergone
surgery are at substantial risk for postoperative atelectasis and subsequent
pneumonia. Migrating atelectasis in the newborn infant, a rare and unique
presentation, may be secondary to neuromuscular disease.
There is an association between the development of lobar collapse
and the requirement for mechanical ventilation. Although lobar collapse is rarely a cause of long-­term morbidity, its occurrence may
necessitate the prolongation of mechanical ventilation or reintubation.
In ventilated patients, positive-­end expiratory pressure or continuous
positive airway pressure is generally indicated.
Airway clearance therapies used for adults are often recommended
and/or used in pediatric populations. However, given the differences
in respiratory physiology and anatomy between children and adults,
practices applicable to one may or may not apply to the other. Atelectasis caused by cystic fibrosis is the only pediatric entity that clearly
benefits from airway clearance therapy, although atelectasis caused by
neuromuscular disease, cerebral palsy, or mechanical ventilation probably benefits from such therapy. Thus far, no specific airway clearance
therapy has been demonstrated to be superior.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2702 Part XVII u The Respiratory System

Chapter 460

Pulmonary Tumors
John Palla and Susanna A. McColley
See also Chapter 438.
Primary tumors of the lung are rare in children and adolescents
(Table 460.1). An accurate estimate of frequency is currently not possible because the literature is composed of case reports and case series.
A high incidence of “inflammatory pseudotumors” further clouds the
statistics. Bronchial adenomas (including bronchial carcinoid, adenoid
cystic carcinoma, and mucoepidermoid carcinomas) are the most
common primary malignant tumors; bronchial carcinoid tumors represent ∼80%. Pediatric carcinoid tumors are predominantly low-­grade
malignancies, but children with these tumors should be evaluated
and monitored by a pediatric oncologist. Carcinoid syndrome from a
bronchial carcinoid tumor is rare in children. Metastatic lesions are the
most common forms of pulmonary malignancy in children; primary
processes include Wilms tumor, osteogenic sarcoma, germ cell tumors,
and hepatoblastoma (see Part XX, Cancer and Benign Tumors). Adenocarcinoma and undifferentiated histology are the most common
pathologic findings in primary lung cancer; pulmonary blastoma is
rarer and frequently occurs in the setting of a primary cystic lesion or
is associated with a congenital pulmonary airway malformation (see
Chapter 444.3). Lymphoma is the most common cause of mediastinal
mass in children; other mediastinal tumors include thymoma, thyroid
cancer, and teratoma. Neuroblastoma may present as a posterior mediastinal mass.

Table 460.1   Pulmonary Tumors in Children
MALIGNANT
Bronchial adenomas (40–60%)
Carcinoid
Mucoepidermoid carcinoma
Adenoid cystic carcinoma
Pleuropulmonary blastoma (15%)
Bronchogenic carcinoma (10–15%)
Adenocarcinoma
Small-­cell carcinoma
Bronchoalveolar carcinoma
Squamous-­cell carcinoma
Undifferentiated carcinoma
Fetal-­lung adenocarcinoma
Pulmonary mesothelioma
Sarcomas (20–25%)
Rhabdomyosarcoma
Synovial sarcoma
Hemangiopericytoma (solitary fibrous tumor)
Leiomyosarcoma
Angiosarcoma
Bronchopulmonary fibrosarcoma
BENIGN
Hamartomas
Hemangiomas
Lymphangioma
Leiomyomas
Myofibroblastic tumors
Inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor
Myofibromatosis
Congenital peribronchial myofibroblastic tumor
Neurogenic tumors
Mature teratoma
From Goldberg JM, Pappo AS, Bishop M. Rare tumors of childhood. In Orkin SH, Fisher
DE, Ginsburg D, et al., eds. Nathan and Oski’s Hematology and Oncology of Infancy
and Childhood, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015: Table 65.4, p. 2130.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND EVALUATION

There is often a delay in the diagnosis of pediatric pulmonary
tumors given their rarity and nonspecific presenting symptoms.
Pulmonary tumors may manifest as fever, hemoptysis, wheezing,
cough, pleural effusion, chest pain, dyspnea, recurrent or persistent
pneumonia, and/or atelectasis. Localized wheezing, and wheezing
unresponsive to bronchodilators, can occur with bronchial tumors.
Tumors may be suspected from plain chest radiographs; however,
CT or MRI imaging of the chest is necessary for precise anatomic
definition (Table 460.2; Figs. 460.1 and 460.2). Depending on the
Table 460.2  Imaging Characteristics of Primary Malignant
Lung Tumors
NEOPLASM

IMAGING CHARACTERISTICS

Inflammatory
myofibroblastic tumor
(IMT)

Solitary (95%) or multiple (5%)
Usually sharply circumscribed, lobulated
mass
Typically located in the peripheral
portion of the lungs
Soft tissue mass with either
homogeneous or heterogeneous
attenuation may have both solid and
cystic and calcific components

Carcinoid or salivary gland
tumor

Centrally located lesion: intraluminal
soft tissue mass with distal atelectasis
or obstructive pneumonitis
Peripherally located lesion: oval or
lobulated intraluminal or exophytic
mass and occasionally calcify

Bronchogenic carcinoma

Central mass lesion with bronchial
obstruction or, less commonly, small
peripheral lesion

Pleuropulmonary
blastoma

Cystic or mixed cystic and solid lesion
adjacent to pleura; can be very large,
with mediastinal displacement

Epithelioid
hemangioendothelioma

Multiple well-­or ill-­defined nodular
opacities up to 3 cm in diameter; very
rare in childhood

From Chu WCW, Epelman M, Lee EY. Neoplasia. In Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric
Diagnostic Imaging, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019: Table 55.3, p. 531.

Fig. 460.1 Inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor. An afebrile 13-­yr-­old

male who presented with increasing dyspnea and right-­
sided pleuritic
chest pain. Axial contrast-­enhanced CT of the chest shows a rounded
heterogeneously enhancing lesion (arrows) located adjacent to an area of
atelectatic lung. Pleural fluid at the same level demonstrates increased attenuation consistent with a hemothorax. (Modified from Chu WCW, Epelman M, Lee EY. Neoplasia. In Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic
Imaging, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019: Fig. 55.8A, p. 531.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 461 u Pneumothorax 2703

A

B

C

Fig. 460.2 Adenoid cystic carcinoma. A 14-yr-­old male with a progressively worsening chronic cough and respiratory difficulty for 1 yr who

presented with hoarseness and crepitus over the neck. A, Chest radiograph shows pneumomediastinum (arrowheads) and an apparent soft tissue
density projecting over the carina (arrows). B, Coronal contrast-­enhanced CT image shows a lobulated soft tissue mass (arrows) centered near the
carina, which results in the narrowing of the adjacent airway. C, Axial contrast-­enhanced T1-­weighted MRI demonstrates avid enhancement of the
mass (arrows). (From Chu WCW, Epelman M, Lee EY. Neoplasia. In Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019. Fig. 55.11: p. 532.)

tumor size and location, pulmonary function tests may be normal
or may show an obstructive, restrictive, or mixed pattern; there is
no responsiveness to bronchodilators. Bronchial tumors are occasionally diagnosed during fiberoptic bronchoscopy performed for
persistent or recurrent pulmonary infiltrates or hemoptysis (see
Chapter 438).
Patients with symptoms or with radiographic or other laboratory findings suggesting pulmonary malignancy should be evaluated carefully for a tumor at another site before surgical excision is
carried out. Isolated primary lesions and isolated metastatic lesions
discovered long after the primary tumor has been removed are
best treated by excision. The prognosis varies and depends on the
type of tumor involved; outcomes for inflammatory pseudotumors
and primary pulmonary carcinoid tumors treated with resection are
good.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 461

Pneumothorax
Suraiya K. Haider and Aarthi P. Vemana
Pneumothorax is the accumulation of extrapulmonary air within the
chest, most commonly from leakage of air from within the lung. Air
leaks can occur spontaneously and be classified as primary or secondary, or occur due to trauma or an iatrogenic cause (Table 461.1). Pneumothorax in the neonatal period is also discussed in Chapter 132.

ETIOLOGY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY

A primary spontaneous pneumothorax occurs without trauma
or obvious underlying lung disease. Spontaneous pneumothorax with or without exertion occurs occasionally in teenagers and

young adults, most frequently in males who are tall and thin and
thought to have subpleural blebs. Smoking cigarettes, marijuana,
crack cocaine, e-­cigarette vaping, and ecstasy/MDMA (methylenedioxymethamphetamine) have been associated with developing a
pneumothorax.
A pneumothorax arising as a complication of an underlying lung
disorder but without trauma is a secondary spontaneous pneumothorax. Familial cases of spontaneous pneumothorax occur and
have been associated with pathogenic variants in the folliculin gene
(FCLN). Over 150 unique FCLN variants have been associated with
the Birt-­Hogg-­Dube syndrome (skin fibrofolliculomas, multiple
basal lung cysts, renal malignancies) or in patients with familial
or recurrent spontaneous pneumothoraces. Individuals with other
inherited disorders, such as α1-­antitrypsin (see Chapter 442) and
homocystinuria, are also predisposed to pneumothorax. Patients
with collagen synthesis defects such as vascular Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome (see Chapter 700) and Marfan syndrome (see Chapter 743)
are at increased risk for the development of pneumothorax.
Pneumothorax can occur in pneumonia, usually with empyema; it can also be secondary to a pulmonary abscess, gangrene,
infarct, rupture of a cyst or an emphysematous bleb (in asthma),
or foreign bodies in the lung. In infants with staphylococcal pneumonia, the incidence of pneumothorax is relatively high. It can be
found in children hospitalized with asthma exacerbations and usually resolves without treatment. Pneumothorax is a serious complication of cystic fibrosis (see Chapter 454). Pneumothorax also
occurs in patients with lymphoma or other malignancies and in
graft-­versus-­host disease with bronchiolitis obliterans. Catamenial
pneumothorax, an unusual condition that is related to menses, is
associated with diaphragmatic defects and pleural blebs.
External chest or abdominal blunt or penetrating trauma can tear
a bronchus or abdominal viscus, with leakage of air into the pleural space. Iatrogenic pneumothorax can complicate transthoracic
needle aspiration, tracheotomy, subclavian line placement, thoracentesis, or transbronchial biopsy. It may occur during mechanical
or noninvasive ventilation, high-­flow nasal cannula therapy, acupuncture, and other diagnostic or therapeutic procedures.
Pneumothorax can be associated with a serous effusion (hydropneumothorax), a purulent effusion (pyopneumothorax), or blood
(hemopneumothorax). Bilateral pneumothorax is rare after the
neonatal period but has been reported after lung transplantation
and with Mycoplasma pneumoniae infection and tuberculosis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2704 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Table 461.1   Causes of Pneumothorax in Children
SPONTANEOUS
Primary Idiopathic (no underlying lung disease)
Spontaneous rupture of subpleural blebs
Drug use (smoking cigarettes, marijuana, crack cocaine, use of
e-­cigarettes)
Valsalva maneuver
Secondary (underlying lung disease)
Congenital lung disease
• Congenital pulmonary airway malformation
• Bronchogenic cysts
• Pulmonary hypoplasia
• Birt-­Hogg-­Dube syndrome
Conditions associated with increased intrathoracic pressure
• Asthma
• Bronchiolitis
• Cystic fibrosis
• Airway foreign body
Infection
• Tuberculosis
• Pneumocystis jirovecii
• Echinococcosis
• Pneumatocele
• Lung abscess
• Bronchopleural fistula
• COVID-19 infection
Lung disease
• Langerhans cell histiocytosis
• Tuberous sclerosis
• Marfan syndrome
• Vascular Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome
• Pulmonary fibrosis
• Sarcoidosis
• Rheumatoid arthritis, scleroderma, ankylosing spondylitis
• Metastatic neoplasm—usually osteosarcoma (rare)
• Pulmonary blastoma
• Catamenial
TRAUMATIC
Noniatrogenic
Penetrating trauma
Blunt trauma
Iatrogenic
Thoracotomy
Thoracoscopy, thoracentesis
Tracheostomy
Tube or needle puncture
Mechanical ventilation
High-­flow therapy (moved from noniatrogenic)
Adapted from Noppen M. Spontaneous pneumothorax: epidemiology, pathophysiology
and cause. Eur Respir Rev. 2010;19(117):217–219, 2010. Tables 1 & 2, p. 218.

PATHOGENESIS

The tendency of the lung to collapse, or elastic recoil, is balanced
in the normal resting state by the inherent tendency of the chest
wall to expand outward, creating negative pressure in the intrapleural space. When air enters the pleural space, the lung collapses.
Hypoxemia occurs because of alveolar hypoventilation, ventilation-­
perfusion mismatch, and intrapulmonary shunt. In simple pneumothorax, intrapleural pressure is atmospheric, and the lung collapses
up to 30%. In tension pneumothorax, a continuing leak causes
increasing positive pressure in the pleural space, with further compression of the lung, shift of mediastinal structures toward the contralateral side, and decreases in venous return and cardiac output
causing hemodynamic instability.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The onset of pneumothorax is usually abrupt, and the severity of symptoms depends on the extent of the lung collapse and the amount of
preexisting lung disease. Pneumothorax may cause dyspnea, chest
pain, and cyanosis. When it occurs in infancy, symptoms and physical
signs may be difficult to recognize. Moderate pneumothorax may cause
little displacement of the intrathoracic organs and few or no symptoms.
The severity of pain usually does not directly reflect the extent of the
collapse.
Usually, there is respiratory distress, with retractions; markedly
decreased breath sounds; and a tympanitic percussion note over the
involved hemithorax. The larynx, trachea, and heart may be shifted
toward the unaffected side. When fluid is present, there is usually
a sharply limited area of tympany above a level of flatness to percussion. The presence of bronchial breath sounds or, when fluid is
present in the pleural cavity, of gurgling sounds synchronous with
respirations suggests an open fistula connecting with air-­containing
tissues.

DIAGNOSIS AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of pneumothorax is usually established by radiographic examination (Figs. 461.1-­461.6). The amount of air outside
the lung varies with time. A radiograph that is taken early shows
less lung collapse than one that was taken later if the leak continues.
Expiratory views accentuate the contrast between lung markings
and the clear area of the pneumothorax (see Fig. 461.1). Variations
exist in the measurement techniques defining the size of a pneumothorax. A large pneumothorax is measured by The American College of Chest Physicians as ≥3 cm from the lung apex to the thoracic
cupola, and by the British Thoracic Society as ≥2 cm from the lung
margin to the chest wall at the level of the hilum (Table 461.2).
It may be difficult to determine whether a pneumothorax is under
tension. Tension pneumothorax is present when there is a shift of
mediastinal structures away from the side of the air leak. A shift may
be absent in situations in which the other hemithorax resists the shift,
such as in the case of bilateral pneumothorax. On occasion, the diagnosis of tension pneumothorax is made only based on evidence of circulatory compromise or on hearing a “hiss” of rapid exit of air under
tension with the insertion of the thoracostomy tube. When the lungs
are both stiff, such as in cystic fibrosis or respiratory distress syndrome,
the unaffected lung may not collapse easily, and shift may not occur
(see Fig. 461.3).
Pneumothorax must be differentiated from localized or generalized emphysema, an extensive emphysematous bleb, large pulmonary cavities or other cystic formations, diaphragmatic hernia,
compensatory overexpansion with contralateral atelectasis, and
gaseous distention of the stomach. In most cases, chest radiography
or CT differentiates among these possibilities. In addition, CT may
identify underlying pathology such as blebs (Fig. 461.7). Further
evaluation to determine if a diaphragmatic hernia is present should
include a barium swallow with a small amount of barium to demonstrate that it is not free air but is a portion of the gastrointestinal
tract that is in the thoracic cavity (see Chapter 131). Ultrasound can
also be used to establish the diagnosis.

TREATMENT

Therapy varies with the extent of the collapse and the nature and
severity of the underlying disease. A small or even moderate-­sized
pneumothorax in an otherwise normal child may resolve without
specific treatment, usually within 1 week. A small pneumothorax-­
complicating asthma may also resolve spontaneously. Administering 100% oxygen may hasten resolution, but patients with chronic
hypoxemia should be monitored closely during the administration
of supplemental oxygen. Pleural pain deserves analgesic treatment.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 461 u Pneumothorax 2705

A

B

Fig. 461.1 Utility of an expiratory film in detection of a small pneumothorax. A, Teenager with stab wound and subtle radiolucency in the left apical

region (arrow) on inspiratory chest radiograph. The margin of the visceral pleura is very faintly visible. B, On an expiratory film, the pneumothorax
(arrow) is more obvious as the right lung has deflated and become more opaque, providing better contrast with the air in the pleural space.

Fig. 461.2 Right pneumothorax, with lung collapse of a compliant

Fig. 461.3 Right pneumothorax, with only limited collapse of a poorly

Needle aspiration into the second intercostal space in the midclavicular line may be required on an emergency basis for tension
pneumothorax and is as effective as tube thoracostomy in the emergency room management of primary spontaneous pneumothorax.
If the pneumothorax is recurrent, secondary, or under tension, or
there is more than a small collapse, catheter drainage or other invasive measures may be necessary. Pneumothorax in patients with
cystic fibrosis or Marfan syndrome frequently recurs, and definitive treatment may be justified with the first episode. Similarly, if

pneumothorax-­complicating malignancy does not improve rapidly
with observation, chemical pleurodesis or surgical thoracotomy is
often necessary. In cases with severe air leaks or bronchopleural fistula, occlusion with an endobronchial balloon has been successful.
Closed thoracotomy (simple insertion of a chest tube) and drainage
of the trapped air through a catheter, the external opening of which is
kept in a dependent position under water, is adequate to reexpand the
lung in most patients; pigtail catheters are frequently used. Consideration can be given to a sclerosing procedure to induce the formation of

lung. Shift of the mediastinum to the left (arrow) indicates that this is a
tension pneumothorax.

compliant lung.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2706 Part XVII u The Respiratory System

*

Fig. 461.4 Pneumothorax, with collapse of right lung (arrows), caused

by barotrauma in a 7-­mo-­old child who was intubated for respiratory
failure.

*

Fig. 461.6 Bronchopleural fistula following surgical resection of the
left upper lobe as a result of congenital lobar emphysema. Chest radiograph shows localized pneumothorax (asterisk) that persisted despite
prior insertion of a large-­bore chest tube (arrowhead).

strong adhesions between the lung and chest wall with the introduction of doxycycline or iodopovidone into the pleural space (chemical
pleurodesis).
Open thoracotomy through a limited incision, with plication of
blebs, closure of the fistula, stripping of the pleura (usually in the apical
lung, where the surgeon has direct vision), and basilar pleural abrasion
is also an effective treatment for recurrent pneumothorax. Stripping
and abrading the pleura leaves raw, inflamed surfaces that heal with
sealing adhesions. Video-­assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) is a
preferred therapy for blebectomy, pleural stripping, pleural brushing,
and instillation of sclerosing agents, with less morbidity than occurs
with traditional open thoracotomy. In cases with a persistent air leak
following thoracic surgery, an autologous blood patch pleurodesis may
also be considered.
There is a risk of recurrence after surgical treatment in the pediatric population, although this is often not related to surgical failure but rather associated with the formation of new or undetected
bullae. Clear benefit for treatment of asymptomatic blebs/bullae
in the contralateral lung has not been established in the pediatric
population.
Pleural adhesions help prevent recurrent pneumothorax, but
they also make subsequent thoracic surgery difficult. When lung
transplantation may be a future consideration (e.g., in cystic fibrosis), steps should be taken to avoid, if at all possible, chemical or
mechanical pleurodesis. It should also be kept in mind that the
longer a chest tube is in place, the greater the chance of pulmonary deterioration, particularly in a patient with cystic fibrosis in
whom strong coughing, deep breathing, and postural drainage are
important. These are all difficult to accomplish with a chest tube in
place.

A

*

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

B
Fig. 461.5 Teenager in whom a spontaneous right pneumothorax

developed because of a bleb. Patient had a persistent air leak despite
recent surgical resection of the causative apical bleb. Chest radiograph
(A) and CT scan (B) clearly show the persistent pneumothorax (asterisk).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 462 u Pneumomediastinum

2707

Table 461.2   Summary of the Main Features of the BTS, Belgian, and ACCP Guidelines for Spontaneous Pneumothorax
Management
BTS

BELGIAN

ACCP

Definition of large pneumothorax

>2 cm between lung margin and
chest wall (at level of the hilum)

≥20% using light index and/
or complete dehiscence from
lateral chest wall

≥3 cm apex-­to-­cupola distance

First line small PSP management

Observation if asymptomatic;
aspiration if symptomatic

Observation if asymptomatic;
aspiration if symptomatic

Observation for 3-­6 hr and
outpatient follow-­up
Aspirate or ICC if pneumothorax
enlarges
Presence of symptoms >24 hr
does not alter treatment

First line large PSP management

Observation if asymptomatic;
aspiration if symptomatic

Aspiration

Insertion of ICC

First line small SSP management

Admission and insertion of ICC;
aspiration can be considered as
an alternative

Admission and observation;
aspiration if symptomatic

Admission and observation;
insertion of ICC if symptomatic

First line large SSP management

Admission and insertion of ICC

Admission and insertion of ICC

Admission and insertion of ICC

BTS, British Thoracic Society; ACCP, American College of Chest Physicians; PSP, primary spontaneous pneumothorax; SSP, secondary spontaneous pneumothorax; ICC, intercostal
chest catheter.
From Lieu N, Ngo P, Chennapragada SM, et al. Update in management of paediatric primary spontaneous pneumothorax. Paediat Respir Rev. 2022;41:73–79. Table 1.

menses, and diabetes mellitus with ketoacidosis. Traumatic causes
of pneumomediastinum include both iatrogenic (dental extractions,
adenotonsillectomy, high flow nasal cannula therapy, esophageal perforation, inhalation of helium gas, and flexible bronchoscopy) and
noniatrogenic (inhaled foreign body and penetrating chest trauma).

PATHOGENESIS

According to the Macklin effect, after an intrapulmonary alveolar rupture,
air dissects along the pressure gradient through the perivascular sheaths
and other soft tissue planes toward the hilum and enters the mediastinum.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Fig. 461.7 High-­resolution CT thorax showing multiple basal cysts.
(From Hopkins TG, Maher ER, Reid E, et al. Recurrent pneumothorax.
Lancet. 2011;377:1624. Fig. 1.)

Dyspnea and transient stabbing chest pain that may radiate to the
neck are the principal features of pneumomediastinum. Other symptoms may be present and may include globus pharyngeus, abdominal
pain, cough, chest tightness, facial swelling, choking, tachypnea, fever,
stridor, and sore throat. Pneumomediastinum is difficult to detect by
physical examination alone. Subcutaneous emphysema is present in
the majority of patients. When present, Hamman sign (a mediastinal
“crunch”) is nearly pathognomonic for pneumomediastinum. Cardiac
dullness to percussion may be decreased, but if the chest is chronically
overinflated, it is unlikely that the clinician can be sure of this finding.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Chapter 462

Pneumomediastinum
Aarthi P. Vemana and Suraiya K. Haider
Air or gas in the mediastinum is called pneumomediastinum and is
typically caused by alveolar rupture, which can be due to either a spontaneous or traumatic cause. A spontaneous pneumomediastinum can
either be primary without an underlying etiology or can occur secondary to an underlying cause. Primary pneumomediastinum can be due to
increases in intrathoracic pressure as is seen with a Valsalva maneuver,
vomiting, Boerhaave syndrome (esophageal perforation), weightlifting,
inhalation of recreational drugs, use of e-­cigarettes, recreational use of
MDMA, and choking events. Causes of secondary pneumomediastinum include lower respiratory tract infections including COVID-19,
asthma exacerbations, mechanical ventilation, anorexia nervosa, normal

Chest radiography reveals mediastinal air, with a more distinct cardiac border than normal (Figs. 462.1 and 462.2). A “spinnaker sail sign” or “angel
wing sign” occurs when air deviates the thymus upward and outward,
which is seen more often in pediatric patients. On the lateral projection, the
posterior mediastinal structures are clearly defined, there may be a lucent
ring (“ring sign”) around the right pulmonary artery, and retrosternal air
can usually be seen. Vertical streaks of air in the mediastinum and subcutaneous air are often observed (see Fig. 462.1). If a pneumomediastinum is
clinically suspected but is not visualized on a chest x-­ray, a chest CT can be
performed to confirm the diagnosis and identify tracheal injury, if present.

TREATMENT

Treatment is directed primarily at the underlying obstructive pulmonary
disease or other precipitating condition. Children who have had pneumomediastinum should be screened for asthma. Analgesics are occasionally needed for chest pain. Children can be observed in the emergency
room and discharged if stable. They should be cautioned to avoid heavy
lifting and the Valsalva maneuver. Hospital admission with supplemental oxygen administration is more common for patients with secondary
pneumomediastinum. In severe cases, consideration should be given to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2708 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
the use of more invasive interventions, including tracheotomy, surgical
repair, and skin incisions over the neck and anterior chest wall. The use
of prophylactic antibiotics to prevent deep neck space infections and
mediastinitis has not been shown to provide additional benefit.

COMPLICATIONS

Pneumomediastinum is rarely a major problem in older children because
the mediastinum can be depressurized by escape of air into the neck or
abdomen. In the newborn, however, the rate at which air can leave the
mediastinum is limited, and pneumomediastinum can lead to dangerous
cardiovascular compromise or pneumothorax (see Chapters 132 and 461).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 463

Hydrothorax
Aarthi P. Vemana and Suraiya K. Haider
Hydrothorax is a transudative pleural effusion; typically, it is caused by
abnormal pressure gradients in the lung. Hydrothorax is most often associated with cardiac, renal, or hepatic disease. It can also be a manifestation
of severe nutritional edema and hypoalbuminemia. Rarely, it results from
superior vena cava obstruction by neoplasms, enlarged lymph nodes, pulmonary embolism, or adhesions. It may occur from a ventriculoperitoneal
(VP) shunt, central venous catheter, peritoneal dialysis, or after corrective
spinal fusion for treatment of adolescent idiopathic scoliosis.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Hydrothorax is usually bilateral, but in cardiac or hepatic disease it can
be limited to the right side or greater on the right than on the left side.
The physical signs are the same as those described for serofibrinous
pleurisy (see Chapter 451.2), but in hydrothorax there is more rapid
shifting of the level of dullness with changes of position. Depending on
the etiology, it can be associated with an accumulation of fluid in other
parts of the body.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

The fluid is transudative, noninflammatory, has few cells, and has a
lower specific gravity (<1.015) than that of a serofibrinous exudate (see
Chapters 449 and 451). The ratio of pleural fluid to serum total protein is <0.5, the ratio of pleural fluid to serum lactic dehydrogenase is
<0.6, and the pleural fluid lactic dehydrogenase value is less than 66%
of the upper limit of the normal serum lactic dehydrogenase range. In
a patient with a VP shunt, B-­transferrin assays and radionuclide tracer
shunt series may be helpful for diagnosis. Peritoneal scintigraphy may
be considered to evaluate for a peritoneal-­pleural leak. In hepatic
hydrothorax, the pleural fluid resembles spontaneous bacterial peritonitis, with positive bacterial cultures and polymorphonuclear leukocyte counts >250 cell/mm3.

TREATMENT

Fig. 462.1 Large pneumomediastinum surrounding the heart and dis-

secting into the neck. (From Clark DA. Atlas of Neonatology, 7th ed.
Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2000.)

Therapy is directed at the underlying disorder. If a transudative fluid
is clinically suspected, aspiration may not be needed unless pressure
symptoms are noted or there are atypical symptoms, such as fever,
pleuritic pain, or asymmetric effusions. Aspirated fluid may be diagnostic using PCR for bacteria and cytology and flow cytometry for
malignancies.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com Bibliography.

Chapter 464

Hemothorax
Suraiya K. Haider and Aarthi P. Vemana

Fig. 462.2 Sail sign—thymic elevation. (From Clark DA. Atlas of Neo-

Hemothorax, an accumulation of blood in the pleural cavity, is rare
in children. Bleeding into the chest cavity most commonly occurs
after chest trauma, either blunt or penetrating. It can be the result
of iatrogenic trauma, including surgical procedures and venous line
insertion. Hemothorax can also result from erosion of a blood vessel in association with inflammatory processes, such as tuberculosis

natology, 7th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2000: p. 94.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 465 u Chylothorax 2709
and empyema. It may complicate a variety of congenital anomalies,
including sequestration, patent ductus arteriosus, and pulmonary
arteriovenous malformation (see Fig. 458.2 in Chapter 458), or
occur in association with vascular Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome. It is
also an occasional manifestation of intrathoracic neoplasms, costal exostoses, blood dyscrasias, bleeding diatheses, thrombolytic
therapy, thoracic endometriosis, or rarely COVID-19 infections.
Rupture of an aneurysm is unlikely during childhood. Hemothorax
may occur spontaneously but is rare in children. A pleural hemorrhage associated with a pneumothorax is a hemopneumothorax; it is
usually the result of a ruptured bulla with lung volume loss causing
a torn pleural adhesion.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

In addition to the symptoms and signs of pleural effusion (see
Chapter 451.2), hemothorax is associated with hemodynamic compromise related to the amount and rapidity of bleeding, with ventilatory collapse. Spontaneous hemothorax presents with sudden
onset of chest or back pain or dyspnea and can progress rapidly to
hemorrhagic shock.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of a hemothorax is initially suspected from radiographs,
ultrasounds, or CT scans but can be made definitively with thoracentesis (Fig. 464.1). In every case, an effort must be made to determine
and treat the cause.

TREATMENT

Therapy includes supplemental oxygen, fluid resuscitation (including possible blood transfusion), and tube thoracostomy. Video-­assisted thorascopic
surgery (VATS) can be considered in most patients with stable vital signs to
visualize the source of bleeding, remove blood clots, resect bullae or blebs,
and to perform pleurodesis. An open thoracotomy may be indicated if there
is uncontrolled bleeding or in a hemodynamically compromised patient.
Inadequate removal of blood in extensive hemothorax leading to a retained
hemothorax can increase the risk for development of pneumonia, empyema,
or substantial restrictive disease secondary to organization of fibrin. Fibrinolytic therapy or a decortication may then be necessary. Embolization is the
treatment of choice for an arteriovenous malformation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 465

Chylothorax
Suraiya K. Haider and Aarthi P. Vemana

*

A

*

B
Fig. 464.1 Chest radiograph (A) and CT scan (B) of hemothorax (as-

terisk) and associated rib fractures (arrows) in a teenager involved in a
motor vehicle accident.

Chylothorax is a pleural collection of fluid formed by the escape of chyle
from the thoracic duct or lymphatics into the thoracic cavity. Chylothorax in children occurs most frequently because of thoracic duct injury
as a complication of cardiothoracic surgery (post Fontan surgery) (Fig.
465.1). Other cases are associated with chest injury (Fig. 465.2), extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, or primary or metastatic intrathoracic
malignancy, particularly lymphoma. In newborns, rapidly increased
venous pressure during delivery may lead to thoracic duct rupture. Chylothorax has also been associated with Down syndrome, Noonan syndrome, Turner syndrome, and congenital myotonic dystrophy. Genetic
pathogenic variants involving the VEGFC/VEGFR3, PI3K/AKT/mTOR,
and RAS/MAPK pathways can impact lymphangiogenesis leading to
lymphatic malformations. Refractory chylothorax in the fetus has been
associated with a missense variant in integrin α9β1 gene. Persistent or
recurrent chylothorax has been described in association with pathogenic
variants in the PIEZO1 gene. Less common causes include lymphangiomatosis (Fig. 465.3), restrictive pulmonary diseases, thrombosis of the
duct, superior vena cava, or subclavian vein; tuberculosis or histoplasmosis, Gorham-­Stout disease, and congenital anomalies of the lymphatic
system (Fig. 465.4). Chylothorax can occur in trauma and child abuse (see
Chapter 16). It is important to establish the etiology because treatment
varies with the cause. In some patients, no specific cause is identified.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The signs and symptoms of chylothorax are the same as those from
pleural effusion of similar size, including cough, chest discomfort, and
dyspnea. Chyle is not irritating, so pleuritic pain is uncommon. Onset
is often gradual. However, after trauma to the thoracic duct, chyle may
accumulate in the posterior mediastinum for days and then rupture
into the pleural space with sudden onset of dyspnea, hypotension, and
hypoxemia. Approximately 50% of newborns with chylothorax present
with respiratory distress in the first day of life. Chylothorax is rarely
bilateral and usually occurs on the right side.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2710 Part XVII u The Respiratory System

Fig. 465.1 Chylothorax (arrows) following cardiac surgery in a
2-­wk-­old infant.

Fig. 465.3 Large right chylous effusion opacifying much of the right

thorax in a teenager with pulmonary lymphangiomatosis and hemangiomatosis. Note the associated interstitial lung disease.

demonstrate abnormalities of the lymphatic trunks and peripheral
lymphatics. MR lymphangiography also allows for visualization of
the peripheral and segments of the central lymphatics. Dynamic
contrast-­enhanced magnetic resonance lymphangiography can provide real-­time evaluation of the central lymphatic flow with good
spatial resolution to guide management options.

TREATMENT

Fig. 465.2 Left chylothorax (arrows) following spinal fusion with Harrington rods. It is postulated that the thoracic duct was injured during
spine surgery. The pigtail chest tube (arrowhead) needed to be retracted to better drain the effusion.

LABORATORY FINDINGS AND IMAGING

Chest radiographs can help to delineate the location of an effusion;
CT scans show normal pleural thickness and may demonstrate a
mediastinal mass such as a lymphoma, as the etiology of the chylothorax. Thoracentesis demonstrates a chylous effusion, a milky
fluid containing triglycerides, protein, lymphocytes, and other
constituents of chyle; fluid may be yellow or bloody. In newborn
infants or those who are not ingesting food, the fluid may be clear.
A pseudochylous milky fluid may be present in chronic serous effusion, in which fatty material arises from degenerative changes in
the fluid and not from lymph. In chylothorax, the fluid triglyceride level is >110 mg/dL, the pleural fluid:serum triglyceride ratio is
>1.0, and pleural fluid:serum cholesterol ratio is <1.0; lipoprotein
analysis reveals chylomicrons. Fluid immunoglobulin levels are elevated. The cells are primarily (>80%) lymphocytes and often exceed
1,000 cells per mm3. After diagnosing chylothorax, a lymphangiogram can localize the site of the leak, and lymphoscintigraphy may

Treatment involves symptomatic support and decreasing or stopping chyle accumulation. Management is divided into two categories: nonsurgical and surgical. Nutritional management strategies
include a combination of nil-per-os (NPO) and total parenteral
nutrition, or enteral feeds using either a low-fat or medium-chain
triglyceride diet or defatted human milk (also known as skimmed
human milk). Thoracentesis is repeated as needed to relieve pressure symptoms; tube thoracostomy is often performed. Somatostatin and octreotide have been used to manage chylothorax. Various
octreotide dosages have been described, including 1–4 μg/kg/
hr intravenously and 10 μg/kg/day subcutaneously. Retrospective
analyses have shown beneficial effects with the use of steroids, in
particular, hydrocortisone, methylprednisolone, and dexamethasone combined with somatostatin or octreotide. Use of propranolol
or sirolimus in severe or refractory cases may be effective. Further
studies are required to confirm the optimal dosage for steroids, propranolol, and sirolimus. Other therapeutic approaches include pressure control ventilation with positive end-­expiratory pressure and
inhalation of nitric oxide. If medical management is unsuccessful,
surgical options should be considered and can include a pleuroperitoneal shunt, thoracic duct ligation, and pleurodesis with the use of
a sclerosing agents such as fibrin glue or povidone-­iodine. Treatment is similar for traumatic chylothorax. Chemical pleurodesis
or irradiation is used in malignant chylothorax. OK432 (picibanil)
has been used to treat fetal and newborn chylothorax. Etilefrine,
a sympathomimetic agent with both α-­ and β-­adrenergic activity,
has been successfully used in a few patients. Constriction of the
thoracic duct by this drug may reduce pleural chyle accumulation.
Percutaneous thoracic duct embolization or treatment of other
lymphatic vessels is a successful interventional radiology strategy.
Surgery should be considered earlier in neonates with massive
chylothorax and chyle output of >50 mL/kg/day despite maximum
medical therapy for 3 days.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 466 u Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia 2711

*

Fig. 465.4 Spontaneous chylo-

thorax in a 4 yr old with a duplication of chromosome 6. A, Chest
radiograph shows opacification of
the right thorax. B, CT scan shows
the chylous pleural effusion (asterisk) compressing the atelectatic
right lung (arrows).

A

COMPLICATIONS

If repeated thoracenteses are required due to the rapid reaccumulation of chyle, malnutrition may occur with significant loss of calories,
protein, and electrolytes. Immunodeficiencies, including hypogammaglobulinemia and abnormal cell-­mediated immune responses, have
been associated with repeated and chronic thoracenteses for chylothorax. The loss of T lymphocytes is associated with increased risk of
infection in neonates; otherwise, infection is uncommon, but patients
should not receive live virus vaccines. Lack of resolution of chylothorax
can lead to malnutrition, infection, and death.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 466

Bronchopulmonary
Dysplasia
Sharon A. McGrath-­Morrow and
J. Michael Collaco
Bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD) is a chronic lung disease of
infancy and childhood that occurs primarily in preterm infants born
at less than 32 weeks’ gestation. BPD is characterized by alveolar hypoplasia, often with concomitant small airway dysfunction and impaired
pulmonary vascular growth. Contributing factors to the development of BPD may include early gestational age, low birthweight, lung
barotrauma, exposure to hyperoxia, lung inflammation, and pre-­and
postnatal infections, as well as potential modifier genes and epigenetic factors. The currently accepted definition for diagnosis includes an
oxygen requirement for 28 days postnatally, and the disorder is graded
as mild, moderate, or severe based on supplemental oxygen and ventilation requirements at specific time points (Table 466.1). For initial
inpatient presentation and management, see Chapter 127.

B

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Physical findings of the pulmonary exam vary with the severity of the
disease and with respiratory illnesses. Although some patients may
appear to be comfortably breathing when well, they can experience significant deterioration when ill or with periods of stress due to decreased
pulmonary reserve secondary to alveolar hypoplasia and small airway
disease. Children with BPD may exhibit tachypnea, head bobbing, and
retractions when ill or at baseline depending on the severity of the disease. Although breath sounds may be clear, many patients have baseline wheeze or coarse crackles. A persistent, fixed wheeze or stridor
suggests subglottic stenosis (see Chapter 436) or large airway malacia.
Fine crackles may be present in patients prone to fluid overload. Chest
radiographs may demonstrate air trapping, focal atelectasis, interstitial
changes, and/or peribronchial thickening.
The most severely affected patients may require respiratory support to achieve adequate gas exchange. Supplemental oxygen may be
required to maintain acceptable oxygen saturations and often is needed
to minimize the work of breathing. Chronic respiratory insufficiency
may be evidenced as elevation of serum bicarbonate, elevated carbon
dioxide on blood gas analysis, hypoxemia, or polycythemia; the most
severe cases may require tracheostomy and ventilation to achieve
long-­term respiratory stability. Patients must be monitored for the
development of pulmonary hypertension, especially if they require
supplemental oxygen and have chronic respiratory insufficiency.
Aspiration from dysphagia and/or gastroesophageal reflux (GERD)
(see Chapter 369) can compromise pulmonary status. The risk of
aspiration may increase during periods of illness due to worsening tachypnea and air trapping. Other comorbidities resulting from
premature birth that complicate the management of BPD include
fixed and functional upper airway obstruction, CNS injuries leading
to abnormal control of breathing, abnormal airway tone, increased
aspiration risk, gastrointestinal dysmotility, systemic hypertension,
and poor growth. Of note, infants with significant lung disease can
exhibit growth failure from the elevated energy expenditure essential
to maintaining the increased metabolic demands of respiration and/
or ongoing hypoxia.
A pulmonary exacerbation in a child with BPD is typically triggered
during viral respiratory infections. Other frequent risk factors for
pulmonary exacerbations may include weather changes, exposure to
cigarette smoke, exposure to emissions from vaping devices, attending
daycare, and aspiration. During an exacerbation, the infant may exhibit
increased work of breathing, crackles, and wheezing, with tachypnea
and retractions becoming more prominent. Underlying pulmonary
hypertension may worsen with pulmonary exacerbations as well.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2712 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Table 466.1   Definition of Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia: Diagnostic Criteria
GESTATIONAL AGE

<32 WEEKS

>
_32 WEEKS

Time point of assessment

36 weeks’ PMA or discharge to home, whichever comes first

>28 days but <56 days’ postnatal age or
discharge to home, whichever comes first

TREATMENT WITH >21% OXYGEN FOR AT LEAST 28 DAYS PLUS
Mild BPD
Breathing room air by 36 weeks’ PMA or discharge, whichever
comes first

Breathing room air by 56 days’ postnatal age or
discharge, whichever comes first

Moderate BPD

Need for <30% oxygen at 36 weeks’ PMA or discharge,
whichever comes first

Need for <30% oxygen at 56 days’ postnatal
age or discharge, whichever comes first

Severe BPD

Need for ≥30% oxygen and/or positive pressure (PPV or
NCPAP) at 36 weeks’ PMA or discharge, whichever comes
first

Need for ≥30% oxygen and/or positive pressure
(PPV or NCPAP) at 56 days’ postnatal age or
discharge, whichever comes first

BPD, Bronchopulmonary dysplasia; NCPAP, nasal continuous positive airway pressure; PMA, postmenstrual age; PPV, positive pressure ventilation.
Adapted from Jobe AH, Bancalari E. Bronchopulmonary dysplasia. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2001;163:1723.

TREATMENT

Treatment is directed toward decreasing the work of breathing and
normalizing gas exchange to allow for optimal growth and neurodevelopment. After initial hospital discharge, infants and children with BPD
are at high risk for rehospitalization. Up to 50% of infants with BPD are
readmitted for acute respiratory illnesses within the first 2 years of life.
These children also may require multiple daily medications, supplemental oxygen, and/or chronic ventilation.
Adherence to prescribed daily medication regimens may decrease
the risk of acute care use and chronic respiratory symptoms; however,
there are no standard guidelines for the management of BPD concerning post-­NICU care. Although commonly used, there are limited data
regarding the efficacy of diuretics in the outpatient setting.
With regard to respiratory support, targeted oxygen saturations
should be ≥92% outside of the NICU to ensure adequate growth and
neurocognitive development. Pulse-­oximetry and polysomnography
may be helpful for titration purposes. Before initial hospital discharge,
infants and children who require chronic ventilatory support have
been shown to benefit from standardized protocols to determine medical readiness, assess familial proficiency in respiratory care, and establish adequate support in an outpatient setting. After discharge, these
patients will require close follow-­up from pulmonologists and otolaryngologists to manage ventilator titration and weaning and tracheostomy care and decannulation, respectively. As infants and children with
tracheostomies are at high risk for adverse events, including death, an
awake and alert trained caregiver is recommended at all times.
Pulmonary function testing in children with a history of BPD has
consistently demonstrated obstructive small airway disease. Small
airway disease in this population may be partially responsive to bronchodilators but may also have a fixed obstructive component. Inhaled
corticosteroids and β-­agonists may be effective in treating symptoms,
such as wheezing or chronic cough.
Adequate caloric intake is important to ensure catch-­
up lung
growth. Some children may require fortified breast milk or formula
to achieve adequate growth. Patients at risk for aspiration and those
with inadequate oral intake may require tube feeding to meet nutritional goals. Placement of a gastrostomy tube should be considered
before discharging home. Aspiration secondary to dysphagia and/or
gastroesophageal reflux should be considered in patients with recurrent respiratory symptoms or pneumonia without obvious infectious
etiologies. Because of their tenuous respiratory status, some infants and
children with BPD may not be able to tolerate even minimal amounts
of aspiration from gastroesophageal reflux. There are limited data
regarding risks and benefits of antireflux medications in infants with
BPD, such as histamine-­2 blockers, proton pump inhibitors, and motility agents. Medications that reduce gastric acidity may increase the
risk of pneumonia in some children. Consideration for either Nissen
fundoplication or gastrojejunostomy tubes may be required in cases of
failure of antireflux medical therapy.

Up to 15–25% of infants with severe BPD will be diagnosed with
pulmonary hypertension, which may be secondary to decreased pulmonary vascular growth and/or a reactive vascular bed. Other risk
factors for developing pulmonary hypertension may include extreme
prematurity and decreased intrauterine growth; recurrent aspiration,
hypoxia, and hypercarbia may worsen severity. Pulmonary hypertension in infants is associated with increased morbidity and mortality
compared to infants without pulmonary hypertension. Although
definitive diagnosis of pulmonary hypertension requires cardiac catheterization, in practice transthoracic echocardiography provides a low-­
risk screening tool. Screening should also attempt to identify potential
structural causes of pulmonary hypertension, such as pulmonary vein
stenosis. Serum biomarkers, such as brain natriuretic protein, may
be useful in tracking response to therapy. Abrupt worsening of pulmonary hypertension (pulmonary hypertensive crises) can occur in
the context of illnesses and with anesthesia. Crises can occur even in
stable children with a history of pulmonary hypertension who become
acutely ill. Although pulmonary hypertension that is associated with
BPD can improve with adequate lung growth, therapies such as sildenafil and other antipulmonary hypertensive agents have been used in
management.
Prevention of respiratory viral illness is vitally important; frequent
handwashing by caregivers (especially before they handle the baby)
and avoidance of contact with children and adults with current
respiratory symptoms are essential. Respiratory syncytial virus (see
Chapter 307) immunoprophylaxis should be considered based on
the severity of lung disease and the patient’s gestational age and current age. Another environmental factor that can worsen respiratory
symptoms is exposure to secondhand tobacco smoke (see Chapter
759.1).

PROGNOSIS

The prognosis for infants with BPD is generally good, although the
presence of BPD may result in a longer initial hospitalization compared
with preterm infants without BPD. Most infants are weaned off of oxygen during the first year of life, and those requiring home mechanical
ventilation are often weaned from this support during toddlerhood.
Many children exhibit an asthma-­like phenotype during early childhood, characterized by episodes of wheezing or coughing triggered by
upper respiratory tract infections, exertion, allergens, etc. For some of
these children, symptoms improve by school age; others may continue
to have asthma-­like exacerbations with viral illnesses and exercise
throughout childhood that may persist into adulthood. Even asymptomatic patients with a history of BPD can continue to demonstrate
small airway flow limitations by spirometry. Lastly, obstructive sleep
apnea may also be more common in infants, children, and young adults
with a history of BPD.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 467 u Skeletal Diseases Influencing Pulmonary Function

2713

Skeletal Diseases
Influencing Pulmonary
Function

function tests may be normal but commonly show an obstructive
defect in the lower airways and, less commonly, a restrictive defect
as the result of abnormal chest wall mechanics. Exercise testing may
demonstrate either normal tolerance or limitations from underlying
cardiopulmonary dysfunction that are associated with the severity of
the defect. Pulmonary limitations, such as ventilatory limitations and
associated flow volume loop abnormalities, are commonly seen in
younger children and adolescents, whereas additional cardiac limitations secondary to stroke volume impairments are more commonly
seen in older adolescents and young adults.

Steven R. Boas and Catherine Kier

TREATMENT

Chapter 467

Pulmonary function is influenced by the structure of the chest wall
(see Chapter 421). Chest wall abnormalities can lead to restrictive or
obstructive pulmonary disease, impaired respiratory muscle strength,
and decreased ventilatory performance in response to physical stress.
The congenital chest wall deformities include pectus excavatum, pectus
carinatum, sternal clefts, Poland syndrome, and skeletal and cartilage
dysplasias. Vertebral anomalies such as kyphoscoliosis can alter pulmonary function in children and adolescents.

467.1 Pectus Excavatum (Funnel Chest)
Steven R. Boas and Catherine Kier

ETIOLOGY

Pectus excavatum—midline narrowing of the thoracic cavity—is usually an isolated skeletal abnormality. The cause is unknown. Pectus
excavatum can occur in isolation, or it may be associated with a connective tissue disorder—Marfan (see Chapter 743) or Ehlers-­Danlos
syndrome (see Chapter 700). It may be acquired secondarily to chronic
lung disease, neuromuscular disease, or trauma.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Pectus excavatum occurs in 1 in 400 births with a 9:1 male preponderance and accounts for >90% of congenital chest wall anomalies. There
is a positive family history in ∼30% of cases.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The deformity is present at or shortly after birth in one third of cases
but is usually not associated with any symptoms at that time. In time,
fatigue, chest pain, palpitations, recurrent respiratory infections,
wheezing, stridor, and cough may be present. Decreased exercise tolerance is one of the most common symptoms. Because of the cosmetic
nature of this deformity, children may experience significant psychologic stress. Physical examination may reveal sternal depression, protracted shoulders, kyphoscoliosis, dorsal lordosis, inferior rib flares, rib
cage rigidity, forward head tilt, scapular winging, and loss of vertebral
contours (Fig. 467.1). Patients may exhibit paroxysmal sternal motion
and a shift of point of maximal impulse to the left. Innocent systolic
murmurs may be heard.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Lateral chest radiograms demonstrate sternal depression. The Haller
index on chest CT (maximal internal transverse diameter of the chest
divided by the minimal anteroposterior diameter at the same level) in
comparison with age-­and gender-­appropriate normative values have
been used historically to help determine the extent of the anatomic
abnormality. However, the correlation of the Haller index with the
physiologic compromise or associated systems appears suboptimal.
The use of 3D chest optical imaging or “surface scan” is gaining popularity in the evaluation. An electrocardiogram may show a right-­axis
deviation or Wolff-­Parkinson-­White syndrome (see Chapter 485); an
echocardiogram may demonstrate mitral valve prolapse (see Chapter 477.3) and ventricular compression. Results of static pulmonary

Treatment is based on the severity of the deformity and the extent
of physiologic compromise as defined by physical examination and
physiologic assessment of cardiopulmonary function (lung function
and exercise tolerance assessment). Therapeutic options include careful observation, the use of physical therapy to address musculoskeletal
compromise, corrective surgery, cosmetic surgery, and noninvasive
thorascopic techniques. For patients with significant physiologic compromise, surgical correction may improve the cosmetic deformity and
may help minimize progression or even improve the cardiopulmonary
compromise. The two main surgical interventions are the Ravitch and
Nuss procedures. The Nuss procedure is a minimally invasive thoracoscopic repair that has been associated with good cosmetic and functional outcomes.
The extent of the anatomic defect, including the degree of asymmetry, may help determine the appropriate surgical approach. Although
surgical repair may result in improved exercise tolerance for some
individuals, usually observed at submaximal exercise intensities,
many patients do not show improvement in either respiratory or cardiac function. Normalization of lung perfusion scans and maximal
voluntary ventilation have also been observed after surgery. Use of a
magnetic brace with gradual remodeling (Magnetic Mini Mover procedure) of the pectus deformity is under clinical investigation, with some
promising results seen for prepubertal children. Surgically placed silicone implants for cosmetic appearance have also been used with high
patient satisfaction. For selected patients, the use of a more noninvasive
approach (i.e., cup suction) has been gaining popularity. Regardless of
the treatment approach, addressing secondary musculoskeletal findings is commonly employed before and after any intervention.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

467.2 Pectus Carinatum and Sternal Clefts
Steven R. Boas and Catherine Kier

PECTUS CARINATUM

Pectus carinatum is a sternal deformity accounting for 5–15% of congenital chest wall anomalies. Anterior displacements of the mid and
lower sternum and adjacent costal cartilages are the most common
types. They are most commonly associated with protrusion of the
upper sternum; depression of the lower sternum occurs in only 15% of
patients. Asymmetry of the sternum is common, and localized depression of the lower anterolateral chest is also often observed. Males are
affected four times more often than females. There is a high familial
occurrence and a common association of mild to moderate scoliosis.
Mitral valve disease and coarctation of the aorta are associated with
this anomaly. Three types of anatomic deformity occur (upper, lower,
and lateral pectus carinatum), with corresponding physiologic changes
and treatment algorithms.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

In early childhood, symptoms appear minimal. School-­age children
and adolescents commonly complain of dyspnea with mild exertion,
decreased endurance with exercise, and exercise-­induced wheezing.
The incidence of increased respiratory infections and use of asthma

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2714 Part XVII u The Respiratory System

Fig. 467.1 Pectus excavatum in a 15-­yr-­old male. Note the presence
of protracted shoulders, inferior rib flares, and sternal depression.

medication is higher than in nonaffected individuals. On physical
examination, a marked increase in the anteroposterior chest diameter
is seen, with a resultant reduction in chest excursion and expansion
(Fig. 467.2). Spirometry has demonstrated both restrictive and obstructive patterns, although the majority of individuals have normal values.
Increases in residual volume are often present and result in tachypnea
and diaphragmatic respirations. Exercise testing shows variable results.
Chest radiographs show an increased anteroposterior diameter of the
chest wall, emphysematous-­appearing lungs, and a narrow cardiac
shadow. The pectus severity score (width of chest divided by distance
between sternum and spine; analogous to the Haller index) is reduced.

TREATMENT

For symptomatic patients with pectus carinatum, minimally invasive
surgical correction procedures may result in an improvement of the
clinical symptoms. Many surgeons prefer to use bracing techniques as
a first-­line treatment, especially for younger patients. Although surgery
is performed for some individuals who are symptomatic, it is often performed for cosmetic and psychologic reasons.

STERNAL CLEFTS

Sternal clefts are rare congenital malformations that result from the
failure of the fusion of the sternum during the eighth week of gestation.
No familial predisposition has been described. Sternal clefts occur in
less than 1% of all chest wall deformities. Sternal clefts are classified as
partial or complete. Partial sternal clefts are more common and may
involve the superior sternum in association with other lesions, such
as vascular dysplasias and supraumbilical raphe, or the inferior sternal
clefts, which are often associated with other midline defects (pentalogy of Cantrell). Complete sternal clefts with complete failure of sternal fusion are rare. These disorders may also occur in isolation. The
paradoxic movement of thoracic organs with respiration may alter pulmonary mechanics. Rarely, respiratory infections and even significant
compromise result. Surgery is required early in life before fixation and
immobility occur.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Fig. 467.2 Pectus carinatum in a 13-­yr-­old male. Note the central
sternal prominence.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Most patients with this disorder die shortly after birth from respiratory failure, although less-­aggressive forms have been reported in older
children. For those who survive the neonatal period, progressive respiratory failure often ensues, owing to impaired lung growth, recurrent
pneumonia, and atelectasis originating from the rigid chest wall.

DIAGNOSIS

Physical examination reveals a narrowed thorax that, at birth, is much
smaller than the head circumference. The ribs are horizontal, and the
child has short extremities. Chest radiographs demonstrate a bell-­
shaped chest cage with short, horizontal, flaring ribs, and high clavicles.

TREATMENT

No specific treatment exists, although thoracoplasty to enlarge the
chest wall and long-­term mechanical ventilation have been tried. Rib-­
expanding (vertical expandable prosthetic titanium rib [VEPTR]) procedures have resulted in improved survival (Fig. 467.3).

PROGNOSIS

For some children with asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy, improvement
in the bony abnormalities occurs with age. However, children younger
than age 1 year often succumb to respiratory infection and failure. Progressive renal disease often occurs in older children. Use of vaccines
for influenza and other respiratory pathogens is warranted, as is the
aggressive use of antibiotics for respiratory infections.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

467.3 Asphyxiating Thoracic Dystrophy
(Thoracic-­Pelvic-­Phalangeal
Dystrophy)
Steven R. Boas and Catherine Kier
A multisystem autosomal recessive disorder, asphyxiating thoracic
dystrophy results in a constricted and narrow rib cage. Also known as
Jeune syndrome, the disorder is associated with characteristic skeletal
abnormalities as well as variable involvement of other systems, including renal, hepatic, neurologic, pancreatic, and retinal abnormalities
(see Chapter 741).

467.4 Achondroplasia
Steven R. Boas and Catherine Kier
Achondroplasia is the most common condition characterized by disproportionate short stature (see Chapter 737). This condition is inherited as an autosomal dominant disorder that results in disordered
growth. Much has been learned about this disorder, including its
genetic origins (95% of cases are caused by pathogenic variants in the
gene coding for fibroblast growth factor receptor type 3) and how to
minimize its serious complications.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 467 u Skeletal Diseases Influencing Pulmonary Function

2715

their teen years and during periods of rapid growth. The cause is
unknown. Congenital scoliosis is uncommon, affecting females more
than males, and is apparent in the first year of life (see Chapter 720.2).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

A

B

Fig. 467.3 A, Seven-mo-­old with Jeune syndrome preoperatively. B,

18 mo after VEPTR insertion. (From Mayer OH. Chest wall hypoplasia—
principles and treatment. Pediatr Respir Rev. 2015;16:30–34, Fig. 3.)

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Restrictive pulmonary disease, affecting <5% of children with achondroplasia who are younger than 3 years, is more likely at high elevation.
Recurrent infections, cor pulmonale, and dyspnea are commonly associated. There is an increased risk of obstructive sleep apnea or hypopneas. Hypoxemia during sleep is a common feature. Risk of airway
malacia is greater than the general population. Onset of restrictive lung
disease can begin at a very young age. On examination, the breathing
pattern is rapid and shallow, with associated abdominal breathing. The
anteroposterior diameter of the thorax is reduced. Special growth curves
for chest circumference of patients with achondroplasia from birth to
7 years are available. Three distinct phenotypes exist: phenotypic group
1 patients possess relative adenotonsillar hypertrophy, group 2 patients
have muscular upper airway obstruction and progressive hydrocephalus, and group 3 patients have upper airway obstruction without hydrocephalus. Kyphoscoliosis may develop during infancy.

DIAGNOSIS

Pulmonary function tests reveal a reduced vital capacity that is more
pronounced in males. The lungs are small but functionally normal.
Sleep studies are recommended because of the high prevalence of sleep-­
disordered breathing. Chest radiographs demonstrate the decreased
anteroposterior diameter along with anterior cupping of the ribs. The
degree of foramen magnum involvement correlates with the extent of
respiratory dysfunction.

TREATMENT

Treatment of sleep apnea, if present, is supportive (see Chapter 31).
Physiotherapy and bracing may minimize the complications of both
kyphosis and severe lordosis. Aggressive treatment of respiratory infections and scoliosis is warranted.

PROGNOSIS

The life span is normal for most children with this condition, except
for the phenotypic groups with hydrocephalus or with severe cervical
or lumbar spinal compression.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

467.5 Kyphoscoliosis: Adolescent Idiopathic
Scoliosis and Congenital Scoliosis
Steven R. Boas and Catherine Kier
Adolescent idiopathic scoliosis (AIS) is characterized by lateral bending of the spine (see Chapter 720). It commonly affects children during

The pulmonary manifestations of scoliosis may include chest wall
restriction, leading to a reduction in total lung capacity, abnormal gas
exchange, airway obstruction, and hypoinflation with associated atelectasis. The angle of scoliosis deformity has been correlated with the
degree of lung impairment only for patients with thoracic curves. Vital
capacity, forced expiratory volume in 1 sec (FEV1), work capacity, oxygen consumption, diffusion capacity, chest wall compliance, and partial
pressure of arterial oxygen decrease as the severity of thoracic curve
increases. These findings can be seen in even mild to moderate AIS
(Cobb angle <30 degrees) but generally do not occur in other, nonthoracic curves. Respiratory compromise is often more severe in children younger than 5 years of age with large scoliotic curves. Reduction
in peripheral muscle function is associated with AIS through either
intrinsic mechanisms or deconditioning. Severe impairment can lead
to cor pulmonale or respiratory failure and can occur before 20 years
old. Children with severe scoliosis (Cobb’s angle >70 degrees), especially males, may have abnormalities of breathing during sleep, and the
resultant periods of hypoxemia may contribute to the eventual development of pulmonary hypertension.

DIAGNOSIS

Physical examination and an upright, posteroanterior radiograph with
subsequent measurement of the angle of curvature (Cobb technique)
remain the gold standard for the assessment of scoliosis. Curves >10
degrees define the presence of scoliosis. Lung volume, respiratory muscle strength, and exercise capacity determination are essential in assessing the degree of respiratory compromise associated with scoliosis.

TREATMENT

Depending on the extent of the curve and the degree of skeletal maturation, treatment options include reassurance, observation, physical
therapy, bracing, and surgery (spinal fusion). Influenza vaccine should
be administered, given the extent of pulmonary compromise that may
coexist. Because vital capacity is a strong predictor for the development
of respiratory failure in untreated AIS, surgical goals are to diminish
the scoliotic curve, maintain the correction, and prevent deterioration
in pulmonary function. Abnormalities of vital capacity and total lung
capacity, exercise intolerance, and the rate of change of these variables
over time should be taken into consideration for the timing of surgical correction. Preoperative assessment of lung function (i.e., lung volumes, oxygen consumption, muscle strength, ventilation/perfusion)
may assist in predicting postsurgical pulmonary difficulties. Many
patients undergoing surgical correction may be managed postoperatively without mechanical ventilation. Even patients with mild scoliosis
may have pulmonary compromise immediately after spinal fusion, secondary to pain, and a body cast that may restrict breathing and interfere with coughing. Children with a preoperative FEV1 <40% predicted
are at risk for requiring prolonged postoperative mechanical ventilation. Rib-­expanding procedures have been successful in severe cases of
congenital scoliosis. Choice of surgical approach may also impact lung
function postoperatively.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

467.6 Congenital Rib Anomalies
Steven R. Boas and Catherine Kier
Isolated defects of the highest and lowest ribs have minimal clinical
pulmonary consequences. Missing midthoracic ribs are associated
with the absence of the pectoralis muscle (Poland syndrome), and lung
function can become compromised. Associated kyphoscoliosis and
hemivertebrae may accompany this defect. If the rib defect is small,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2716 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
no significant sequelae ensue. When the second to fifth ribs are absent
anteriorly, lung herniation and significant abnormal respiration ensue.
The lung is soft and nontender and may be easily reducible on examination. Complicating sequelae include severe lung restriction (secondary
to scoliosis), cor pulmonale, and congestive heart failure. Symptoms
are often minimal but can cause dyspnea. Respiratory distress is rare
in infancy.

DIAGNOSIS

Chest radiographs demonstrate the deformation and absence of ribs
with secondary scoliosis. Most rib abnormalities are discovered as incidental findings on a chest film.

TREATMENT

If symptoms are severe enough to cause clinical compromise or significant lung herniation, then homologous rib grafting can be performed.
Rib-­expanding procedures are also of great value. A modified Nuss
procedure has been used to correct associated chest wall anomalies
with rib abnormalities. Adolescent girls with congenital rib anomalies
may require cosmetic breast surgery.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 468

Chronic Respiratory
Insufficiency
468.1 Chronic Respiratory Failure and Long-­
Term Mechanical Ventilation
Denise M. Goodman and Steven O. Lestrud
Care has improved for the growing population of children with
chronic respiratory failure requiring invasive (ventilation through
a tracheostomy) and noninvasive (mask ventilation) ventilation,
including those with predisposing conditions such as acute respiratory failure, prematurity, and neuromuscular disease. Although it
is difficult to determine the prevalence of chronic ventilation, estimates range from approximately 4-­6/100,000 children, or 3,000-­
4,000 children nationally who receive home ventilation. There may
be roughly three times more children receiving mask ventilation than
invasive mechanical ventilation. The conditions leading to the need
for home ventilation are diverse. About 65% of children have a primary neurologic indication, including neuromuscular weakness or
abnormal ventilatory control, and ∼30% have chronic lung disease
(Table 468.1).
Patients with primarily pulmonary indications have a greater likelihood of ultimately being weaned from the need for ventilation than
do those with neuromuscular or central nervous system disease. Mortality for patients requiring chronic ventilation is ∼12–34%, depending on underlying disease. The lower mortality range is for children
with neonatal lung disease, with the higher value for children with
complex congenital heart disease. Approximately 12–40% of children
are eventually weaned from ventilation and decannulated, reflecting
the underlying cause for which ventilation is required. This can usually be accomplished within the first 5 years of life. Nonetheless, the
care of these children can be challenging. One study reported that

Table 468.1   Indications for Long-­Term Mechanical
Ventilation
PULMONARY/ALVEOLAR
Bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD)
Severe acquired lung disease, such as after pediatric acute
respiratory distress syndrome (PARDS)
Pulmonary fibrosis syndromes
AIRWAY
Severe tracheomalacia
Severe bronchomalacia
Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA)
Storage diseases
CHEST
Kyphoscoliosis
Skeletal dysplasias
Obesity
NEUROMUSCULAR
Spinal muscular atrophy
Spinal cord injury
Diaphragmatic dysfunction
Mitochondrial diseases
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM (CNS)
Congenital central hypoventilation syndrome (CCHS)
Rapid-­onset obesity with hypothalamic dysregulation, hypoventilation,
and autonomic dysfunction (ROHHAD)
Severe ischemic brain injury
Myelomeningocele with Arnold-­Chiari type II malformation
Acquired hypoventilation syndromes

up to 40% of chronically ventilated children are readmitted within
the first year of discharge, usually within the first 3 months. Children requiring long-­term mechanical ventilation (LMV) benefit from
comprehensive care coordination incorporating generalists, specialists, home nursing, therapies, and a durable medical equipment
(DME) resource.

MODALITIES FOR RESPIRATORY SUPPORT

The goals of home mechanical ventilation are to maintain adequate
oxygenation and ventilation, minimizing metabolic demands of
chronic respiratory failure to ensure adequate somatic growth and
optimal developmental gains.

Invasive Positive Pressure Ventilation

The term invasive designates ventilation through a tracheostomy. Some
devices are suitable for both noninvasive positive pressure ventilation
(NPPV) and invasive ventilation, whereas other devices are suitable
for only one approach. The ideal home ventilator is lightweight, portable, and quiet. All home ventilators differ from hospital-­based ventilators in that air movement is affected either by a piston or turbine
that is electrically controlled. This contrasts with hospital ventilators,
which are often gas-­driven. A home ventilator should be able to provide continuous flow and have a wide range of settings (particularly for
pressure, volume, pressure support, and rate) that allows ventilatory
support from infancy to adulthood. Battery power for the ventilator,
both internal and external, should be sufficient to permit unrestricted
portability in the home and community. The equipment must also be
impervious to electromagnetic interference and must be relatively easy
to understand and troubleshoot.
Although families and care teams may at first resist placement, a
tracheostomy has several advantages. It provides a secure and stable
airway, a standardized interface for attaching the ventilator circuit
to the patient, and the ability to easily remove airway secretions and
deliver inhaled medications. Pediatric tracheostomy tubes typically
have a single lumen and may have an inflatable cuff. Tracheostomy
tubes with and without cuff inflation should be sized to control the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 468 u Chronic Respiratory Insufficiency
air leak around the tube and promote adequate gas exchange, yet
allow enough space around the tube to facilitate vocalization and
prevent tracheal irritation and erosion from the tube. The child’s
caregivers need to learn stoma care, elective and emergent tracheostomy changes, proper securing of the tube, suctioning of secretions, and recognition of emergencies such as tube obstruction or
decannulation.

Optimal Ventilator Support

Factors such as underlying neuromuscular disease; medications such
as sedatives, analgesics, steroids, and muscle relaxants; and prolonged
immobility, as well as use of mechanical ventilation, may decondition
the respiratory muscles and the diaphragm, resulting in muscle weakness. Consequently, it is important to avoid 24 hour a day patient synchrony with ventilation and titrate the amount of ventilator support
to prevent fatigue yet facilitate spontaneous breathing. While assessing
ventilator needs, frequent evaluation of gas exchange is needed and can
usually be done noninvasively. Ventilator settings should be stable for
a given period, dictated by the severity of pulmonary disease, before
discharge home.

OTHER MANAGEMENT CONSIDERATIONS
Airway Clearance

One of the most important considerations is maintenance of airway
patency. Adequate removal of secretions may minimize intercurrent pulmonary infections. In turn, infections may cause a transient
increase in secretions, requiring an escalation of clearance strategies.
If the child has an adequate cough, then periodic suctioning may be
all that is needed. Some children, however, need additional help mobilizing and clearing secretions. This becomes particularly important in
children with neuromuscular disease, for whom regularly scheduled
clearance therapies are an imperative. Vest therapy (high-­frequency
chest wall oscillation) uses an inflatable vest that encircles the chest.
Air inflates and deflates the vest with phasic pulses against the chest
wall, loosening secretions. This device still requires a preserved and
strong enough cough to expel secretions. The cough assist device
provides more active airway clearance, delivering a forceful positive
pressure adjunct during inspiration and active negative pressure during expiration. Thus the cough is more effective because of the rapid
pressure changes. The cough assist can be used with an artificial airway
or mask. Controls will set the inspiratory and expiratory pressures and
periods.

Inhalation Medications

Clearance of secretions may be promoted with delivery of hypertonic
(3% saline) nebulizations. These are often timed to cough-­assist sessions to maximize the clearance benefits of both. Children requiring
ventilation also commonly need bronchodilators.

Mucolytics and Anticholinergics

Some patients may need additional interventions as a result of excess
secretions. Anticholinergic drugs, principally glycopyrrolate, are
often effective, but must be dosed carefully to avoid thickening secretions excessively, which can lead to inspissated secretions and life-­
threatening plugging of the airway. Oral secretions are sometimes
amenable to localized injection of botulinum toxin or select surgical
ligation of salivary ducts. It is also wise to ensure that the patient is adequately hydrated, as dehydration may produce thick tenacious secretions. At times a mucolytic may be used. Hypertonic saline is the most
common mucolytic, but a number of other agents have been tried, such
as dornase alfa and N-­acetylcysteine.

Monitoring

A patient who is ventilated in the home must be electronically and/or
physically monitored at all times. Infants and young children, children
who are cognitively impaired, and children who are completely tracheostomy dependent for airway patency because of suprastomal obstruction must be under direct observation of the caregivers at all times.

2717

Caregivers should also closely monitor children whose pulmonary status is fragile or fluctuant. Continuous monitoring of O2 saturation and
heart rate is recommended during sleep and either continuous or intermittent monitoring during the daytime, depending on patient stability.
Patients with congenital central hypoventilation syndrome (CCHS)
or pulmonary hypertension are particularly vulnerable to episodes of
hypoxemia and/or hypercarbia, and those with pulmonary hypertension are particularly susceptible to rapid drops in O2 saturation.

Supplemental Oxygen

Supplemental oxygen may be delivered from a tank or concentrator.
Whether on room air or oxygen at baseline, even mild intercurrent
infections may lead to an increase in oxygen requirement. In these
situations, the child should be evaluated in person rather than over the
phone to ensure that a more serious illness is not developing.

Physical, Occupational, and Speech Therapy

The technology needed to support physical well-­being should not
overshadow the inherent needs common to all children—to play, grow,
develop, and interact. Ongoing physical therapy, occupational therapy,
and speech therapy can help a child reach full potential, and many
achieve complete catch-­up development. Early intervention programs
and access to play groups are important factors to attaining cognitive
and social milestones. When typical development is not attainable,
therapies can improve mobilization and muscle strength. Core trunk
and abdominal strength is particularly important for pulmonary rehabilitation and essential for successful weaning off ventilation. Other
important skills include oromotor skills for feeding and communication. Evaluation of swallow is a key component of therapy for children
with chronic respiratory failure. Sign language is frequently used for
communication because of delayed speech or hearing loss. Audiology
specialists should be involved in the assessment of hearing because
there is a higher incidence of hearing loss in patients undergoing long-­
term ventilation.

PREPARING FOR DISCHARGE

A number of threads need to come together for a safe and effective discharge, including medical stability, family education, financial support
(insurance or a state waiver program), availability of a DME company,
and, when appropriate, home private-­duty nursing. A poor outcome
may occur with any of the many medical or process factors or family factors, including not only education but also home readiness and
psychosocial supports. A standardized discharge process can ensure
that all details are addressed, minimizing length of stay and improving
safety. An awake and attentive trained caregiver should be in the home
of a child with invasive ventilation at all times; this expectation may
differ for those receiving NPPV depending on clinical circumstance.
For those receiving invasive ventilation, the caregiver may be a nurse,
but nursing resources are often scarce, so many programs require two
trained family caregivers. The training given to the family includes tracheostomy stoma care, suctioning, equipment expertise, administration of medications, and facility with other devices, such as gastrostomy
tubes. In addition, the family is instructed in emergency preparedness,
including what to do for acute changes in clinical status, desaturation,
or airway obstruction or decannulation. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation training is essential. Parents also need to be able to travel portably
with the child and equipment. A standardized emergency bag containing critical tracheostomy and ventilator supplies should accompany
the child at all times. Other preparations center around home readiness, including accessibility (number of stairs, if any), members of the
household, assuring no smoking in the home, and notification of utility
companies such as the electric or heating company to ensure the home
is serviced quickly in the event of power interruption. The family must
also have a functioning telephone to ensure adequate accessibility and
communication between the family and care team. For those going
home with invasive mechanical ventilation, both a primary and backup
ventilator may be needed, as well as batteries, a self-­inflating bag and
mask, suctioning equipment, supplemental oxygen, and appropriate monitoring, including a pulse oximeter. The use of high-­fidelity

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2718 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
simulation as a means to rehearse skills is increasing. Family training
often culminates in an autonomous 24-­hour stay in the hospital during which time one caregiver must continuously remain awake, and
all cares, including ventilator checks, suctioning, tracheostomy tube
changes, medications, and the like, are provided by the family.
See Chapter 468.4.

mechanical ventilation device. Successful liberation from mechanical ventilation, if it occurs, often takes place between the ages of 2
and 5 years. One thought is that with ambulation and development
of core strength, respiratory reserve improves, facilitating weaning.
Even so, residual lung disease is common. Children with a history of
bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD) and previous ventilator dependence often have significant airway obstruction on pulmonary function testing.

Nutrition

PSYCHOSOCIAL CONSIDERATIONS

CARE BY THE GENERAL PEDIATRICIAN

Ventilated patients may have nutritional needs that are equal to, greater
than, or lesser than those of comparably aged well children. Growth
should be tracked at each well child and subspecialty visit. Excessive
growth is as harmful as inadequate growth, and excess calories may
lead to increased carbon dioxide (CO2) production. Anthropometry or
measured energy expenditure may be needed to assure a more precise
prescription of nutritional support. Many children with tracheostomies have oral aversion and/or dyscoordination of swallowing, with
resultant risk for aspiration. In these children a gastrostomy tube may
ensure adequate nutrition in the interim, while ongoing speech therapy
promotes oral feeding.

Infections

Tracheitis (see Chapter 433.2), bronchiolitis (see Chapter 439), and
pneumonia (see Chapter 449) are common in patients with chronic
respiratory failure. Infections may be caused by community-­acquired
viruses (adenovirus, influenza, respiratory syncytial virus, parainfluenza, rhinovirus) or community-­or hospital-­acquired bacteria. Common pathogens are gram-­
negative, highly antimicrobial-­
resistant
pathogens that may cause further deterioration in pulmonary function.
Bacterial infection is most likely in the presence of fever, deteriorating
lung function (hypoxia, hypercarbia, tachypnea, and retractions), leukocytosis, and mucopurulent sputum. The presence of leukocytes and
organisms on Gram stain of tracheal aspirate, along with the visualization of new infiltrates on radiographs, may be consistent with bacterial
infection.
Infection must be distinguished from tracheal colonization of bacteria, which is asymptomatic and associated with normal amounts
of clear tracheal secretions. Colonization may also be distinguished
from infection in that colonization usually has few, if any, white blood
cells on Gram stain of tracheal secretions. If infection is suspected,
it must be treated with antibiotics, based on the culture and sensitivities of organisms recovered from the tracheal aspirate. At times
an inhaled antibiotic such as tobramycin might avert progression of
infection. Antibiotics should be used judiciously to prevent further
colonization with drug-­resistant organisms. However, some patients
who have recurrent infections may benefit from prophylaxis with
inhaled antibiotics. Clinical decisions will be based on the child’s
appearance, any increased need for ventilation or supplemental oxygen, and consultation with the subspecialist. A final caveat is that if
a respiratory viral panel is desired, this must be obtained from nasal
secretions similar to a well child; tracheal aspirate does not provide
an appropriate specimen.

CARE BY THE SUBSPECIALTY TEAM
Weaning Off of the Ventilator

Typically, the ventilator settings are reduced, minimizing ventilator
parameters to achieve physiologic respiratory rates and 6-­8 mL/kg
tidal volumes. Subsequent maneuvers will evaluate the patient free
breathing, initially with simple observed transition times of 5-­10 minutes, extending time off as clinically indicated. This can be done in the
outpatient setting during visits with the pulmonologist or other subspecialist responsible for ventilator management. Additional factors
that reflect tolerance of increased work of breathing, including weight
gain, energy levels, general behavior, and sleep patterns, are also
monitored carefully. When the child has completely weaned off ventilator support while awake and is only on the ventilator approximately
6 hours nightly during sleep, a polysomnogram study performed off
the ventilator may be considered before complete liberation from the

Caring for a child on long-­term ventilatory support in the home is a
complex, physically demanding, emotionally taxing, and expensive
process for the family. It changes the family routines, priorities, and
overall lifestyle and may adversely affect relationships both within the
family and with extended family and friends. Practical considerations
include loss of spontaneity in family outings, sleep disturbance, extra
expenses, having strangers in the house providing care, and adhering
to medical regimens and follow-­up visits. Intangible stresses are also
prominent, including disruption in the usual parent–child caregiving
roles and stresses between parent partners and with other children. The
loss of normality, sense of isolation, and concerns regarding what is
best for the child are additional sources of distress. All of these stresses
are exacerbated by challenges in securing reliable home private-­duty
nurse resources; this issue may delay hospital discharge and complicate
postdischarge care, at times even leading to readmission because of lack
of adequate support. For children with a life-­limiting condition, there
is the additional need to periodically revisit the child’s current medical
state, sense of well-­being, and trajectory of illness, as critical decisions
will eventually arise regarding end-­of-­life care. The general pediatrician can often be a familiar and comfortable safe place to explore these
issues, as parents may be conflicted in wanting to be a “good” parent
while feeling guilty about their own needs and vulnerabilities. Finally,
families may find transportation to frequent outpatient visits difficult;
telemedicine may offer an alternative for select situations.

ADULT TRANSITION

There are a growing number of children surviving into adulthood who
require chronic ventilation. There are little empiric data regarding this
transition, including identifying patients for whom transition is appropriate, implementing a standardized transition process, partnering
with adult pulmonologists, or replicating in an adult environment the
care coordination provided by the pediatric care team. The pulmonary
team ideally initiates ongoing discussions regarding self-­care responsibilities and transitioning of medical care to adult providers with the
adolescent and his or her parents when the patient reaches the early
teens. Discussion about self-­care should take into consideration realistic expectations about the adolescent’s physical and cognitive capabilities. The actual transition of care occurs for most young adults at
age 18-­21 years and includes referral to an internist and an adult pulmonologist. Transition of medical care also includes transition from
pediatric to adult support services for funding sources and nursing
care. Ideally, an outpatient visit that includes current and future adult
medical providers together is completed to facilitate communication
and formally transition care.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

468.2 Congenital Central Hypoventilation
Syndrome
Amy Zhou, Susan M. Slattery, Casey M. Rand, and
Debra E. Weese-­Mayer
CCHS is a clinically complex neurocristopathy that includes a variable severity of respiratory and autonomic dysregulation, as well as
Hirschsprung disease and neural crest tumors in a subset of patients.
In the classic CCHS presentation, symptoms of alveolar hypoventilation manifest in the newborn period and during sleep only—with

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 468 u Chronic Respiratory Insufficiency
Table 468.2  Clinical Manifestations of CCHS
ORGAN SYSTEM

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Ophthalmologic

Decreased/absent pupillary light response
Anisocoria
Strabismus
Lack of convergent gaze
Marcus Gunn jaw winking

Respiratory

Alveolar hypoventilation
Absent perception of dyspnea

Cardiovascular

Bradycardia
Prolonged sinus pauses (>3 seconds)
Transient asystole
Decreased heart rate variability
Low normal daytime blood pressure
Orthostatic hypotension
Nondipping blood pressure circadian
pattern
Decreased BP response to exercise
Syncope

Gastrointestinal

Hirschsprung disease (20%)
Constipation
Esophageal dysmotility

Endocrine

Hyperinsulinism
Hypoglycemia
Hyperglycemia

Neurologic

Decreased anxiety
Decreased pain perception
Seizures
Neurocognitive deficits

Skin

Sporadic profuse sweating

Tumors

Neuroblastoma
Ganglioneuroma
Ganglioneuroblastoma

Others

Decreased baseline body temperature
Poor heat tolerance

CCHS, Congenital central hypoventilation syndrome; BP, blood pressure; GI,
gastrointestinal.
From Bishara J, Keens TG, Perez IA. The genetics of congenital central hypoventilation
syndrome: clinical implications. App Clin Genetics. 2018;11:135–144, Table 1. Originally
published by and used with permission from Dove Medical Press Ltd.

diminished tidal volume and a typically monotonous respiratory rate
leading to cyanosis and hypercarbia. In more severe cases of CCHS,
the hypoventilation manifests during wakefulness and sleep. In the
later-­onset cases of CCHS (LO-­CCHS), onset of overt symptoms
is delayed until 1 month of age or older (often into childhood and
adulthood). Hypoventilation is typically during sleep only and usually milder in LO-­CCHS. CCHS and LO-­CCHS are further characterized by partial to complete failure of peripheral and central
chemoreceptors to properly respond to hypercarbia and hypoxemia
during wakefulness and sleep, coupled with physiologic and/or anatomic autonomic nervous system (ANS) dysregulation (ANSD).
Physiologic dysregulation may include all organ systems affected by
the ANS, specifically the respiratory, cardiac, sudomotor, vasomotor, ophthalmologic, neurologic, and enteric systems (Table 468.2).
The anatomic or structural ANSD includes Hirschsprung disease and
tumors of neural crest origin (neuroblastoma, ganglioneuroma, or
ganglioneuroblastoma).

GENETICS

The PHOX2B gene is the disease-­defining gene for CCHS. PHOX2B
encodes a highly conserved homeodomain transcription factor, is
essential to the embryologic development of the ANS from the neural
crest, and is expressed in key regions and systems that explain much

2719

of the CCHS phenotype. Individuals with CCHS are heterozygous for
either a polyalanine repeat expansion pathogenic variant (PARPV)
in exon 3 of the PHOX2B gene (normal number of alanines is 20 with
normal genotype 20/20), such that individuals with CCHS have 24-­
33 alanines on the affected allele (genotype range is 20/24-­20/33), or
a nonpolyalanine repeat expansion pathogenic variant (NPARPV)
resulting from a missense, nonsense, frameshift, stop codon, in-­frame
indels (in-­frame insertions, deletions, or duplications), full exon/gene
deletions, or splice-­
site pathologic genetic variant. Approximately
90–92% of cases of CCHS have PARPVs and the remaining 8–10% of
cases have NPARPVs (Table 468.3).
Stepwise clinical PHOX2B testing for probands with the CCHS phenotype is advised. Step 1: PHOX2B screening test (fragment analysis),
then if negative; Step 2: PHOX2B sequencing test, then if negative;
Step 3: PHOX2B multiplex ligation-­dependent probe amplification
(MLPA) test to minimize the risk of false-­negative findings, minimize
the expense and need for more than one blood sample, and expedite
confirmation of the diagnosis.
Genetic counseling is essential for family planning and for delivery
room preparation in anticipation of a CCHS birth and ensuring adequate ventilation for the mother during pregnancy. PHOX2B testing
is also advised for both parents of a child with CCHS to anticipate the
risk of recurrence in subsequent pregnancies (if mosaic) and to determine if a parent has yet-­undiagnosed LO-­CCHS. Fragment analysis
PHOX2B testing (also known as the screening test) will best identify
low-­level somatic mosaicism. Prenatal testing for a PHOX2B variant
is clinically available (www.genetests.org) for families with a known
PHOX2B gene variant.

Ventilator Dependence and Control of Breathing

Patients with CCHS have deficient CO2 sensitivity during wakefulness
and sleep such that they do not respond with a normal increase in
ventilation in either state, nor do they arouse in response to hypercarbia and/or hypoxemia during sleep. During wakefulness, a subset
of patients may respond sufficiently to avoid significant hypercarbia,
but most individuals with CCHS have hypoventilation that is severe
enough that hypercarbia is apparent in the resting awake state. Children with CCHS also have altered sensitivity to hypoxia while awake
and asleep. A key feature of CCHS is the lack of respiratory distress
or sense of asphyxia with physiologic compromise (hypercarbia and/
or hypoxemia). This lack of responsiveness to hypercarbia and/or
hypoxemia, which can result in respiratory failure, does not consistently improve with advancing age. A subset of older children with
CCHS may show an increase in ventilation (specifically an increase
in respiratory rate rather than an increase in tidal volume) when they
are exercised at various work rates. This response is possibly secondary to neural reflexes from rhythmic limb movements, although an
increase in minute ventilation is often insufficient to avoid physiologic
compromise.
The greater the number of extra alanines, the more likely the need
for continuous ventilatory support, at least among the most common PHOX2B PARPV genotypes (20/25, 20/26, 20/27). Although
PHOX2B genotype seems to anticipate the severity of hypoventilation, it does not correlate with exogenous ventilatory challenge
responses. Infants and young children as a group have reasonable
ventilatory response slopes while awake, but this advantage seems to
vanish by school age.

Hirschsprung Disease (see Chapter 378.4)

Overall, 20% of children with CCHS also have Hirschsprung disease (HSCR), known as Haddad syndrome, and any infant or child
with CCHS who presents with constipation should undergo rectal
biopsy to screen for the absence of ganglion cells. The frequency of
Hirschsprung disease seems to increase with the longer polyalanine
repeat tracts (genotypes 20/27-­20/33) and in those with NPARPVs.
Even in cases without frank HSCR disease, individuals with CCHS
may display symptoms of gastrointestinal abnormalities such as severe
constipation and abnormal esophageal motility, suggesting ganglion
cell dysfunction.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2720 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Table 468.3   Congenital Central Hypoventilation Syndrome–Related Symptoms by PARPV vs NPARPV and PARPV Genotype
GENOTYPE
NPARPVS

PARPV GENOTYPE
FEATURE

20/241,
20/25

Respiratory (hypoventilation)

20/26

20/27

NPARPV IN GENERAL

38BP DELETION

Asleep only

Awake with
exertion and
eating and
asleep

Awake and
asleep

Awake and asleep

Awake and asleep

Cardiac arrhythmia:
Abrupt sinus pauses ≥3 seconds
warranting cardiac pacemaker

Variable:
None with
childhood
onset; a
subset
will have
prolonged
sinus
pauses in
adulthood

19%

>80%

None with childhood onset to date

Hirschsprung disease

<0.1%

20–30%

30%

80–90%

∼50+%

~50+%

Severe constipation
Esophageal dysmotility/dysphagia
Neural crest
tumors

95–100% severe
long segment
disease (i.e.,
entire colon
and some small
intestine)

First year of life

First year of life

Neuroblastoma

0%

0%

See footnote 2

50%

Ganglioneuroblastoma

0%

0%

0%

<5%

Ganglioneuroma

0%

0%

0%

<5%

Normal
response

Midsize
pupils with
attenuated
response to
light

Small pupils at
rest; nearly
absent
response to
light

Large pupils at rest; negligible response to
light

ANSD: Pupillary response to light

ANSD, Autonomic nervous system dysregulation; NPARPV, nonpolyalanine repeat expansion pathogenic variant (i.e., missense, nonsense, frameshift, stop codon, splice site); PARPV,
polyalanine repeat expansion pathogenic variant.
1. Genotype 20/24 would be considered a susceptibility allele (needs another factor to manifest) or a low-­or variable-­penetrance allele with features that can be triggered by
pharmacologic agents (a pharmaco-­genetic phenomenon) or a gene × environment interaction (without main effects).
2. Generally 0%; however, an infant with the 20/33 genotype had metastatic neuroblastoma (12).
From Weese-­Mayer DE, Rand CM, Khaytin I, et al. Congenital central hypoventilation syndrome. Updated 2021 Jan 28. In: Adam MP, Ardinger HH, Pagon RA, et al., eds.
GeneReviews [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-­2021. Available from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1427/. Table 2, pp. 7–8.

Tumors of Neural Crest Origin (see Chapter 547)

Tumors of neural crest origin are more frequent in patients with
NPARPVs (50%) than in those with PARPVs (1%). These extracranial
tumors are more often neuroblastomas in individuals with NPARPVs,
but ganglioneuromas and ganglioneuroblastomas occur in a small subset of patients.

Cardiac Asystoles

Transient, abrupt, and prolonged sinus pauses have been identified in
patients with CCHS, necessitating implantation of cardiac pacemakers
when the pauses are ≥3 seconds. Among patients with the most common PHOX2B genotypes, 19% of those with the 20/26 genotype and
83% of those with the 20/27 genotype have cardiac pauses of 3 seconds
or longer. The risk for sinus pauses among children with NPARPVs is
unknown at present.
Heart rate variability is characteristically decreased in CCHS,
likely because of reduced cardiac baroreflex sensitivity and blunted

sympathetic response. One report demonstrated a genotype-­
phenotype relationship for heart rate variability during exogenous ventilatory response testing, prompting assessment of risk
for sinus pauses. Introduction of 72-­hour Holter recordings every
12 months, at a minimum, has allowed for early identification of
these abrupt sinus pauses, permitting timely cardiac pacemaker
implantation.

Autonomic Nervous System Dysregulation

A higher number of polyalanine repeats on the affected allele among
patients with a PARPV is associated with an increased number of
physiologic symptoms of ANSD. In addition, there is a spectrum of
physiologic ANSD symptoms, including decreased heart rate variability, esophageal/gastric/colonic dysmotility, decreased pupillary
response to light, reduced basal body temperature, altered distribution
and amount of diaphoresis, altered vasomotor tone, and altered pain
and anxiety perception.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 468 u Chronic Respiratory Insufficiency
Characteristic Facial Morphology

Characteristic facial features have been described for children with
CCHS. Using facial photogrammetry, five features were used to correctly predict 86% of CCHS cases and 82% of controls in a matched
case control study. A typical CCHS face is characterized by an upper
and midface that is short relative to its width, resulting in a characteristic broad, flat, boxlike appearance (Fig. 468.1). The lateral one third
of the upper lip vermillion border is overturned so it is flesh-­colored
instead of pink. Results also suggest that male CCHS patients are more
strongly affected than females.

Neuropathology

Brain imaging studies and functional MRI (fMRI) responses have
identified structural anomalies in CCHS cases that may contribute
to the observed respiratory and autonomic phenotypes. These findings may be primarily the result of PHOX2B variant–induced failure
of neurogenesis in the human embryo, but a significant contribution
from postnatal hypoxic, hypercarbic, or perfusion damage cannot be
excluded. The neuroanatomic defects in CCHS are likely the result
of focal PHOX2B (mis)expression coupled with sequelae of recurrent hypoxemia/hypercarbia in the subset of suboptimally managed
patients. The following regions pertinent to respiratory control in the
pons and medulla of the brainstem show PHOX2B expression: locus
coeruleus, dorsal respiratory group, nucleus ambiguus, and parafacial
respiratory group, among other areas. Physiologic evidence suggests
that the respiratory failure in these children is mostly based on defects
in central mechanisms, but peripheral mechanisms (mainly carotid
bodies) may also be important.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Patients with CCHS usually present with symptoms in the first few hours
after birth. Most children are the products of uneventful pregnancies
and are term infants with appropriate weight for gestational age. Variable Apgar scores have been reported. The affected infants do not show
signs of respiratory distress, but their shallow respirations and respiratory pauses (apnea) usually evolve to respiratory failure with apparent
cyanosis in the first days of life. In neonates with CCHS, Paco2 accumulates during sleep to very high levels, sometimes >90 mm Hg, and may
decline to normal levels after the infants awaken. This problem becomes
most apparent when multiple attempts at extubation fail in an intubated
neonate who appears well with ventilatory support but develops respiratory failure without respiratory distress after removal of the support.
However, more severely affected infants with CCHS hypoventilate awake

and asleep; thus the previously described difference in Paco2 between
states may not be apparent. Often, the respiratory rate is higher in
rapid eye movement (REM) sleep than in non-­REM sleep in individuals with CCHS, and in general, respiratory rates are higher in infants
and children with CCHS than similarly aged peers with intact control
of breathing.
LO-­CCHS should be suspected in infants, children, and adults who
have unexplained centrally mediated hypoventilation and/or seizures
or cyanosis, especially subsequent to the use of anesthetic agents and/
or sedation, acute respiratory illness or recurrent severe respiratory illness with difficulty weaning from ventilator support (and failed extubations), and potentially obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) unresponsive
to traditional intervention. These individuals may have other evidence
of chronic hypoventilation, including pulmonary hypertension, polycythemia, elevated bicarbonate concentration, difficulty concentrating,
and mild unexplained neurocognitive impairment. A heightened level
of suspicion has led to increasing numbers of older children and adults
diagnosed with LO-­CCHS receiving proper treatment. This later presentation reflects the variable penetrance of a subset of PHOX2B variants and the potential role of an exogenous cofactor in unmasking the
hypoventilation phenotype.
In addition to treatment for the alveolar hypoventilation, children
with CCHS require comprehensive physiologic evaluation during sleep
and wakefulness, including age-­appropriate activities of daily living
such as eating, as their hypoxemia and hypercarbia from insufficient
artificial ventilation may go unnoticed. It is necessary to provide coordinated care to optimally manage associated multisystem abnormalities such as Hirschsprung disease, tumors of neural crest origin, and
symptoms of physiologic ANSD, including cardiac asystole, among
other findings (details provided in American Thoracic Society [ATS]
2010 Statement on CCHS) (Table 468.4).

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Testing should be performed to rule out primary neuromuscular, lung,
and cardiac disease as well as an identifiable brainstem lesion that
could account for the symptoms characteristic of CCHS (Table 468.5).
The availability of clinical PHOX2B genetic testing allows for early and
definitive diagnosis of CCHS (see Table 468.3). Because individual
subfeatures of CCHS mimic many treatable and/or genetic diseases,
the following disorders should also be considered: altered airway or
intrathoracic anatomy (diagnosis made with bronchoscopy and chest
CT), diaphragm dysfunction (diagnosis made with diaphragm fluoroscopy), a structural hindbrain or brainstem abnormality (diagnosis made with MRI of the brain and brainstem), Möbius syndrome
(diagnosis made with MRI of the brain and brainstem and neurologic
examination), and specific metabolic diseases, such as Leigh syndrome,
pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency, and discrete carnitine deficiency.
However, profound hypercarbia without respiratory distress during
sleep will quickly lead the clinician to consider the diagnosis of CCHS
or LO-­CCHS.

MANAGEMENT
Supported Ventilation: Diaphragm Pacing

A

B

Fig. 468.1 Characteristic CCHS facies. Photographs of representative

CCHS. These two children with CCHS both have the representative facies. The female with CCHS (A) has a PHOX2B genotype of 20/25, and
the male with CCHS (B) has a 20/27 genotype. Note the decreases
in sloping of the forehead, upper face height, upper facial inclination,
nasolabial angle, upper and lower lip heights, and the inferior inflection of the lateral vermillion border of the upper lip. (Modified from
Todd ES, Weinberg SM, Berry-­Kravis EM, et al. Facial phenotype in
children and young adults with PHOX2B-­determined congenital central hypoventilation syndrome: quantitative pattern of dysmorphology.
Pediatr Res. 2006;59:39–45, Fig. 2A and 2C.)

2721

Depending on the severity of the hypoventilation, the individual with
CCHS can have various options for artificial ventilation: positive
pressure ventilation (noninvasive via mask or invasive via tracheostomy) or negative pressure ventilation (pneumosuit, chest cuirass, or
diaphragm pacing). Chronic mechanical ventilation is addressed in
Chapters 468.1 and 468.4. Diaphragm pacing offers another mode of
supported ventilation, involving bilateral thoracoscopic implantation
of electrodes beneath the phrenic nerves, with connecting wires to
subcutaneously implanted receivers. The external transmitter, which
is much smaller and lighter in weight than a ventilator, sends a signal to flat, donut-­shaped antennae that are placed on the skin over the
subcutaneously implanted receivers. A signal travels from the external transmitter to the phrenic nerve to stimulate contraction of the
diaphragm. A tracheostomy is typically required, because the pacers
induce a negative pressure on inspiration as a result of the contraction
of the diaphragm being unopposed by pharyngeal dilatation, resulting

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2722 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Table 468.4   Recommended Evaluations in Patients with CCHS
EVALUATION

FREQUENCY

PHOX2B GENOTYPE

Pulmonary

Comprehensive physiologic
testing during sleep and
wakefulness, including
continuous pulse oximetry,
cardiorespiratory monitoring,
capnography, and
polysomnography

<3 yr of age: every 6 mo
≥3 yr: annually

All PHOX2B PARM and NPARM

Cardiovascular

Ambulatory cardiac monitoring
(≥72 hr), blood pressure, and
echocardiogram

Annually

All PHOX2B PARM and NPARM

Gastrointestinal

Barium enema or anorectal
manometry; confirmation by
rectal biopsy

At initial diagnosis and
subsequently if symptoms
appear

20/26-­20/33 PARM and NPARM

Neurodevelopmental

Comprehensive neurocognitive
tests

<3 yr of age: every 6 mo
≥3 yr: annually

All PHOX2B PARM and NPARM

Oncologic

Chest radiograph, abdominal
ultrasound, and urine
catecholamines (homovanillic
acid and vanillylmandelic acid)

0-­6 yr of age: every 3 mo
6-­10 yr of age: every 6 mo
>10 yr of age: per oncologist
recommendation

20/28-­20/33 PARM and NPARM

Ophthalmologic

Comprehensive ocular testing by
an ophthalmologist

Annually

All PHOX2B PARM and NPARM

NPARM, Nonpolyalanine repeat expansion mutation; PARM, polyalanine repeat expansion mutation; PHOX2B, paired-­like homeobox 2B.
Data from the 2010 American Thoracic Society Statement on CCHS Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2010;181:626–644.
From Kasi AS, Li H, Harford KL, et al. Congenital central hypoventilation syndrome: optimizing care with a multidisciplinary approach. J Multidisp Healthcare. 2022;15:455–469, Table 1.
Originally published by and used with permission from Dove Medical Press Ltd.

Table 468.5  Differential Diagnoses of Congenital Central
Hypoventilation Syndrome
METABOLIC
Mitochondrial defects (e.g., Leigh disease)
Pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency
Hypothyroidism
NEUROLOGIC
Structural central nervous system abnormalities (e.g., Arnold Chiari
malformation, Möbius syndrome)
Vascular injury (e.g., central nervous system [CNS] hemorrhage,
infarct)
Trauma
Tumor
PULMONARY
Primary lung disease
Respiratory muscle weakness (e.g., diaphragm paralysis, congenital
myopathy, myasthenia gravis)
GENETIC
Prader-­Willi syndrome
Familial dysautonomia and other neuropathies
OTHER
Sedative drugs
Rapid-­onset obesity, hypothalamic dysregulation hypoventilation,
autonomic dysregulation (ROHHAD)
Modified from Healy F, Marcus CL. Congenital central hypoventilation syndrome in
children. Pediatr Respir Rev. 2011;12:253–263, Table 1.

in airway obstruction with paced breaths. Individuals with CCHS who
are ventilator-­dependent for 24 hours a day are ideal candidates for
diaphragm pacing to provide increased ambulatory freedom (without
the ventilator tether) while they are awake; however, they still require
mechanical ventilator support while they are asleep. This balance
between awake pacing and asleep mechanical ventilation allows for a
rest from phrenic nerve stimulation at night. In addition, a growing
but still limited number of children and adults who require artificial

ventilatory support only during sleep are now using diaphragm pacing.
This is likely because of the introduction of thoracoscopic diaphragm
pacer implantation and shortened postoperative recovery time. However, in the absence of a tracheostomy, diaphragm pacing during sleep
may cause airway obstruction at varied levels of the airway, depending
on the specific patient. The potential for these obstructions needs to
be carefully considered before diaphragm pacer implantation, and certainly before tracheal decannulation.

Monitoring in the Home

Home monitoring for individuals with CCHS and LO-­CCHS is distinctly different from and more conservative than that for other children requiring long-­term ventilation, because CCHS individuals lack
innate ventilatory and arousal responses to hypoxemia and hypercarbia. In the event of physiologic compromise, other non-­CCHS children
will show clinical signs of respiratory distress. By contrast, for children
and adults with CCHS and LO-­CCHS, the only means of determining adequate ventilation and oxygenation is with objective measures
from a pulse oximeter, end-­tidal CO2 monitor, and close supervision
of these values by a highly trained registered nurse (RN) in the home
and at school. While awake, patients with CCHS themselves are unable
to sense or adequately respond to a respiratory challenge that may
occur with ensuing respiratory illness, increased exertion, or even the
simple activity of eating. At a minimum, it is essential that individuals with CCHS have continuous monitoring with pulse oximetry and
end-­tidal CO2 with RN supervision during all sleep time, but ideally
24 hours a day. These recommendations apply to all CCHS and LO-­
CCHS patients regardless of the nature of their artificial ventilatory
support, but especially those with diaphragm pacers, as only the most
recent transmitter has mechanical dysfunction alarms intrinsic to the
diaphragm pacer device.

Noninvasive Ventilatory Support Equipment

Supplemental oxygen with positive pressure support can be administered by nasal cannula, pillows, nasal mask, or full-­face mask via
an actual ventilator, but this is suitable only for highly cooperative
children with milder hypoventilation during sleep only. Long-­term
use of mask ventilation in infants and young children may result in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 468 u Chronic Respiratory Insufficiency
midface dysplasia or pressure wounds. Mask ventilation does not
offer the stable airway provided by a tracheostomy with mechanical
ventilation, especially in the rapidly developing infant and young
child.

Positive Pressure Ventilators

Ideally, a ventilator intended for home use is lightweight and small,
quiet so it does not interfere with activities of daily living or sleep, is
able to entrain room air, preferably has continuous flow, and has a wide
range of settings (particularly for pressure support, pressure, volume,
and rate) that allows ventilatory support from infancy to adulthood.
Battery power for the ventilator, both internal and external, should
be sufficient to permit unrestricted portability in the home and community. The equipment must also be impervious to electromagnetic
interference and must be relatively easy to understand and troubleshoot. Children who are chronically ventilated via positive pressure
ventilation will require surgical placement of a tracheostomy tube. The
tracheostomy tube provides stable access to the airway, a standardized
interface for attaching the ventilator circuit to the patient, and the ability to easily remove airway secretions or deliver inhaled medications.
Pediatric tracheostomy tubes typically have a single lumen and may
have an inflatable tight-­to-­the-­shaft cuff. Tracheostomy tubes with and
without cuff inflation should be sized to control the air leak around
the tube and promote adequate gas exchange yet allow enough space
around the tube to facilitate vocalization and prevent tracheal irritation
and erosion from the tube.

Optimizing Neurocognitive Performance

Impaired oxygen delivery to the brain, whether acute or chronic, can
have detrimental effects on neurocognitive development. The ATS
statement on CCHS recommends positive pressure ventilation via tracheostomy in the first several years of life to ensure optimal oxygenation and ventilation. The method of choice for respiratory support in
later years will depend on a variety of factors, including severity of disease, patient age, level of patient and family cooperation, and availability and quality of home healthcare, among other factors. The level of
oxygen stability obtained with each modality varies. Thus the method
of respiratory assistance, especially in infancy and early childhood, is
likely to play a factor in neurocognitive outcome.
Past literature has indicated reduced neurocognitive performance
in school-­age children with CCHS, with mean full scale intellectual
quotient (IQ) values one standard deviation below the normal IQ
of 100. Even in preschool years, children with CCHS and the 20/26
and 20/27 PHOX2B genotypes demonstrate reduced neurocognitive performance compared to children with the 20/25 genotype. In
these cases, PHOX2B genotype is clearly associated with both mental and motor outcomes. An association is also found between IQ
and CCHS-­related features such as severe cyanotic breath holding
spells, sinus pauses, seizures, and severity of hypoventilation. One
study reported a negative correlation between neurocognitive performance scores and length of polyalanine expansion, suggesting that
both the specific gene variant and ventilatory method may influence
neurocognitive outcome. Findings from a neurocognition study in
preschool-­age children suggest the potential for excellent neurocognitive outcome in some patients with CCHS. Neurodevelopmental
monitoring would be most beneficial beginning in early infancy and
followed closely with advancing age.
Efforts are underway to evaluate and characterize the CCHS phenotype longitudinally through the International CCHS Registry (htt
ps://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT03088020) (Northwestern University). Delineating markers of disease progression and understanding
the clinical manifestations of CCHS with advancing age will provide
more accurate guidelines to healthcare providers, allowing physicians,
families, and patients to better anticipate healthcare needs of affected
individuals and for use as biomarkers for future pharmacologic intervention studies.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

2723

468.3 Rapid-­Onset Obesity with Hypothalamic
Dysfunction, Hypoventilation, and
Autonomic Dysregulation
Sarah F. Barclay, Ilya Khaytin, Amy Zhou,
Casey M. Rand, and Debra E. Weese-­Mayer
Rapid-­onset obesity with hypothalamic dysfunction, hypoventilation,
and autonomic dysregulation (ROHHAD) is a rare, poorly understood
disorder with childhood onset, the first sign of which is sudden, rapid,
and extreme weight gain in a previously healthy child. The acronym
describes the presenting symptoms and the typical order in which they
will manifest or unfold, as the condition evolves over months to years.
Despite its rarity, ROHHAD must be considered whenever rapid-­onset
obesity is observed in a child, because in the absence of appropriate treatment, a high mortality rate is associated with the severe central hypoventilation that will invariably develop.
The diagnosis is initially considered after the observation of rapid-­
onset obesity (15-­20 lb gain) after age 1.5 years, accompanied by at
least one additional sign of hypothalamic dysfunction (HD). Central
hypoventilation may not be present at the time of rapid weight gain but
will develop over time, and artificial ventilatory support will be required
at least during sleep, if not 24 hours a day. Signs of autonomic nervous
system dysregulation typically occur after the weight gain, HD, and
hypoventilation have been identified. Additionally, approximately 40%
of ROHHAD patients will have or develop a tumor of neural crest origin, typically ganglioneuroma or ganglioneuroblastoma (a small number of neuroblastomas have been identified).
ROHHAD is distinct from LO-­
CCHS (see Chapter 468.2).
ROHHAD is primarily distinguished from LO-­CCHS by the presence
of obesity and other signs of HD and by the absence of a CCHS-­related
pathogenic PHOX2B variant.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Children with ROHHAD initially appear healthy, with an unremarkable medical history. The initial symptoms present between ages 18
months and 7 years. Typically, the first symptom observed is rapid-­
onset obesity, with weight gain of 15-­30 lb in 6-­12 months. The growth
charts from a representative child followed longitudinally illustrate
the characteristic accelerated increase in weight and body mass index
(BMI) (Fig. 468.2). This is considered one sign of HD in these patients.
The second common sign of HD, seen in most ROHHAD patients, is
disordered water balance, including hypernatremia and hyponatremia
and both adipsia and polydipsia. Growth hormone (GH) deficiency
is also observed in most patients. In some, this manifests clinically as
slowed growth rate and short stature, whereas in others a failed GH
stimulation test is the only manifestation. Hyperprolactinemia is
observed near universally in patients with ROHHAD. Other symptoms
of HD, occurring in >25–50% of ROHHAD patients, include poor
thermoregulation, central hypothyroidism, central adrenal insufficiency, and delayed or precocious puberty. The number of hypothalamic abnormalities that will be observed and the sequential order
in which they will appear are variable, and some symptoms may not
manifest for months to 1-­2 years after the initial diagnosis. However, all
ROHHAD patients will present with at least one of these signs of HD
beyond the rapid-­onset weight gain.
Sleep-­disordered breathing (SDB) is one of the key symptoms of
ROHHAD, often manifesting as one of the most severe features of the
phenotype, with the greatest potential for severe morbidity and death.
More than half of ROHHAD patients have initial obstructive sleep
apnea (OSA); although SDB is known to be associated with obesity and
OSA is often seen in obese individuals, over time, when the ROHHAD
phenotype unfolds, SDB will evolve beyond what could potentially be
explained as obesity related. All ROHHAD patients will eventually
develop central alveolar hypoventilation, requiring artificial ventilation as life support, even when the upper airway obstruction is relieved
as an intervention for OSA. About half of ROHHAD patients will
require artificial ventilation only during sleep, whereas half will require

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2724 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
hypoventilation because the majority of ROHHAD patients have no
behavioral issues and a normal IQ.
Seizures have been reported in some ROHHAD patients, likely
caused by episodes of hypoxemia, when hypoventilation either has not
yet been diagnosed or has been inadequately managed.

Weight (kg)

80
60

DIAGNOSIS

40
20
0

BMI (%ile)

150
100
50
0

0

5

10

15

Age (years)

Fig. 468.2 Growth curves of weight and body mass index (BMI) from

an individual child with ROHHAD. Weight and BMI percentiles for a
child with ROHHAD from the time of diagnosis until age 14.3 yr, demonstrating the rapid onset of obesity. Weight and BMI percentiles were
calculated using published CDC growth charts and methods. Solid lines
in weight graph represent 3rd, 50th, and 97th percentiles. Dots and
open squares are individual measurements for the child.

continuous artificial ventilation (during sleep and wakefulness). Up to
50% of children with ROHHAD will have a cardiorespiratory arrest
before their hypoventilation is identified and treated. Unfortunately,
many ROHHAD patients die from cardiorespiratory arrest because
of unrecognized or inadequately managed hypoventilation. Thus if a
ROHHAD diagnosis is suspected, it is crucial that a comprehensive
respiratory physiology evaluation be performed, including overnight
polysomnography and awake physiologic recording in activities of
daily living and followed serially long after the hypoventilation is identified and intervention provided.
All ROHHAD patients have symptoms of autonomic nervous
system (ANS) dysregulation (ANSD); the specific symptoms and
the order and timing of their appearance will vary among patients.
The most common manifestations of ANSD in ROHHAD are
ophthalmologic, including pupillary dysfunction, strabismus,
and alacrima. Many ROHHAD patients will have gastrointestinal dysmotility, presenting as either chronic constipation or, less
commonly, chronic diarrhea. Other signs of ANSD include altered
sweating, decreased body temperature, decreased sensitivity to
pain, and cold hands and feet indicating altered vasomotor tone.
Bradycardia is observed in some ROHHAD patients, typically
related to extreme hypothermia.
Neural crest tumors are observed in ∼40% of ROHHAD patients,
most frequently ganglioneuromas and ganglioneuroblastomas of the
chest or abdomen; rarely a neuroblastoma has been reported. These
tumors can occur at any age, so proactive imaging evaluation throughout childhood and adolescence to identify the tumors is essential.
Patients do not always have behavioral or psychologic disorders
if artificial ventilation is optimized. For those who do, however,
the disorders can be quite severe, including anxiety, depression,
rage, lethargy, irritability, aggressiveness, psychosis, and obsessive-­
compulsive disorder. Developmental disorders described include
neurocognitive delay, developmental regression, attention-­deficit/
hyperactivity disorder, and pervasive developmental disorder.
These disorders are most likely accentuated by poorly managed

The diagnostic criteria for ROHHAD include rapid-­onset obesity after
1.5 years of age; central hypoventilation beginning after age 1.5 years;
≥1 of the following signs of HD: disordered water balance, hyperprolactinemia, failed GH stimulation test, central hypothyroidism, corticotropin deficiency, and altered onset of puberty; and features of
autonomic dysregulation. Additionally, it must be confirmed that no
CCHS-­related PHOX2B pathogenic variant is present to rule out a
diagnosis of CCHS or LO-­CCHS.
Because no single diagnostic test is currently available for ROHHAD,
the diagnosis must be based on observation of the clinical presentation and therefore requires expert consultation in multiple pediatric
subspecialties, including respiratory physiology, endocrinology, autonomic medicine, cardiology, oncology, nutrition, critical care, sleep,
and psychiatry, with orchestration by the child’s pediatrician. When a
child with rapid-­onset obesity is seen by a general pediatrician or family
physician, the steep trajectory of weight gain should signal prompt consideration of a ROHHAD diagnosis, with immediate referral to a center
with expertise in this unique constellation of symptoms. Early recognition is critical for a positive outcome in children with ROHHAD. If
alveolar hypoventilation is not identified and aggressively managed, cardiorespiratory arrest can occur and has proved fatal in many cases.
A characteristic set of facial features has been described for CCHS,
which, using facial photogrammetry, is able to identify 86% of genetically confirmed CCHS cases (see Chapter 468.2). Although such
formal evaluation of ROHHAD facies has not been completed, a preliminary report indicates that ROHHAD patients have similar facial
mapping characteristics to CCHS patients, especially the characteristic
“lip trait,” in which the lateral one third of the upper vermillion border is flesh-­colored instead of pink (Fig. 468.3). This is distinct from
the general lip changes observed with increasing BMI in a study of
adolescent females, which include fuller-­looking lips and downturned
corners of the mouth.
Initial evaluations should include overnight polysomnography to
identify OSA or central hypoventilation, awake comprehensive physiologic recording in age-­appropriate activities of daily living, cardiac
evaluation to assess for cor pulmonale and rhythm disturbance, endocrine function evaluation, screening for neural crest tumors (chest
radiograph, abdominopelvic ultrasound, or meta-iodobenzylguanidine [MIBG] scan), and a behavioral and psychological evaluation,
especially if any behavioral, psychologic, or developmental disorders
are seen or suspected. Brain imaging should be performed to rule out
intracranial lesions that may account for the observed hypothalamic-­
pituitary abnormalities (using the hypothalamic-­pituitary protocol).
If the criteria are met and a ROHHAD diagnosis is made, successful
management requires ongoing teamwork among the various subspecialists, with a pediatrician team leader to orchestrate all testing, the
family, and the child to provide optimized integrated care for the child.

MANAGEMENT

There is currently no cure for ROHHAD. Rather, treatment consists
of early identification, meticulous monitoring, and anticipatory along
with symptomatic management of the various phenotypic features as
they develop (“unfold”). Comprehensive initial evaluations should
determine the nature and severity of hypoventilation, HD, and ANSD,
and appropriate interventions should be implemented in a time-­
sensitive manner. Obesity in ROHHAD is very difficult to control,
but in consultation with a nutritionist and endocrinologist, the trajectory of advancing weight gain can be diminished with moderate exercise and calorie restriction, leading to improved BMI with advancing
age. Specific signs of HD and ANSD should be evaluated by a pediatric endocrinologist and expert in pediatric autonomic medicine,
respectively, and treated as necessary longitudinally as the phenotype

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 468 u Chronic Respiratory Insufficiency

2725

monitoring with oximetry and capnography during sleep, with spot
checks during wakefulness. The goal should be to maintain hemoglobin saturation values of ≥95% and end-­tidal CO2 values of 35-­45 mm
Hg, with vigilant evaluation for awake hypoventilation necessitating
artificial ventilation up to 24 hours a day as necessary.
Given that the ROHHAD phenotype evolves with advancing age,
ongoing care requires regularly scheduled evaluation of all the systems
involved to identify and treat further symptoms as they appear. Comprehensive evaluation should ideally occur at a Center of Excellence for
ROHHAD and should include respiratory physiology assessment both
asleep and awake (in varied levels of age-­appropriate exertion, concentrational tasks, quiet play, and eating), screening of chest and abdomen for
neural crest tumors in the adrenals or along the sympathetic chain, evaluation of the hypothalamic-­pituitary axis with hormonal replacement as
necessary, age-­appropriate noninvasive evaluation of ANS dysregulation,
comprehensive cardiac evaluation for sequelae of recurrent hypoxemia
and/or bradycardia, and neurocognitive testing. These evaluations should
initially occur at 2-­to 3-­month intervals, but this schedule may be altered
with advancing age, depending on each patient’s clinical condition.
With proper and meticulous management, the ROHHAD phenotype has been observed to “refold,” with the possibility of achieving
weight control, eventually recovering spontaneous awake breathing,
and improvement of other autonomic measures. Without proper management, oxygen deprivation can lead to irreversible deterioration in
patients. However, with prompt diagnosis and aggressive management,
including careful attention to the child’s airway, breathing, and circulation, complications can be minimized and the prognosis can be quite
favorable, although long-­term outcome remains the focus of an international registry (https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT03135730).

A

Paraneoplastic/Autoimmune Hypothesis
B
Fig. 468.3 Characteristic CCHS “lip trait” shown in a child with

ROHHAD. Shown here is the mouth of a child with ROHHAD at age 4
(A) and 11 (B) years. The lateral one third of the upper vermillion border
is flesh-­colored instead of pink. This is not a characteristic feature of
obese faces in general (the upper lip is neural crest in origin).

“unfolds” and “refolds.” Such treatments or management strategies
may include hormone replacement; regimented fluid intake; ophthalmologic assessment and treatment; longitudinal monitoring of peripheral, core, and ambient temperature; and management of constipation
with stool softeners. Disordered water balance to prevent dehydration
should be addressed, as well as regulation of heart rate, because bradycardia is seen in some patients (usually with decreased core temperature), though cardiac pacemakers are rarely indicated.
Neural crest tumors should be assessed and resected by a pediatric
surgeon together with a pediatric oncologist, because the sheer size of
these benign tumors creates serious compromise to surrounding tissues. If no tumor is identified initially, screening should continue every
6 months until adulthood, because a malignant neuroblastoma has
been identified in an adolescent ROHHAD patient.
Most critical is the management of hypoventilation. Initial intervention for OSA will likely involve surgical relief of the upper airway
obstruction. This will usually unveil central hypoventilation, and initiation of supported ventilation will be required. If no central hypoventilation is identified, the patient should continue to be vigilantly
monitored by a respiratory physiologist because all ROHHAD patients
will eventually develop central hypoventilation requiring artificial ventilation during sleep at a minimum. Individuals with ROHHAD have
attenuated to absent physiologic responsiveness to hypoxemia/hypercarbia, and they lack behavioral awareness of hypoxemia/hypercarbia.
Optimal oxygenation and ventilation can then be maintained using
a mechanical ventilator with mask initially then, if necessary, by tracheostomy to secure the airway and optimize ventilation. This should
be accompanied by highly trained home nursing and continuous

Paraneoplastic syndromes are rare disorders caused by a neoplasm triggering an altered immune response that aberrantly attacks and destroys
neurons, leading to the nervous system symptoms. An autoimmune or
paraneoplastic basis for ROHHAD has been suggested based on neural
crest tumors occurring in 40% of ROHHAD patients and reports of
encephalitis seen on autopsy. The evidence so far is conflicting, with
some reports supporting the autoimmune hypothesis, whereas others
do not. Further, the onset of ROHHAD symptoms often precedes identification of a neural crest tumor in ROHHAD patients, and in many
cases, neural crest tumors have not been discovered with MRI or even
an autopsy. Of note, with excision of the identified neural crest tumor
there has not been consistent “recovery” from ROHHAD. Rather, the
ROHHAD phenotype continues to “unfold.”

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Congenital central hypoventilation syndrome is a rare pediatric disorder of the ANS and respiratory control. CCHS is caused by pathogenic variants in the PHOX2B gene, which plays an important role
in the differentiation and development of the ANS from neural crest
progenitor cells (see Chapter 468.2). The hallmark feature of CCHS is
life-­threatening hypoventilation while sleeping (and, in some cases, also
while awake). CCHS patients require artificial ventilatory life support,
typically by tracheostomy and mechanical ventilator. Unlike ROHHAD,
however, CCHS usually presents in the newborn period, although later-­
onset CCHS has been diagnosed after 1 month of age, in later childhood, in adolescence, and even in adulthood. CCHS also presents with
other symptoms of ANS dysregulation, including altered heart rate regulation, vasomotor tone, and temperature regulation, ophthalmologic
manifestations, and reduced gastrointestinal motility. However, CCHS
patients are not obese and only rarely have isolated measures of HD.
When hypoventilation is observed, a simple blood test can confirm a
CCHS diagnosis by looking for pathogenic PHOX2B variants.
Prader-­Willi syndrome (PWS) shares childhood obesity as one of
the most prominent features with ROHHAD. PWS is caused by chromosomal abnormalities at chromosome 15q11-­q13, specifically by a
lack of the paternal contribution at this region (from genomic deletion,
uniparental disomy, or imprinting error), whereas methylation differences, loss of heterozygosity, and pathogenic variants in this region

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2726 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
have been ruled out in a ROHHAD cohort. Infants with PWS present with neonatal hypotonia and failure to thrive (malnutrition). Later,
children with PWS develop extreme hyperphagia and obesity. Other
major symptoms of PWS include intellectual impairment, maladaptive
behaviors, short stature caused by GH insufficiency, hypogonadism,
and SDB. In addition, many PWS patients show signs of ANS dysregulation, including altered temperature perception and regulation, strabismus, and high pain threshold.
ROHHAD should also be distinguished from other obesity-­related
genetic disorders. Smith-­Magenis syndrome, Carpenter syndrome,
and 16p11.2 deletion syndrome present with obesity. However, all of
them are additionally marked by early developmental delay, unlike
ROHHAD, which has normal neurodevelopment in the absence of
cardiorespiratory arrest. Therefore testing for genetic causes of obesity
should be undertaken in obese children whose phenotype does not
appear to match that of ROHHAD.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

468.4 Long-­Term Ventilation and Technology
Support: Indications, Principles,
Decision-­Making, Pragmatics, and
Home Provision
Robert J. Graham

INDICATIONS, GOALS, AND DECISION-­MAKING

The decision to implement LMV has many challenges from a diversity of underlying pathophysiology, uncertain disease trajectories, the
development of new condition-­
specific therapies, personal experiences, and values held by providers, patients, parents, and the broader
community, variability in resources, and lack of standards. Although
optimizing gas exchange (i.e., oxygenation and CO2 removal), mitigating the impact of intercurrent respiratory infections, and supporting
neuromuscular-­skeletal limitations, growth, and development remain
among the primary objectives, LMV represents a tool for the comprehensive care of children with complex needs.
LMV has a role within the broad spectrum of palliative care. It is
used proactively to attenuate cumulative morbidities (respiratory and
cardiac) associated with progressive neuromuscular conditions, such
as Duchenne muscular dystrophy. LMV is also used reactively when
acute illness (e.g., acute respiratory distress syndrome or an acute flaccid myelitis) does not resolve. In infants with premature lung disease or
complex airway anomalies, LMV may be implemented as a temporary
measure, as these conditions may improve with maturity or surgical
interventions. LMV can also represent a bridge to lung transplant for
those with intrinsic pulmonary or pulmonary vascular disease. More
commonly, LMV has become a destination therapy to optimize symptom management and prolong life in complex conditions. Etiologies of
the chronic respiratory failure include but are not limited to congenital
anomalies (e.g., complex cardiac conditions, central nervous system
disorders, interruptions in aerodigestive morphogenesis, and skeletal
dysplasias), acquired central neurologic injuries from perinatal, infectious, traumatic, and hypoxic-­ischemic events, metabolic disorders, or
progressive neuromuscular conditions. Progress in other areas of medicine, such as gene-­targeted therapy in spinal muscular atrophy and
myotubular myopathy, may alter the LMV decision-­making landscape
as families foresee the prospect of improvement.

NONINVASIVE AND TRANSTRACHEAL SUPPORTS

The essential modalities for LMV include negative pressure, noninvasive positive pressure ventilation (NIPPV with either continuous
or biphasic support provided through an occlusive mask interface),
or transtracheal positive pressure. Considerations for a given child
or young adult should include but are not limited to anatomic factors, physiologic goals, long-­term care goals, comfort, tolerability/

compliance, and safety (mobility/portability, monitoring, device availability and backup, training capacity).
Negative pressure devices, such as the cuirass ventilator, do not
require any interface with the face or trachea and are more natural from
a mechanical perspective. The need for oxygen supplementation is not
addressed directly through such a device. NIPPV can address dynamic
upper airway obstruction and can augment respiratory mechanics and
gas exchange. This modality may, however, have limitations if upper
airway obstruction is severe or fixed or the need for oxygen supplementation is high. Masks, prongs, and pillows of varying sizes are available for nasal, oral, combination, and full interface, including those for
infants. A mouthpiece interface has also been demonstrated to be effective and feasible. The choice of continuous positive airway pressure
(CPAP) versus biphasic positive airway pressure (BiPAP) is dependent
on the underlying pathophysiology. Conceptually, CPAP can overcome
a dynamic upper airway obstruction and allow for spontaneous ventilation, while BiPAP is more versatile in compensating for upper airway
obstruction and supporting lung recruitment and gas exchange. CPAP
is limited to management of mild OSA. In addition, BiPAP may allow
for home escalation for the management of intercurrent illness with
oversight of the medical team. Although NIPPV can be maintained
24 hours a day, efficacy of ventilation, difficult airway considerations
(i.e., whether the child can anatomically be intubated), developmental
needs, implications for midface hypoplasia, and secretion clearance are
among factors that affect the decision to pursue tracheostomy placement and invasive LMV.
Transtracheal LMV provides the most secure and effective respiratory support. Fixed and dynamic upper airway obstruction is bypassed
with tracheostomy tube placement. Secretions are more readily cleared
from the lower airway. Positive pressure and oxygen delivery via a tracheostomy tube more consistently address primary impairments in
gas exchange (within limits) as well as mechanical disadvantages from
neuromuscular insufficiency and restrictive disease. When possible,
placement of a tracheostomy tube in a child should be coordinated at
an institution with pediatric expertise, including in long-­term tracheostomy care, because the short-­term morbidities and, potentially, mortality are not insignificant.
Individuals using NIPPV are at risk for pressure ulcerations on the
face and on the scalp. Proper fit of the interface must be assured because
a tighter fit is not necessarily commensurate with better support. Alternating masks on a regular basis may alleviate pressure on a given site.
Additional nonadhesive dressings can also be used to facilitate the
mask seal and minimize skin breakdown. For those with a tracheostomy tube in place, care of tracheostomy ties and regular assessment
of the stoma are required. Moisture-­wicking dressings can attenuate
risk of maceration, but their use should be balanced against the value
of exposure to air for drying. Stomal assessment should include evaluation for granulation, fissures, and traction created by additional torque
from ventilator tubing, which should be maintained midline and without weight displacement on the tracheostomy tube itself. Any areas of
integument interruption are potential niduses for infection and of great
concern for immunocompromised hosts.

AUGMENTED SECRETION CLEARANCE
See Chapter 468.1.

AERODIGESTIVE AND COMMUNICATION
CONSIDERATIONS

Assessment of swallowing and speaking capacity should be part of an
assessment for LMV and may help guide the modality. Implementation
of noninvasive or transtracheal supports will not further impair either
of these functions. Rather, the underlying condition is the primary
determinant. This consideration is most notable in children or young
adults with neurologic injury or neuromuscular conditions. Decision-­
making around placement of a transabdominal gastric or gastrojejunal
enteral feeding tube, if not already in place, should coincide with decisions around LMV. Nasogastric tubes, it should be appreciated, may
impair the NIPPV mask seal and cause laryngeal irritation in the long
term. Antireflux surgery (i.e., fundoplication) should also be discussed

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 468 u Chronic Respiratory Insufficiency
at this time as providers consider ongoing implications of esophageal
reflux, aerophagia, and challenges maintaining jejunostomy tubes.
Use of NIPPV must be approached cautiously in those with impaired
swallowing, as positive pressure will increase the risk of macroaspiration and microaspiration. Individuals using NIPPV can eat and drink
while on support with risk versus benefit determination and assessment
of impact on quality of life. Aerophagia on NIPPV is also problematic, regardless of bulbar function and swallowing capacity; abdominal
distention is uncomfortable, contributes to satiety and vomiting risk,
and further impairs respiratory mechanics with decreased functional
residual capacity and increased inspiratory workload. If a gastrostomy
is present, active evacuation of swallowed air and use of passive venting
tubes can be helpful.
Children with swallowing capacity can continue to eat and drink
by mouth with a tracheostomy tube in place on LMV. The presence
of a cuffed tracheostomy tube does not prevent aspiration if swallowing is impaired. Speaking may be facilitated by LMV, as settings can
be increased or a speaking valve used to increased airflow across the
vocal cords. Regardless, multidisciplinary care with a speech-­language
pathologist, feeding specialist, and augmented communication services
can be helpful for many children and their families using LMV. Conditioned aversions to oral stimulation can be challenging for infants, but
developmental gains should not be impeded by LMV.

GAS EXCHANGE AND VENTILATOR STRATEGIES

Pressure-­or volume-­regulated modes, spontaneous or controlled settings, and mixed modes are all feasible for NIPPV and transtracheal
supports with new devices. The appropriate support should coincide
with oxygenation and ventilation goals on a case-­by-­case basis. Consideration, however, should be given to the site of care and contingencies
for presentation to acute cure during intercurrent illness or emergency.
Providers should assess limitations in oxygen supplementation outside
of the hospital; measured or estimated delivered fractional inspired
oxygen (Fio2) will inform families and providers of capacity when adding oxygen in liters/minute flow to the ventilator circuit; dilution can
have a dramatic effect, and achieving Fio2 >0.60 may be difficult when
oxygen is added to a home ventilator circuit. Safety allowances should
also account for the duration of portable oxygen provision, which is
based upon liter flow and tank/reservoir volume.
Monitoring of CO2 in the homecare setting is not usual, although
portable end-­tidal CO2 devices are available. Conditions such as CCHS
warrant vigilance, and parameters for implementation, or titration, of
mechanical ventilation should be discussed with families. Recognition
that significant and indolent hypercapnia can precede hypoxia is necessary, and long-­term effects on cerebral and pulmonary vasculature
should be considered. In the absence of direct CO2 monitoring, periodic measurement of serum bicarbonate may be helpful to assess for
renal compensation for altered CO2 clearance; however, interpretation
may be altered in the presence of diuretic therapy, metabolic disease,
or ketogenic diets.

CARDIOPULMONARY INTERACTIONS

Closely linked to the gas-­exchange goals are considerations for cardiopulmonary interactions. Although there are subtle implications for systemic venous return of any form of positive pressure ventilation, LMV
can be used to decrease transmural myocardial load and to optimize
right ventricular afterload through lung recruitment and pulmonary vascular reactivity. The prolonged survival of young males with Duchenne
muscular dystrophy is in part the result of consistent respiratory support
to optimize lung health and to attenuate myocardial dysfunction. Primary or secondary pulmonary hypertension, whether overt or indolent,
requires consideration of oxygenation and ventilation goals. Echocardiograms are not required for all children or young adults with LMV, but
this modality may be helpful to guide management in cohorts with congenital heart lesions, cardiomyopathies, severe obstructive pulmonary
disease, significant central dysregulation, and on a case-­by-­case basis.
When considering gas-­exchange goals and cardiopulmonary interactions, providers must also consider daytime and nocturnal differences. Neuromuscular-­derived hypoventilation is more prominent at

2727

night, as is upper airway obstructive disease; the latter is more important for those using noninvasive LMV. Daytime support provision
must account for increased oxygen consumption and demand based on
variable activity and stressors, including environmental temperature.
Providers and families must factor in mobility, behavioral tolerance,
and quality of life.

CHEST WALL/THORACIC CONFIGURATION

Positive pressure through LMV in early childhood for children with
neuromuscular conditions and/or restrictive lung disease is also used to
improve thoracic compliance and configuration. Lung inflation can be
used to attenuate the impact of thoracic asphyxiation as well as progressive parasol chest deformation in diaphragm-­dependent conditions,
such spinal muscular atrophy. This use has implications for atelectasis
and secretion inspissation, associated pulmonary vasoconstriction, and
cumulative restrictive or asymmetric pulmonary mechanics.

NUTRITION AND WEIGHT GAIN
See Chapter 468.1.

DEVELOPMENTAL CONSIDERATIONS

Decisions regarding the LMV modality, noninvasive or transtracheal,
requires consideration of development as well. Beyond safety factors,
tolerance of interventions, availability of appropriate-­sized interfaces,
and portability, there remains substantial subjectivity with respect
to perspective on the implication for social interactions (i.e., devices
covering the face versus a device in the neck). Although there are no
published series, long-­term or near-­continuous NIV also has implications for midface hypoplasia and potentially compounds upper airway
obstructive symptoms, as is evident by images of BiPAP faces. Swallowing and speech capacity primarily reflect the child’s underlying condition and conditioned aversions rather than the LMV itself.

PROJECTED INTERVENTIONS AND NEEDS

The trajectory and management of the underlying disease, as well as
symptom management, are the primary drivers in determining the
need and duration of LMV. Stakeholders should also consider future
interventions, specifically surgical procedures. LMV, noninvasive or
transtracheal, can be used to optimize perioperative standing and facilitate recovery and provision of opiate-­based analgesia that could alter
respiratory drive. The maintenance of a tracheostomy tube in anticipation of sequential surgeries (e.g., spinal instrumentation, craniofacial and airway reconstruction, or serial cardiac interventions) may be
required for practical reasons but also minimizes the need for repeated
intubation.

PREPARING FOR THE LIVED EXPERIENCE OF LMV
AND OTHER TECHNOLOGY SUPPORTS

Emotional challenges are associated with the integration of technology supports into “routine” care and assuming an altered role as a parent and care provider. Addressing practical needs, however, can help
attenuate some of the anxiety and allow families to focus on, or revisit,
the global goals of care, quality of life, and the role of technology. The
family will need to consider each of the following implications.
Financial (e.g., insurance, subsidies, alternative funding, and parental employment): Independent of personal resources, the majority of
families with children requiring technology assistance report some
degree of financial burden. These costs arise from the direct outlay for
equipment and medications, lost work time or need to discontinue/
change vocations, home adaptations, and other indirect costs. Accessing a financial counselor or case manager may help identify and navigate through local, state/regional, and government/federal resources.
Additional considerations should also be paid to personal trusts, wills,
and estate planning, as all of these have implications for long-­term benefits and financial supports for the individual with special healthcare
needs.
Equipment and supplies: Ideally, the equipment intended for use at
home will be tested before discharge to home. Testing ensures proper
function and any tolerance. Electrical compatibility with the home

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2728 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
service should be confirmed. Delivery of backup devices (e.g., tracheostomy tubes, including a smaller size for contingency planning; batteries
for ventilators; and portable oxygen tanks as a supplement to electric
oxygen concentrators) and emergency supplies (e.g., self-­
inflating
respiratory bags, epinephrine for those who have allergy histories, or
prophylactic antiepileptic medication for those prone to breakthrough
seizures) should be confirmed. Medication supplies and refills should
be sufficient to allow for the scheduling of follow-­up visits. Providers
responsible for recertification or reordering should be identified.
Training: Standards for training and demonstration of competency
vary among institutions and across providers. Families and their medical teams should come to an agreement on minimum safety preparation and the number of responsible parties available to assist in the
home. Hospital-­based training around ventilator use and troubleshooting, central-­line care, tracheostomy tube exchanges and suctioning,
wound care, and other interventions could include basic life support
classes and one-­on-­one sessions with nurses, respiratory therapists,
or other staff, with hands-­on or mannequin simulation. Assumption
of full care by families while in the hospital can be informative for all
stakeholders and reassuring to families; supported replication of the
demands of homecare before discharge is ideal.
Augmented staff: Home nursing, hospice, personal care assistants,
extended family, and friends represent additional resources for the
child and their family. Allowances vary based on the child’s age, independence, medical condition, technology dependence, goals of care,
and other factors. These individuals may require additional training,
but augmenting numbers of proficient homecare providers is crucial
for safety and consistency of care. When considering homecare provision, families should consider the type of personnel and how additional supports would allow the child to attend school, the parent to
work or maintain the household, continue care when the parent is sick
or incapacitated, or assist with other children. The challenges of establishing, training, and maintaining a home staff require time and tolerance, recognizing that the child’s safety is the priority.
Monitoring: Conceptually, monitoring is used to detect early physiologic changes, determine adequacy of LMV, and minimize cumulative morbidities or risk of mortality. Continuous direct observation
is not practical, or often desirable, in the community setting. Recommendations for monitoring children and young adults on LMV vary
based on underlying vulnerability, care setting, activity (e.g., home,
long-­term care facility, school, or in transport via car), and adjuvant
supports (e.g., home nursing or personal care assistant). Pulse oximetry can be used intermittently or on a continuous basis, with oxygen
and heart rate parameters determined on a case-­by-­case basis. Typically, capnography is not available except in cases of central hypoventilation syndromes but can complement oximetry. Internal ventilator
alarm settings for both NIPPV and transtracheal ventilators are used
to monitor high-­and low-­pressure parameters and minute ventilation.
Stakeholders must acknowledge, however, that internal alarms may be
insufficient in the setting of a large mask or peritracheal leak or in the
event of a device malfunction.
The child’s individual risks and the environmental circumstances
drive the balance of extrinsic monitoring (e.g., pulse oximetry and
heart rate) and intrinsic device alarms. There are also pragmatic considerations of signal-­to-­noise when determining monitoring parameters; recurrent false alarms will desensitize providers and may disturb
a child’s sleep; conversely, wide alarm parameters circumvent early
warning systems with significant consequences. Alarm fatigue, as
experienced by hospital-­based providers, should be discussed, as it can
be of great consequence where the resources are not as robust. Simple
audio and video monitors (i.e., video cameras) can be used to augment
surveillance and may help families in their activities of daily living.
Adaptations to the homecare setting: Modifications to the home
may be required to ease care and optimize safety. Ramps for wheelchair
access will permit ingress and egress. Lift systems can minimize physical burden and injury risk to providers. Doorways can be expanded to
permit access to multiple rooms. Alternative bath and toileting accommodations may be needed. Electrical system upgrades with grounding

and increased amperage are often required for equipment demand and
safety.
Transportation: Discharge planning for a child or young adult with
technology dependence should include transportation to school, community programs, routine family activities, and scheduled or urgent
medical services. Proximity (rural or urban), the child’s mobility,
weather, and the need for monitoring en route are other considerations.
Adaptive car seats or car beds can be purchased. Personal vehicles may
need expensive modifications, including lifts and power inverters.
Allowances may also be required for one person to drive while another
(i.e., nurse, parent, or care assistant) tends to the child. If traveling long
distances, perhaps on vacation, advanced planning might include identification of hospitals along the route and reciprocal equipment companies to assist with unexpected supply needs.
Air transportation: If a family anticipates travel by plane, contingencies should be made for oxygen support at altitude, recognizing
that most commercial airlines pressurize their cabins to the equivalent
of 7,000-­8,000 feet. Portable oxygen sources may have less liter flow
capacity than stationary or home devices; there is also a need to differentiate continuous versus on-­demand flow options. Space and limited supplies inflight should be considerations. Power wheelchairs are
prone to damage when placed in cargo holds, and ground crews likely
require explicit instructions. Providers may need to write letters for
airport security and airlines for excess baggage, electronic equipment,
medication, and fluid allowance. Families can also consider sending
additional supplies to the final destination in advance.
Environmental stressors: Extreme temperatures, heat or cold, variability in humidity, and other environmental variables can greatly
affect the well-­being of a child with underlying cardiorespiratory insufficiency or other special healthcare needs. Home adaptations to permit climate control for the child’s room may be required. Families may
consider prewarming, or cooling, vehicles for routine excursions, and
limitations on day-­to-­day activities are warranted at times. Augmented
hydration needs should be reviewed with medical providers, along
with routine sunscreen and preventive measures.
Preparation for transition to the homecare setting may include a
period of quiescence, depending on the circumstances and family preferences. Establishing a period of stability, when there has been no need
to alter supports, may minimize unplanned readmissions.

Community Resources

The transition from the acute care or rehabilitation facility to homecare setting is often much anticipated and welcomed. This step can also
be frightening and overwhelming, whether it represents the first time
home or a return after an acute illness or planned surgery. Hospital-­
based providers can partner with families to alleviate some anxiety and
to avoid potential pitfalls through proactive engagement. Hand-­off to
outpatient and community stakeholders can include the following:
The community medical practice: Updates on problem lists, projected follow-­up, medication and equipment needs, routine health
maintenance and preventive measures (e.g., immunizations), special
considerations for nutrition, identification of specialty providers and
follow-­up schedules, and case-­specific risks.
First responders: Confirmation that the family has the capacity to
call emergency services, outreach to police and ambulance services to
outline baseline needs, special condition-­specific interventions or precautions, identification of equipment that may need to be taken with
the child in the event of an emergency, determination of emergency
destination (i.e., local hospital or referral center), and clarification of
resuscitation status and life-­sustaining therapies.
Therapy programs: Physical, occupational, speech-­language/feeding, and other therapists benefit from hospital-­based assessments and
outlines of expectations, restrictions, and uncertainties.
Educational programs/schools/day habilitation: Integration into
community services requires evaluation of developmental needs and
potential adaptive settings, equipment, services, staffing, and transportation for all ages.
Power and water: Alerting local housing, social, power, and water
authorities to medical necessities can facilitate prioritization of service

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 468 u Chronic Respiratory Insufficiency
restoration during natural disasters or other interruptions and identify
programs to defray incurred costs with increased technology-­driven
electrical usage (e.g., home ventilators, oxygen concentrators, and climate control).
Families may find additional resources through faith-­based institutions, nonprofit and advocacy groups (e.g., Kiwanis, Shriners, Boy
Scouts), and condition-­specific entities, such as the Muscular Dystrophy Association. Outreach to other families with similar circumstances
can also be helpful with the caveat that their recommendations reflect
their own goals and lived experience with special healthcare needs.

Subacute Care

Local resources for medical services should be identified in advance.
This begins with the primary care and first responders but extends to
local and regional hospitals. It is important to determine the range of
services available and to identify specific providers who would familiarize themselves with a given case. The child with technology dependence will experience intercurrent illnesses or unexpected accidents
that require evaluation, but may not always necessitate transport to
tertiary care or referral centers. Individual care plans can be developed
in conjunction with the family and local providers and may include
thresholds for transfer.
Families should also consider bringing home equipment and supplies when presenting to urgent and acute care settings. Devices such
as pediatric NIPPV masks and cough-­assist machines or compounded
medications may not be available at every facility. Short-­term evaluations may become protracted, and lack of routine care provision may
compound the immediate issues.

Emergency and Acute Care

Providers and families should acknowledge that children with special healthcare needs (CSHCN) and LMV are at risk for repeated
hospitalization. Progression of underlying illnesses (e.g., heart failure), planned surgical interventions (e.g., spinal instrumentation,
bronchoscopy surveillance, tendon releases), or superimposed acute
illnesses (e.g., pneumonia, gastroenteritis, appendicitis, recurrent
seizures) may necessitate readmission. Those children who are technology dependent have a higher likelihood of requiring critical care
services because of the nature of their needs and their vulnerability. Preventable equipment-­related issues may be obviated through
the planning described previously. Once hospitalized, CSHCN are at
greater risk of medical error and incur more interventions when compared with otherwise healthy children. Parents should be encouraged
to develop a medical passport and reference list of providers to facilitate communication and consistency of care. Referencing established
care guidelines and, again, developing individualized care plans may
be helpful.

Quality of Life

CSHCN of increasing complexity and technology dependence are
thriving in the homecare setting as a result of advances in medical care,
shared decision-­making, community services, and most notably, extensive, vigilant, and proactive care efforts by their families. Adaptations
allow for participation in all aspects of family, school, and community
activities. Although individual trajectory and subsequent needs may be
difficult to predict, all stakeholders should acknowledge the impact of
chronic care on the family unit and health-­related quality of life. The
evolution of a medical home for this cohort of children will require
provisions for family mental health, sibling supports, respite, and other
measures to optimize outcomes.

TRANSITIONING FROM ACUTE CARE TO
REHABILITATION OR COMMUNITY SETTING

Disposition of children and young adults with LMV will vary based on
their relative stability, local support services, and goals of care. A proactive, flexible, comprehensive care model is required to assure safe and
effective provision. The impacts of care needs on the child and family
are inextricably linked.

2729

ROUTINE HEALTH MAINTENANCE
Airway Evaluation

There is no standard for regular airway assessment for children with
LMV, specifically those with transtracheal support, but annual evaluation should represent the minimum. Office-­based transtracheal tube
endoscopy can facilitate assessment of tube upsizing for linear growth,
presence of granulation tissue, airway inflammation, and general
mucosal integrity. Formal diagnostic laryngoscopy and bronchoscopy under general anesthesia are required to assess for suprastomal
and laryngeal-­level pathology along with the rare acquired trachea-­
esophageal fistulae. Independent of routine evaluation, recurrent or
unexpected tracheal bleeding may warrant evaluation for a trachea-­
vascular fistula via CT angiogram and bronchoscopy.

Bacterial Colonization

Chronic respiratory failure lends itself to airway bacterial colonization
because of alterations in secretion clearance, aerodigestive interactions, the presence of artificial airways with the development of biofilms, and other factors. Hydrophilic and gram-­negative bacteria (e.g.,
Pseudomonas, Serratia, and Stenotrophomonas) are common. There is
no standard of care for determining pathogenicity versus colonization.
Use of systemic or inhaled antibacterial agents to decrease colonization load, frequency of tracheostomy tube exchanges to reduce biofilm
accumulation, utility of viral screening, and threshold for treatment of
an acute lower airway process or tracheitis is provider and case dependent. Providers should appreciate that recurrent empiric antibacterial
treatment may select for resistant bacterial strains and has implications
for enteric bacterial colonization.

Dental Care

Routine daily and office-­based dental care should follow standard recommendations for all children. Extrapolation from the acute care setting and general population would suggest that oropharyngeal care and
minimization of bacterial overgrowth would affect the risk of superimposed respiratory illness in LMV and long-­term cardiovascular outcomes, respectively. Special consideration with respect to aspiration
risk, developmental tolerance, and prophylaxis and procedural sedation for intervention may require engagement of specialty providers.

Immunizations

No immunizations are specifically indicated for individuals receiving
LMV. Routine provision is recommended, including seasonal vaccinations for viral pathogens. Expansion of exposure precautions, as experienced during the COVID-­19 pandemic, also remain essential.

Radiography, Laboratory, Polysomnography, and
Pulmonary Function Testing

There are no recommendations for routine chest radiography, standard
or cross-­sectional, in the context of LMV. The cumulative radiation
exposure would need to be considered. Gas exchange adequacy can
often be assessed noninvasively. Venous, capillary, or arterial puncture for determining resting and long-­term oxygenation and ventilation status may be of limited utility and validity, as intercurrent illness,
technique with tourniquet, and associated agitation will alter results.
Condition-­specific (e.g., muscular dystrophy) recommendations for
polysomnography, spirometry, or pulmonary function testing have
been established and may be extrapolated with some validity. Regular
assessment may also be helpful when gauging disease trajectory, LMV
titration, safety parameters, and weaning potential.

LONG-­TERM MECHANICAL VENTILATION
WEANING AND TRACHEAL DECANNULATION

Reassessment of the role of LMV should be part of routine and
family-­centered care. Determination should include but is not limited to the factors described earlier with open discussion of goals of
care, developmental appropriateness, physiologic and anatomic consideration, growth implications, new treatments, and contingencies.
As there are currently no definitive conditioning regimens or LMV

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2730 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
weaning strategies, providers can determine the value of time off versus decreased level of supports as well as pragmatic considerations for
the child and family. Continuity of care, however, holds implicit value.
Monitoring provision may need to be increased during weaning.
If tracheal decannulation is required, a formal diagnostic laryngoscopy and bronchoscopy should be considered to rule out granulation (suprastomal and infrastomal) and dynamic airway collapse
that may prohibit immediate tracheostomy tube removal. If positive
pressure or oxygen supplementation will still be required after decannulation, determination of the child’s tolerance of noninvasive ventilation or other interventions (e.g., cough assist) should be determined in
advance. Desensitization may be required.

Ultimately, LMV has an increasing role in the support of children
and young adults with chronic respiratory failure. Decision-­making
about any technology supports can be challenging from an emotional,
practical, and ethical perspective. As families and other stakeholders
explore options, the goal at these consequential junctures should be
to align expectations, hopes, and potential lived experiences. Everyone
should acknowledge the uncertainties and the potential to withhold,
withdraw, and regularly reassess, even in the community setting. As
this population of CSHCN and technology dependence ages, transition
from pediatric to adult services should also be anticipated.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

