The Endocrine System
Section 1

PART

XXIV

VASCULAR SUPPLY

Disorders of the
Hypothalamus and
Pituitary Gland
Chapter 594

Hormones of the
Hypothalamus and
Pituitary

The arterial blood supply of the pituitary gland originates from the
internal carotid via the inferior, middle, and superior hypophyseal
arteries. This network of vessels forms a unique portal circulation
connecting the hypothalamus and pituitary. The branches of the
superior hypophyseal arteries penetrate the stalk and form a network of vessels that traverse the pituitary stalk and terminate in
a network of capillaries within the anterior lobe. It is through this
portal venous system that hypothalamic hormones are delivered to
the anterior pituitary gland. Anterior pituitary hormones, in turn,
are secreted into a secondary plexus of portal veins that drain into
the dural venous sinuses.

ANTERIOR PITUITARY CELL TYPES

A series of sequentially expressed transcriptional activation factors
directs the differentiation and proliferation of anterior pituitary cell
types. These proteins are members of a large family of DNA-­binding
proteins resembling homeobox genes. The consequences of pathogenic
variants in several of these genes are evident in human forms of multiple pituitary hormone deficiency. Five cell types in the anterior pituitary produce six peptide hormones. Somatotropes produce growth

Eric I. Felner and Briana C. Patterson
The pituitary and hypothalamus are the major regulators of an elaborate hormonal system. The pituitary gland receives signals from the
hypothalamus and responds by sending pituitary hormones to target
glands. The target glands produce hormones that provide negative
feedback at the level of the hypothalamus and pituitary (Figs. 594.1 and
594.2). This feedback mechanism enables the pituitary to regulate the
amount of hormone released into the bloodstream by the target glands.
The pituitary’s central role in this hormonal system and its ability to
interpret and respond to a variety of signals have led to its designation
as the master gland. Table 594.1 lists the hypothalamic and pituitary
hormones and their functions.

Glucocorticoid receptors
Thyroid hormone receptors
Leptin receptors

Paraventricular
nucleus

TRH
neuron
CRH

Brainstem
catecholaminergic
inputs
Temperature

Energy
state

NPY/
AGRP
neurons

Arcuate
nucleus

Hypothalamus
tanycytes
T4
T3

POMC/
CART
neurons

ANATOMY

The pituitary gland is located at the base of the skull in a saddle-­shaped
cavity of the sphenoid bone called the sella turcica. The bony structure protects and surrounds the pituitary bilaterally and inferiorly. The
dura, a dense layer of connective tissue, forms the roof of the sella
turcica. An external layer of the dura continues into the sella turcica
to form its lining. As a result, the pituitary is extradural and is not
normally in contact with cerebrospinal fluid. The pituitary gland is
connected to the hypothalamus by the pituitary stalk. The pituitary
gland is composed of an anterior (adenohypophysis) and a posterior
(neurohypophysis) lobe. The anterior lobe constitutes approximately
80% of the gland.

TRH

Somatostatin

Pituitary
T4
T3

TSH
T4

EMBRYOLOGY

The anterior pituitary gland originates from Rathke’s pouch as an
invagination of the oral ectoderm. It then detaches from the oral epithelium and becomes an individual structure of rapidly proliferating
cells. By 6 weeks of gestation, the connection between Rathke’s pouch
and oropharynx is completely obliterated. The pouch establishes a
direct connection with the downward extension of the hypothalamus,
which gives rise to the pituitary stalk. Persistent remnants of the craniopharyngeal duct, the original connection between Rathke’s pouch
and the oral cavity, can develop into adamantinous craniopharyngiomas (see Chapter 546).

T3
Thyroid

Fig. 594.1 Regulation of the hypothalamic-­
pituitary-­
thyroid axis.

AGRP, Agouti-­
related peptide; CART, cocaine-­and amphetamine-­
regulated transcript; CRH, corticotropin-­releasing hormone; NPY, neuropeptide Y; POMC, proopiomelanocortin; T3, triiodothyronine; T4,
thyroxine; TRH, thyrotropin-­releasing hormone; TSH, thyrotropin. (From
Low MJ. Neuroendocrinology. In Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR,
Kronenberg HM, eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology, 13th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Fig. 7.9.)

3359
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3360 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Hippocampus
Prefrontal
cortex

Processive
(Neurogenic)
Stress
(fear, restraint)
Lateral
septum

BST

Paraventricular
nucleus

GABA

MeA

5-HT

Hypothalamic
glutamatergic
inputs

Hypothalamic
glutamatergic
inputs

Brainstem
catecholaminergic
inputs
NTS

CRH
neuron

Subfornical org.
OVLT
MePO

Systemic
(Physiologic)
Stress
(osmotic challenge,
macromolecules)

Glucocorticoid
receptors
Cytokine receptors
Leptin receptors

Raphe nucleus
Hypothalamic
GABAergic inputs

Prostaglandins
Brainstem
vasculature

Arcuate,
NPY, and POMC
neurons

Systemic
(Physiologic)
Stress
(cytokines,
hypoxia,
hemorrhage)

Hypothalamus

to
CNS
CRH
AVP

CRIF?

IL-1, IL-2,
IL-6, TNFα

Pituitary
Immune
cells

ACTH

Cortisol

Adrenal

Fig. 594.2 Regulation of the hypothalamic-­
pituitary-­
adrenal axis.

ACTH, Adrenocorticotropic hormone; AVP, arginine vasopressin; BST,
bed nucleus of the stria terminalis; CNS, central nervous system; CRH,
corticotropin-­releasing hormone; CRIF, corticotropin release–inhibiting
factor; GABA, γ-­aminobutyric acid; 5-­HT, 5-­hydroxytryptamine; IL-­1, interleukin 1; MeA, medial amygdala; MePO, medial preoptic nucleus;
NPY, neuropeptide Y; NTS, nucleus of the tractus solitarius; OVLT, organum vasculosum of the lamina terminalis; POMC, proopiomelanocortin;
TNF-­α, tumor necrosis factor-­α. (From Low MJ. Neuroendocrinology. In
Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Fig. 7.18.)

hormone (GH), lactotropes produce prolactin (PRL), thyrotropes
make thyroid-­
stimulating hormone (TSH), corticotropes express
proopiomelanocortin (POMC), the precursor of adrenocorticotropic
hormone (ACTH), and gonadotropes express luteinizing hormone
(LH) and follicle-­stimulating hormone (FSH).

Growth Hormone

Human GH is a 191–amino acid, single-­chain polypeptide that is synthesized, stored, and secreted by somatotropes in the pituitary. Its gene
(GH1) is the first in a cluster of five closely related genes on the long
arm of chromosome 17 (q22-­24). The other four genes (CS1, CS2, GH2,
and CSP) have >90% sequence identity with the GH1 gene.
GH is secreted in a pulsatile fashion under the regulation of
hypothalamic hormones. The alternating secretion of GH-­releasing
hormone (GHRH), which stimulates GH release, and somatostatin, which inhibits GH release, accounts for the rhythmic secretion
of GH. Peaks of GH occur when peaks of GHRH coincide with
troughs of somatostatin. Ghrelin, a peptide produced in the arcuate
nucleus of the hypothalamus and in much greater quantities by the
stomach, also stimulates GH secretion. In addition to these three
hypothalamic hormones, physiologic factors play a role in stimulating and inhibiting GH. Sleep, exercise, physical stress, trauma, acute
illness, puberty, fasting, and hypoglycemia stimulate the release of
GH, whereas hyperglycemia, hypothyroidism, and glucocorticoids
inhibit GH release (Fig. 594.3).

GH binds to receptor molecules on the surface of target cells. The GH
receptor is a 620–amino acid, single-­chain molecule with an extracellular domain, a single membrane-­spanning domain, and a cytoplasmic
domain. Proteolytically cleaved fragments of the extracellular domain
circulate in plasma and act as a GH-­binding protein. Similar to other
members of the cytokine receptor family, the cytoplasmic domain of
the GH receptor lacks intrinsic kinase activity; instead, GH binding
induces receptor dimerization and activation of a receptor-­associated
Janus kinase (Jak2). Phosphorylation of the kinase and other protein
substrates initiates a series of events that leads to alterations in nuclear
gene transcription. The signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b (STAT5b) plays a critical role in linking receptor activation to
changes in gene transcription.
The biologic effects of GH include increases in linear growth, bone
thickness, soft tissue growth, protein synthesis, fatty acid release from
adipose tissue, insulin resistance, and blood glucose. The mitogenic
actions of GH are mediated through increases in the synthesis of
insulin-­like growth factor 1 (IGF-­1), formerly named somatomedin
C, a 70–amino acid single-­chain peptide coded for by a gene on the
long arm of chromosome 12 with considerable homology to insulin.
Circulating IGF-­1 is synthesized primarily in the liver and formed
locally in mesodermal and ectodermal cells, particularly in the growth
plates of children, where its effect is exerted by paracrine or autocrine
mechanisms. Circulating levels of IGF-­1 are bound to several different
binding proteins and are related to blood levels of GH and nutritional
status. The major binding protein is a 150-­kDa complex (IGF-­BP3) that
is low in GH-­deficient children. Human recombinant IGF-­1 has been
developed as a therapeutic in conditions characterized by primary
IGF-­1 deficiency, end-­organ resistance to GH (e.g., Laron syndrome),
and the development of antibodies for those individuals administered
GH. Insulin-­like growth factor 2 (IGF-­2) is a 67–amino acid single-­
chain protein that is coded for by a gene on the short arm of chromosome 11 that is also homologous to insulin and IGF-­1. Less is known
about its physiologic role, but it appears to be an important mitogen in
bone cells, where it occurs in a concentration many times higher than
that of IGF-­1.

Prolactin

PRL is a 199–amino acid peptide made in pituitary lactotropes. The
regulation of PRL is unique because PRL is constitutively secreted
by the pituitary unless it is actively inhibited by dopamine, a peptide produced by neurons in the hypothalamus. Disruption of the
hypothalamus or pituitary stalk can result in elevated PRL levels.
Dopamine antagonists, states of primary hypothyroidism, administration of thyrotropin-­releasing hormone (TRH), hypothalamic
injury secondary to radiation therapy, and pituitary tumors result
in increased serum levels of PRL. Dopamine agonists and processes
causing destruction of the anterior pituitary gland can reduce levels
of PRL.
The primary physiologic role for PRL is the initiation and maintenance of lactation. PRL prepares the breasts for lactation and stimulates milk production postpartum. During pregnancy, PRL stimulates
the development of the milk secretory apparatus, but lactation does not
occur because of the high levels of estrogen and progesterone. After
delivery, the estrogen and progesterone levels drop, and physiologic
stimuli such as suckling and nipple stimulation signal PRL release and
initiate lactation.

Thyroid-­Stimulating Hormone

TSH consists of two glycoprotein chains (α, β) linked by hydrogen
bonding: the α-­subunit, which is composed of 89 amino acids and
is identical to other glycoproteins (FSH, LH, and human chorionic
gonadotropin), and the β-­subunit, composed of 112 amino acids, that
is specific for TSH.
TSH is stored in secretory granules and released into circulation
primarily in response to TRH, which is produced by the hypothalamus. TRH is released from the hypothalamus into the hypothalamic-­
pituitary portal system and ultimately stimulates TSH release from

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 594 u Hormones of the Hypothalamus and Pituitary 3361
Table 594.1  Hormones of the Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland
HORMONES

LOCATION

S/I

FUNCTION

ACTH

Anterior pituitary

S

Production and secretion of GCs, MCs, and androgens from adrenal gland

ADH

Posterior pituitary

S

Reabsorption of water into the bloodstream via renal collecting ducts

CRH

Hypothalamus

S

Secretion of ACTH

Dopamine

Hypothalamus

I

Secretion of PRL

FSH (females)

Anterior pituitary

S

Secretion of estrogen from ovary

FSH (males)

Anterior pituitary

S

Production of sperm from testis

GH

Anterior pituitary

S

Secretion of IGF-­1

GHRH

Hypothalamus

S

Secretion of GH

Ghrelin

Hypothalamus

S

Secretion of GH

GnRH

Hypothalamus

S

Secretion of FSH and LH

LH (females)

Anterior pituitary

S

Ovulation and development of the corpus luteum

LH (males)

Anterior pituitary

S

Production and secretion of testosterone

Oxytocin

Posterior pituitary

S

Contractions of uterus at birth and release of milk from breast

PRL

Anterior pituitary

S

Promotion of milk synthesis

Somatostatin

Hypothalamus

I

Secretion of GH and TSH

TRH

Hypothalamus

S

Secretion of TSH and PRL

TSH

Anterior pituitary

S

Secretion of T4 and T3

ACTH, Adrenocorticotropic hormone; ADH, antidiuretic hormone; CRH, corticotropin-­releasing hormone; FSH, follicle-­stimulating hormone; GCs, glucocorticoids; GH, growth
hormone; GHRH, growth hormone–releasing hormone; GnRH, gonadotropin-­releasing hormone; IGF-­1, insulin-­derived growth factor 1; LH, luteinizing hormone; MCs,
mineralocorticoids; PRL, prolactin; S/I, stimulate/inhibit; T3, triiodothyronine; T4, thyroxine; TRH, thyrotropin-­releasing hormone; TSH, thyroid-­stimulating hormone (thyrotropin).

pituitary thyrotropes. TSH stimulates release of thyroxine (T4) and
triiodothyronine (T3) from the thyroid gland through the formation
of cyclic adenosine monophosphate and the G protein second messenger system. In addition to the negative feedback inhibition by T3, the
release of TRH and TSH is inhibited by dopamine, somatostatin, and
glucocorticoids.
Deficiency of TSH results in inactivity and atrophy of the thyroid
gland, whereas excess TSH results in hypertrophy and hyperplasia of
the thyroid gland.

Adrenocorticotropic Hormone

ACTH is a 39–amino acid single-­chain peptide that is derived by proteolytic cleavage from POMC, which is a 240–amino acid precursor
glycoprotein product of the pituitary gland. POMC also contains the
sequences for the lipotropins, melanocyte-­stimulating hormones (α, β,
γ), and β-­endorphin.
Secretion of ACTH is regulated by corticotropin-­releasing hormone (CRH), a 41–amino acid peptide found predominantly in the
median eminence but also in other areas in and outside of the brain.
ACTH is secreted in a diurnal pattern. It acts on the adrenal cortex to stimulate cortisol synthesis and secretion. ACTH and cortisol
levels are highest in the morning at the time of waking, are low in
the late afternoon and evening, and reach their nadir within the first
2 hours after beginning sleep. Similar to TRH and TSH, CRH and
ACTH function through the formation of cyclic adenosine monophosphate and the G protein second messenger system. Although
CRH is the primary regulator of ACTH secretion, other hormones
play a role. Arginine vasopressin, oxytocin, angiotensin II, and cholecystokinin stimulate release of CRH and ACTH, whereas atrial
natriuretic peptide and opioids inhibit release of CRH and ACTH.
Similar to the feedback inhibition T3 has on TRH and TSH, cortisol also inhibits CRH and ACTH. Physiologic conditions, such as
stress, fasting, and hypoglycemia, also stimulate release of CRH and
ACTH.

Luteinizing Hormone and Follicle-­Stimulating
Hormone

Gonadotropic hormones include two glycoproteins: LH and FSH.
They contain the same α subunit as TSH and human chorionic
gonadotropin but distinct β subunits. Receptors for FSH on the
ovarian granulosa cells and on testicular Sertoli cells mediate FSH
stimulation of follicular development in the ovary and of gametogenesis in the testis. On binding to specific receptors on ovarian
theca cells and testicular Leydig cells, LH promotes luteinization
of the ovary and Leydig cell function of the testis (Fig. 594.4). The
receptors for LH and FSH belong to a class of receptors with seven
membrane-­spanning protein domains. Receptor occupancy activates adenylyl cyclase through the mediation of G proteins.
LH-­releasing hormone, a decapeptide, has been isolated, synthesized, and widely used in clinical studies. Because it leads to the
release of LH and FSH from the same gonadotropic cells, it appears
that it is the only gonadotropin-­releasing hormone (GnRH).
Secretion of LH is inhibited by androgens and estrogens, and secretion of FSH is suppressed by gonadal production of inhibin, a 31-­kDa
glycoprotein produced by ovarian granulosa cells (females) and testicular Sertoli cells (males). Inhibin consists of α and β subunits joined
by disulfide bonds. The β-­β dimer activin also exists, and its actions
generally oppose that of inhibin by stimulating FSH secretion. In addition to its endocrine effect, activin has paracrine effects in the testis.
It facilitates LH-­induced testosterone production, indicating a direct
effect of Sertoli cells on Leydig cells.

POSTERIOR PITUITARY CELL TYPES

The posterior lobe of the pituitary is part of a functional unit, the
neurohypophysis, that consists of the neurons of the supraoptic and
paraventricular nuclei of the hypothalamus; neuronal axons, which
form the pituitary stalk; and neuronal terminals in the median eminence or in the posterior lobe. Vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3362 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
GH receptors
GHS receptors
GHRH receptors
SST receptors

SST
neuron

Raphe
nucleus

Periventricular
nucleus

5-HT

CRH
neuron

Brainstem
catecholaminergic
inputs

Basal
forebrain
ACh

GHRH
neuron
NPY
neuron
SST
neuron

Arcuate
nucleus

DA
Galanin

Hypothalamus
to CNS

GHRH

Leptin

Fat

SST

Ghrelin

Pituitary

FFA

GH

IGF-1
Stomach

Liver
Ghrelin

Fig. 594.3 Regulation of the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­growth hormone (GH) axis. GH secretion by the pituitary is stimulated by GH-­releasing hor-

mone (GHRH) and is inhibited by somatostatin (SST). Negative feedback control of GH secretion is exerted at the pituitary level by insulin-­like growth
factor 1 (IGF-­1) and by free fatty acids (FFAs). GH itself exerts a short-­loop negative feedback through activation of SST neurons in the hypothalamic
periventricular nucleus. These SST neurons directly synapse on arcuate GHRH neurons and project axon collaterals to the median eminence. Neuropeptide Y (NPY) neurons in the arcuate nucleus also indirectly modulate GH secretion by integrating peripheral GH, leptin, and ghrelin signals and
projecting to periventricular SST neurons. Ghrelin is secreted from the stomach and is a natural ligand for the GH secretagogue (GHS) receptor that
stimulates GH secretion at both the hypothalamic and pituitary levels. On the basis of indirect pharmacologic data, it appears that release of GHRH
is stimulated by galanin, γ-­aminobutyric acid (GABA), and α2-­adrenergic and dopaminergic inputs and inhibited by SST. Secretion of SST is inhibited
by muscarinic acetylcholine (ACh) and 5-­HT-­1D receptor ligands and increased by β2-­adrenergic stimuli and corticotropin-­releasing hormone (CRH).
CNS, Central nervous system; DA, dopamine; 5-­HT, serotonin (5-­hydroxytryptamine). (From Low MJ. Neuroendocrinology. In Melmed S, Polonsky
KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Fig. 7.22.)

[ADH]) and oxytocin are the two hormones produced by neurosecretion in the hypothalamic nuclei and released from the posterior pituitary. They are octapeptides and differ by only two amino
acids.

Vasopressin

Vasopressin (ADH) regulates water conservation at the level of the
kidney by increasing the permeability of the renal collecting duct to

water. It stimulates translocation of water channels through its interaction with vasopressin 2 (V2) receptors in the collecting duct, which act
through G proteins to increase adenylyl cyclase activity and increase
permeability to water. These V2 receptors also mediate von Willebrand
factor and tissue plasminogen activator. At higher concentrations,
ADH activates vasopressin 1 (V1) receptors in smooth muscle cells
and hepatocytes and exerts pressor and glycogenolytic effects through
mobilization of intracellular calcium stores. Separate vasopressin 3

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 594 u Hormones of the Hypothalamus and Pituitary 3363

NE
GnRH
neuron

Stress,
Nutrition,
Exercise,
Seasonal cues

Progesterone receptors
Estrogen receptors
Androgen receptors
Inhibin receptors
Leptin receptors

CRH

Kisspeptin
neuron

NPY

Anteroventral
Periventricular
nucleus
Hypothalamus

GABA

GALP

Glutamate

Arcuate
nucleus
β-endorphins

Kisspeptin
neuron

to CNS

to CNS

Pituitary

Inhibin

Testosterone

Estradiol
LH and
FSH

Inhibin

Testis

Progesterone

Ovary

Fig. 594.4 Regulation of the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­gonadal axis. Schematic diagram of the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­gonadal axis showing neural

systems that regulate gonadotropin-­releasing hormone (GnRH) secretion and feedback of gonadal steroid hormones at the level of the hypothalamus
and pituitary. CNS, Central nervous system; CRH, corticotropin-­releasing hormone; FSH, follicle-­stimulating hormone; GABA, γ-­aminobutyric acid;
GALP, galanin-­like peptide; LH, luteinizing hormone; NE, norepinephrine; NPY, neuropeptide Y. (From Low MJ. Neuroendocrinology. In Melmed S,
Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Fig. 7.30.)

(V3) receptors mediate stimulation of ACTH secretion. These effects
involve phosphatidylinositol hydrolysis rather than cyclic adenosine
monophosphate production.
Vasopressin and its accompanying protein neurophysin II are
encoded by the same gene. A single preprohormone is cleaved, and
both are transported to neurosecretory vesicles in equimolar amounts
in the posterior pituitary.
Vasopressin has a short half-­life and responds quickly to changes
in hydration. The stimuli for its release are increased plasma osmolality, perceived by osmoreceptors in the hypothalamus, and decreased
blood volume, perceived by baroreceptors in the carotid sinus of the
aortic arch.

Oxytocin

Oxytocin stimulates uterine contractions at the time of labor and
delivery in response to distention of the reproductive tract and stimulates smooth muscle contraction in the breast during suckling, which
results in milk letdown. Studies suggest that oxytocin also plays a role
in orgasm, social recognition, pair bonding, anxiety, trust, love, and
maternal behavior. Most recently, through the interaction with its G
protein–coupled receptor in pancreatic and adipose tissue, oxytocin
appears to play a significant role in appetite regulation and obesity by
inducing anorexia.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3364 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System

Chapter 595

Hypopituitarism
Briana C. Patterson and Eric I. Felner
Hypopituitarism denotes underproduction of one or more pituitary
hormones. Affected children have postnatal growth impairment and
other endocrine deficiencies that are specifically corrected by hormone
replacement. The incidence of congenital hypopituitarism is thought
to be between 1 in 4,000 and 1 in 10,000 live births. An epidemiologic
association between hypopituitarism and breech delivery has been
reported, but the causal relationship is not understood. With expanding knowledge of the genes that direct pituitary development or hormone production, an increasing proportion of cases can be attributed
to specific genetic alterations. Monogenic causes can only be identified
in about 10% of persons with congenital hypopituitarism. The likelihood of finding a genetic alteration is increased by consanguinity and
occurrence in siblings or across generations; however, in most cases
of isolated growth hormone deficiency (GHD) and sporadic multiple
pituitary hormone deficiency (MPHD), no specific single-­gene cause
can be identified. It is likely that polygenic and/or environmental factors regularly play a role in the development of congenital hypopituitarism. The genes, hormonal phenotypes, associated abnormalities,
and modes of transmission of several single-­gene disorders causing
congenital MPHD are shown in Table 595.1. Causes of acquired hypopituitarism, which usually has a later onset, has different causes (Table
595.2). Single-­gene alterations causing disruption of the GH axis primarily are shown in Table 595.3.

MULTIPLE PITUITARY HORMONE DEFICIENCY
Genetic Forms (see Table 595.1)

Sequentially expressed transcriptional activation factors direct the
differentiation and proliferation of anterior pituitary cell types. These
proteins are members of a large family of DNA-­binding proteins resembling homeobox genes. Alterations in different genes may produce different manifestations of MPHD. The PROP1 and POU1F1 genes are
expressed later in pituitary development only in cells of the anterior
pituitary and result in hypopituitarism without anomalies in other
organ systems. The HESX1, LHX3, LHX4, OTX2, SOX3, and PITX2
genes are expressed at earlier stages and are not restricted to the pituitary. Pathogenic alterations in these genes tend to produce phenotypes
that extend beyond hypopituitarism to include abnormalities in other
organs, and the degree of hypopituitarism is typically variable.

PROP1

PROP1 is found in the nuclei of somatotropes, lactotropes, and thyrotropes. Its roles include turning on POU1F1 expression and downregulating HESX1 expression. Although no genetic alteration can be
identified in most patients with MPHD, pathogenic variants of PROP1
are the most common explanation for recessive MPHD and are 10
times as common as the combined total of alterations in other pituitary
transcription factor genes. Deletions of one or two base pairs in exon
2 are most common, followed by missense, nonsense, and splice-­site
pathogenic mutations. Anterior pituitary hormone deficiencies may
not be evident in the neonatal period. The median age at diagnosis of
GHD is around 6 years. Recognition of thyroid-­stimulating hormone
(TSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), follicle-­stimulating hormone (FSH),
and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) deficiencies is delayed relative to recognition of GHD. Anterior pituitary size is small in most
patients, but in others there is progressive enlargement of the pituitary.

POU1F1 (PIT1)

POU1F1 (formerly PIT1) is a nuclear protein that binds to the GH
and prolactin promoters. It is necessary for the emergence and mature
function of somatotropes, lactotropes, and thyrotropes. Dominant and

recessive pathogenic variants in POU1F1 are responsible for complete
deficiencies of growth hormone (GH) and prolactin and variable TSH
deficiency. Affected patients exhibit nearly normal fetal growth but
experience severe growth failure in the first year of life. With normal
production of LH and FSH, puberty develops spontaneously, although
at a later-­than-­normal age. These patients are not at risk for development of ACTH deficiency. Anterior pituitary size is normal to small.

HESX1

The HESX1 gene is expressed in precursors of all five cell types of
the anterior pituitary early in embryologic development. Pathogenic
genetic variations in HESX1 result in heterogeneous phenotypes with
differences in development of the optic nerve and pituitary. The anterior pituitary may be hypoplastic or aplastic, and the posterior pituitary may be orthotopic or ectopic. Patients may have isolated GHD
or MPHDs, with or without the optic nerve hypoplasia syndrome,
historically called septo-­optic dysplasia (incomplete development of the
septum pellucidum with optic nerve hypoplasia and pituitary insufficiency). However, the majority of patients with optic nerve hypoplasia
syndrome do not have HESX1 gene alterations.

LHX3 and LHX4

The phenotype produced by recessive loss-­of-­function alterations of
the LHX3 gene resembles that produced by PROP1 genetic variants.
There are deficiencies of GH, prolactin, TSH, LH, and FSH but not
ACTH. Some affected persons show enlargement of the anterior pituitary. The first patients to be described had the unusual findings of a
short neck and a rigid cervical spine. Dominantly inherited pathogenic variations in the structurally similar LHX4 gene consistently
produce GH deficiency, with the variable presence of TSH and ACTH
deficiencies. Additional findings can include a very small V-­shaped
pituitary fossa, Chiari I malformation, and an ectopic posterior
pituitary.

Other Congenital Forms

Pituitary hypoplasia can occur as an isolated phenomenon or in association with more extensive developmental differences such as anencephaly or holoprosencephaly. Midline facial anomalies (cleft lip,
palate; see Chapter 356) or the finding of a solitary maxillary central
incisor may indicate a higher likelihood of GH or other anterior or
posterior hormone deficiency (Fig. 595.1). At least 12 genes have been
implicated in the complex genetic etiology of holoprosencephaly.
Hall-­Pallister syndrome is caused by dominant loss-­of-­function
alterations in the GLI3 gene. Absence of the pituitary gland is accompanied by hypothalamic hamartoma, polydactyly, nail dysplasia, bifid
epiglottis, imperforate anus, and anomalies of the heart, lungs, and
kidneys. The combination of anophthalmia and hypopituitarism has
been associated with pathogenic variants in the SIX6, SOX2, and OTX2
genes.
Optic nerve hypoplasia syndrome may be detected as a result of
clinical observation of nystagmus and visual impairment in infancy.
Neuroimaging demonstrates optic nerve and brain abnormalities and
is associated with anterior and/or posterior pituitary hormone deficiencies in up to 75% of cases (Fig. 595.2). Although these patients
often show the triad of a small anterior pituitary gland, an attenuated
pituitary stalk, and an ectopic posterior pituitary bright spot, the primary etiology of the hypopituitarism in this condition is thought to be
hypothalamic dysfunction. GH deficiency is the commonly observed
hormone deficiency, and other anterior pituitary hormone deficiencies
are less common. Diabetes insipidus is reported in only about 5% of
cases. The etiology is likely multifactorial and may involve interaction
between genetic and environmental factors. In most cases, no single-­
gene alteration can be identified.
Severe, early-­onset MPHD, including deficiency of ACTH, is often
associated with the triad of anterior pituitary hypoplasia, absence or
attenuation of the pituitary stalk, and an ectopic posterior pituitary
bright spot seen on MRI. Most cases are sporadic, and there is a male
predominance. Some are caused by pathogenic variants of the SOX3
gene, located on the X chromosome.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 595 u Hypopituitarism 3365
Table 595.1  Etiologic Classification of Congenital and Genetic Forms of Multiple Pituitary Hormone Deficiency
GENE OR LOCATION

PHENOTYPE

INHERITANCE

GENETIC FORMS
POU1F1 (PIT1)

GH, PRL deficiencies, variable TSH deficiency

AR, AD

PROP1

GH, TSH, PRL, LH, FSH deficiencies, variable ACTH deficiency, variable AP

AR

LHX3

GH, TSH, PRL, LH, FSH deficiencies, variable AP, ± short neck, limited neck rotation,
sensorineural deafness

AR

LHX4

GH, TSH, ACTH deficiencies, small AP, EPP, variable Arnold-­Chiari, cerebellar abnormalities

AD

TPIT

ACTH deficiency, severe neonatal form

AR

HESX1

GH deficiency, variable for others, small AP, EPP, optic nerve hypoplasia; septo-­optic dysplasia

AR, AD

SOX2

LH, FSH deficiencies, variable GH deficiency, anophthalmia, microphthalmia, esophageal
atresia, sensorineural hearing loss

AD

SOX3

Variable deficiencies, ± MR, EPP, small AP and stalk, developmental delay

XL

PITX2

Axenfeld-­Rieger syndrome: hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, pituitary hypoplasia, anterior
chamber abnormalities of the eye, dental hypoplasia

AD

GLI2

Hypopituitarism, holoprosencephaly, midline defects, polydactyly

AD

GLI3

Hall-­Pallister syndrome, hypopituitarism

AD

SHH (Sonic Hedgehog)

GH deficiency with single central incisor

AD

OTX2

GH or combined deficiencies, anophthalmia or microphthalmia, coloboma, developmental delay

AD

TBX19

ACTH deficiency, neonatal hypoglycemia or cholestatic jaundice

AR

PC1

Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, ACTH deficiency

AR

GIF, SHHT, SIX3

Pituitary stalk interruption syndrome: thin or absent pituitary stalk, hypoplasia of
adenohypophysis, ectopic neurohypophysis, neonatal hypoglycemia, cholestasis, micropenis

Holoprosencephaly
related gene group

FGF8

Hypopituitarism, holoprosencephaly

AD

FGFR1

Hypopituitarism, pituitary hypoplasia, agenesis of the corpus callosum, ocular defects

AD

PROKR2

GH, TSH and ACTH deficiencies, micropenis and neonatal hypoglycemia

AD, AR

UNKNOWN OR POLYGENETIC ETIOLOGY
Congenital absence of
pituitary gland
Optic nerve hypoplasia
syndrome/septo-­optic
dysplasia

Optic nerve hypoplasia, nystagmus, absent septum pellucidum, pituitary hypoplasia

ACTH, Adrenocorticotropic hormone; AP, anterior pituitary; AD, autosomal dominant; EPP, ectopic posterior pituitary; FSH, follicle-­stimulating hormone; GH, growth hormone; LH,
luteinizing hormone; MR, mental retardation; PRL, prolactin; AR, autosomal recessive; TSH, thyroid-­stimulating hormone; XL, X-­linked.

Acquired Forms

Any lesion that damages the hypothalamus, pituitary stalk, or anterior
pituitary can cause pituitary hormone deficiency (see Table 595.2).
Because such lesions are not selective, multiple hormonal deficiencies
are usually observed. Diabetes insipidus is more frequent in acquired
than in congenital hypopituitarism. The most common structural
lesion of the pituitary causing childhood-­onset acquired MPHD is
craniopharyngioma (see Chapter 546). Central nervous system germinoma, optic pathway or hypothalamic glioma, histiocytosis, tuberculosis, sarcoidosis, toxoplasmosis, meningitis, pituitary abscess, and
aneurysms can also cause hypothalamic-­
hypophyseal damage and
dysfunction. Additionally, children treated with radiation therapy for
central nervous system or nasopharyngeal tumors are at increased risk
for GHD and other pituitary hormone deficiencies to the extent that
the radiation field includes the hypothalamus and/or pituitary, even if
the tumor itself is anatomically remote from the pituitary and hypothalamus. The magnitude of the risk and the timing of the emergence
of pituitary hormone deficiencies depend on the dose of radiation to
the hypothalamic-­pituitary axis and the duration of elapsed time after
radiotherapy is complete. High doses of radiation (>50 Gy) are likely
to produce GH deficiency sooner than 1 year after irradiation, whereas
other anterior pituitary hormone deficiencies may not appear until

later. GH production appears to be particularly vulnerable to the effects
of irradiation, even at lower doses, whereas deficiencies of ACTH,
gonadotropins, and thyrotropin-­releasing hormone (TRH)/TSH occur
with declining frequency and typically occur at higher doses of radiation. Irradiation alone does not typically result in diabetes insipidus.
Traumatic brain injury, including abusive head trauma, motor vehicle
accidents, and chronic repetitive head injury, is an increasingly recognized cause of pituitary dysfunction related to damage to the pituitary,
its stalk, or the hypothalamus.

ISOLATED GROWTH HORMONE DEFICIENCY AND
INSENSITIVITY
Genetic Forms of Growth Hormone Deficiency

Isolated GHD is caused by abnormalities of the GH-­releasing hormone
receptor, GH genes, and certain genes located on the X chromosome
(see Table 595.3).

Growth Hormone–Releasing Hormone Receptor

Recessive loss-­of-­function alterations in the receptor for GH-­releasing
hormone interfere with proliferation of somatotropes during pituitary
development and disrupt the most important signals for release of GH.
The anterior pituitary is small, in keeping with the observation that

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3366 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 595.2  Causes of Acquired Pituitary Insufficiency
TRAUMATIC
Surgical resection
Radiation damage
Traumatic brain injury
INFILTRATIVE/INFLAMMATORY
Primary hypophysitis
Lymphocytic
Granulomatous
Xanthomatous
Secondary hypophysitis
Sarcoidosis
Langerhans cell histiocytosis
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis
Takayasu disease
Hemochromatosis
INFECTIONS
Tuberculosis
Pneumocystis jirovecii infection
Fungal (histoplasmosis, aspergillosis)
Parasites (toxoplasmosis)
Viral (cytomegalovirus)
VASCULAR
Pregnancy related
Aneurysm
Apoplexy
Diabetes
Hypotension
Arteritis
Sickle cell disease

GH1

The GH1 gene is one of a cluster of five genes on chromosome 17q22-­
24. This cluster arose through successive duplications of an ancestral
GH gene. Unequal crossing over at meiosis has produced a variety of
gene deletions. Small deletions (<10 kb) remove only the GH1 gene,
whereas large deletions (45 kb) remove one or more of the adjacent
genes (CSL, CS1, GH2, and CS2). The growth phenotype is identical
with deletion of GH1 alone or GH1 together with one or more of the
adjacent genes. Loss of the CS1, GH2, and CS2 genes without loss of
GH1 causes deficiency of chorionic somatomammotropin and placental GH in the maternal circulation, but it does not result in fetal or
postnatal growth retardation. Most children with GH1 gene deletions
respond very well to recombinant GH treatment, but some develop
antibodies to GH and cease growing despite treatment.
Recessively transmitted pathogenic variants in the GH1 gene produce a similar phenotype. Missense, nonsense, and frameshift alterations have been described. Autosomal dominant isolated GHD is also
caused by variants in GH1. These alterations usually involve splice-­site
errors in intron 3 and result in a variant protein that lacks the amino
acids normally encoded by exon 3. Accumulation of this protein interferes with the processing, storage, and secretion of the normal GH protein and may result in additional deficiencies of TSH and/or ACTH.
There are several reports of alterations in GH1 that lead to variant proteins with reduced biologic activity.

X-­Linked Isolated Growth Hormone Deficiency

NEOPLASTIC
Pituitary adenoma
Parasellar mass
Rathke cyst
Dermoid cyst
Meningioma
Germinoma
Suprasellar/optic pathway glioma
Craniopharyngioma
Hypothalamic hamartoma
Pituitary metastatic deposits
Hematologic malignancy
Leukemia
Lymphoma
FUNCTIONAL
Nutritional
Caloric restriction
Malnutrition
Excessive exercise
Nonspecific illness
Acute critical illness
Chronic renal failure
Chronic liver failure
Hormonal
Hyperprolactinemia
Hypothyroidism
Drugs
Anabolic steroids
Glucocorticoid excess
GnRH agonists
Estrogen
Dopamine
Somatostatin analog
Immune check-­point inhibitors
Modified from Kaiser U, Ho KKY. Pituitary physiology and diagnostic evaluation.
In: Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds. Williams Textbook of
Endocrinology, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Table 8.5, p. 193.

somatotropes normally account for >50% of pituitary volume. There
is some compromise of fetal growth followed by severe compromise of
postnatal growth.

Two loci on the X chromosome have been associated with hypopituitarism. The first lies at Xq21.3-­q22 in the region of the BTK gene.
Pathogenic variants in this region produce hypogammaglobulinemia
and isolated GHD. The second locus maps farther out on the long arm,
at Xq24-­q27.1, a region containing the SOX2 transcription factor gene.
Abnormalities in this locus have been linked to isolated GHD with
intellectual disability and to MPHD with the triad of pituitary hypoplasia, missing pituitary stalk, and ectopic posterior pituitary gland.

Acquired Forms

The GH axis is more susceptible to disruption by acquired conditions
than are other hypothalamic-­
pituitary axes. Recognized causes of
acquired GHD include the use of radiotherapy for malignancy, meningitis, histiocytosis, and trauma.
Children who receive radiotherapy for central nervous system
tumors, leukemia, or total body irradiation before hematopoietic
stem cell transplant are at risk for developing GHD. Spinal irradiation
results in disproportionately poor growth of the axial skeleton relative
to the appendicular skeleton; this problem is not remediable with GH
treatment. Growth typically slows during radiation therapy or chemotherapy, may improve for 1-­2 years after cancer treatment, and then
declines with the development of GHD. The dose and frequency of
radiotherapy are important determinants of hypopituitarism. GHD is
almost universal 5 years after therapy with a total dose ≥35 Gy. More
subtle defects are seen with doses around 20 Gy. Deficiency of GH is
the most common defect, but deficiencies of TSH and ACTH can also
occur. The evaluation of GHD is more complicated when radiation-­
associated precocious puberty is also present. The clinician is likely to
encounter children in the 8-­to 10-­year age range who are growing at
rates that are normal for chronological age but subnormal for stage of
pubertal development.

GROWTH HORMONE INSENSITIVITY
Abnormalities of the Growth Hormone Receptor

GH insensitivity is caused by disruption of pathways distal to the production of GH (Table 595.4). Laron syndrome involves pathogenic
genetic variations in the GH receptor. Children with this condition
clinically resemble those with severe isolated GHD. Birth length tends
to be about 1 standard deviation (SD) below the mean, and severe
short stature with lengths >4 SD below the mean is present by 1 year
of age. Resting and stimulated GH levels tend to be high, and insulin-­
like growth factor (IGF) 1 levels are low. The GH receptor has an
extracellular GH-­binding domain, a transmembrane domain, and an

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 595 u Hypopituitarism 3367
Table 595.3  Established Genetic Defects of the GH-­IGF Axis Resulting in Isolated GH Deficiency, GH Insensitivity, or IGF-­1
Deficiency
GENE

INHERITANCE

PHENOTYPE

ISOLATED GROWTH HORMONE DEFICIENCY
GHRHR
AR
Type IB form of isolated GHD; low levels of GH production, but less severe than type 1A isolated GHD; may also
be caused by pathogenic variants in GH1
GHS-­R

AD

GHD and ISS

GH1

AR

Type IA form of isolated GHD, in utero growth retardation; absent GH production caused by gene deletion,
antibodies to GH develop over time during treatment

GH1

AR

Type IB form of isolated GHD; low levels of GH production, but less severe than type 1A isolated GHD; may also
be caused by pathogenic variants in GHRHR

GH1

AD

Type II form of isolated GHD; dominant negative pathogenic variants in GH1, which decrease GH secretion

BTK

XL

Type III form of isolated GHD; hypogammaglobulinemia

GH1

AD

Bioinactive GH molecule; rare, dominant negative pathogenic variant in GH1 that interferes with GHR signaling

GROWTH HORMONE INSENSITIVITY
GHR
AR, AD
IGF-­I deficiency; high GH level; normal, decreased or increased GHBP (depending on which domain of the
receptor is affected); unresponsive to GH treatment
IGF-­1 DEFICIENCY
IGF1
AR

IGF-­1 deficiency; IUGR and postnatal growth failure, sensorineural deafness, insulin resistance, microcephaly

STAT5b

AR

IGF-­1 deficiency, variable immune defect, hyperprolactinemia, chronic pulmonary infections, eczema

ALS

AR

IGF-­1 deficiency; variable postnatal growth failure, delayed puberty

AD, Autosomal dominant; ALS, acid-­labile subunit; AR, autosomal recessive; GH, growth hormone; GHBP, GH-­binding protein; GHD, growth hormone deficiency; GHRHR, GH-­releasing
hormone receptor; IGF, insulin-­like growth factor; ISS, idiopathic short stature; IUGR, intrauterine growth retardation; XL, X-­linked.
Modified from Sperling MA. Pediatric Endocrinology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2014: Table 10.3, p. 333.

Fig. 595.1 Solitary median maxillary central incisor at age 16 mo.

(From Giannopoulou EZ, Rohrer T, Hoffmann P, et al. Solitary median
maxillary central incisor. J Pediatr. 2015;167:770, Fig. 2.)

intracellular signaling domain. Pathogenic alterations in the extracellular domain interfere with binding of GH. Serum GH-­binding protein
activity, representing the circulating form of the membrane receptor
for GH, is generally low. Variants in the transmembrane domain can
interfere with anchoring of the receptor to the plasma membrane.
In these cases, circulating GH-­binding protein activity is normal or
high. Alterations in the intracellular domain interfere with JAK/STAT
signaling.

Post-­Receptor Forms of Growth Hormone
Insensitivity

Some children with severe growth failure, high GH and low IGF-­1 levels, and normal GH-­binding protein levels have abnormalities distal to
the GH binding and activation of the GH receptor. Several have been

Fig. 595.2 Septo-­optic dysplasia with agenesis of the septum pel-

lucidum. Sagittal T1 weighted MR image shows that fornices are inferiorly positioned (long arrow). The optic apparatus is hypoplastic
(short arrow); there is no identifiable neurohypophysis. (From Rollins
N. Congenital brain malformations. In: Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric
Diagnostic Imaging, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019: Fig. 31.13.)

found to have pathogenic variations in the gene-­encoding signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b (STAT5b). Disruption of this
key intermediate connecting receptor activation to gene transcription
produces growth failure similar to that seen in Laron syndrome. These
patients also suffer from immunodeficiency and chronic pulmonary

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3368 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 595.4  Proposed Classification of Growth Hormone
Insensitivity

Table 595.5  Clinical Features of Growth Hormone
Insensitivity, Including Classic Laron Syndrome

PRIMARY GH INSENSITIVITY (HEREDITARY DEFECTS)
GH receptor defect (may be positive or negative for GH-­binding
protein)
• Extracellular alteration (e.g., Laron syndrome)
• Cytoplasmic alteration
• Intracellular alteration
GH signal transduction defects (distal to cytoplasmic domain of GH
receptor)
• Stat5b pathogenic variants
Insulin-­like growth factor-­1 defects
• IGF-­1 gene deletion
• IGF-­1 transport defect (pathogenic variant in ALS)
• IGF-­1 receptor defect
Bioinactive GH molecule (responds to exogenous GH)

GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT
Near-­normal birthweight
Slightly decreased birthweight
Severe postnatal growth failure
Delayed bone age (may be advanced relative to height age)
Micropenis in childhood; normal for body size in adults
Puberty may be delayed 3-­7 yr
Normal sexual function and fertility

SECONDARY GH INSENSITIVITY (ACQUIRED DEFECTS)
Circulating antibodies to GH that inhibit GH action
Antibodies to the GH receptor
GH insensitivity caused by malnutrition, liver disease, catabolic
states, diabetes mellitus
Other conditions that cause GH insensitivity
ALS, Acid-­labile subunit; GH, growth hormone; IGF, insulin-­like growth factor.
From Sperling MA. Pediatric Endocrinology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2014: Box 10.4.

infections, consistent with important roles for STAT5b in interleukin
cytokine signaling.

IGF-­1 Gene Abnormalities

Pathogenic alterations of the IGF-­1 gene produce severe prenatal
and postnatal growth impairment. Microcephaly, intellectual disability, and deafness are present in patients with exon deletion and
a missense variant. These patients can be expected to respond to
recombinant IGF-­1 treatment.

Insulin-­Like Growth Factor–Binding Protein
Abnormalities

Pathogenic variants in the gene encoding the acid-­labile subunit of the
circulating 165-­kDa IGF-­1, IGF-­BP3, acid-­labile subunit complex has
been associated with short stature. Total IGF-­1 levels were very low.
The index case, with homozygosity for an acid-­labile subunit alteration,
did not show an increase in IGF-­1 levels or an increase in growth rate
during GH treatment.

IGF-­1 Receptor Gene Abnormalities

Pathogenic variants in the gene encoding the IGF-­1 receptor also
compromise prenatal and postnatal growth. The phenotype does not
appear to be as severe as that seen with the absence of IGF-­1. Adult
heights are closer to the normal range, and affected patients do not
have intellectual disability or deafness.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Congenital Hypopituitarism

The child with congenital hypopituitarism is usually of normal size and
weight at birth, although those with MPHD and those with pathogenic
genetic variants in the GH1 or GHR gene have birth lengths that average 1 SD below the mean. Children with severe deficits in GH production or action typically fall more than 4 SD below the mean for length
by 1 year of age. Those with less severe deficiencies grow at rates below
the 25th percentile for age and gradually diverge from normal height
percentiles. Delayed closure of the epiphyses permits growth beyond
the normal age when growth should be complete. Features of GH
insensitivity, including Laron syndrome, are somewhat distinct from
GHD and MPHD and are noted in Table 595.5.
Infants with congenital dysfunction of the pituitary or hypothalamus may present with neonatal emergencies such as apnea, cyanosis,
or severe hypoglycemia with or without seizures. Prolonged neonatal
cholestatic jaundice is common. It involves elevation of conjugated and

OTHER PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS
Sparse hair (before age 7 yr)
Frontal bossing
Normal head circumference
Small facies (resulting in craniofacial disproportion)
Hypoplastic nasal bridge
Shallow orbits
Delayed dentition
Blue sclerae
High-­pitched voice
Hip dysplasia
Limited extension in elbows
LATE FINDINGS/OTHER COMPLICATIONS
Hypoglycemia in infants and children (fasting symptoms in some
adults)
Delayed walking and motor milestones
Avascular necrosis of femoral head
Thin, prematurely aged skin
Osteopenia
From Sperling MA. Pediatric Endocrinology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2014: Box 10.5.

unconjugated bilirubin and may be associated with giant cell neonatal hepatitis. Nystagmus can suggest optic nerve hypoplasia syndrome
(see Chapter 671). Micropenis with or without testicular maldescent
in males provides an additional diagnostic clue. Deficiency of GH may
be accompanied by hypoadrenalism (see Chapter 615.2) and hypothyroidism (see Chapter 603), along with gonadotropin deficiency (see
Chapters 623.2 and 626.2).
Toddlers and school-­age children tend to present with proportionate short stature. On physical examination, the head may be round and
the face short and broad. The frontal bone may be prominent, and the
bridge of the nose is often depressed and saddle shaped. The nose may be
small, but the nasolabial folds are well developed. The mandible and the
chin may be underdeveloped, and the teeth, which erupt late, are often
crowded. The neck is short, and the larynx is small. The voice is high-­
pitched and remains high after puberty. The extremities are well proportioned, with small hands and feet. Weight for height is often normal, but
there may be an imbalance of lean mass and adipose tissue. The genitals
are usually small for age in males, and sexual maturation may be delayed
or absent as the child ages.
In teens with undiagnosed congenital hypopituitarism, short stature is
expected. Additionally, facial, axillary, and pubic hair may be decreased,
and the scalp hair is fine. Intelligence is usually normal for age, unless
there are other structural brain abnormalities, and the children may
seem precocious compared with younger children of a similar size.

Acquired Hypopituitarism

The child is normal initially, and manifestations similar to those seen in
idiopathic pituitary growth failure gradually appear and progress. When
complete or almost complete destruction of the pituitary gland occurs,
signs of pituitary insufficiency are present. Atrophy of the adrenal cortex,
thyroid, and gonads results in loss of weight, asthenia, sensitivity to cold,
mental torpor, and absence of sweating. Sexual maturation fails to take
place or regresses if already present. There may be atrophy of the gonads
and genital tract with amenorrhea and loss of pubic and axillary hair.
There is a tendency to hypoglycemia. Growth slows dramatically. Diabetes insipidus (see Chapter 596) may be present but can by obscured by
the development of yet untreated central adrenal insufficiency.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 595 u Hypopituitarism 3369
If the lesion is an expanding tumor, symptoms such as headache,
vomiting, visual disturbances, pathologic sleep patterns, decreased
school performance, seizures, polyuria, and growth failure can occur.
Documented slowing of growth can antedate neurologic signs and
symptoms, especially with craniopharyngioma, yet neurologic and
ophthalmologic complaints are more often the presenting problems.
In other cases, evidence of pituitary insufficiency may first appear after
surgical intervention. In children with craniopharyngioma, visual field
defects, optic atrophy, papilledema, obesity, and cranial nerve palsy are
common. Skeletal age may be delayed in acquired MPHD but may be
relatively normal if the pituitary dysfunction is of very recent onset.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

MPHD and/or GHD should be suspected in infants with hypoglycemia, micropenis, congenital nystagmus, and prolonged conjugated
hyperbilirubinemia and in older children with severe postnatal growth
failure (Table 595.6). Criteria for short stature include height below
Table 595.6  Evaluation of Suspected Growth Hormone
Deficiency
History

• Birthweight and length
• Obstetric complications
• Breech presentation
• Neonatal hypoglycemia
• Prolonged neonatal jaundice/cholestasis
• Review of systems for systemic illness
• Diet history

Physical exam

• Linear growth failure (may be the only
clinical feature present)
Proportionate short stature
Low height velocity
• Weight for length appropriate or increased
• Micropenis with or without testicular
maldescent in males
• Small midface
• Cleft palate
• High-­pitched voice
• Delayed dental eruption
• Optic nerve hypoplasia

Imaging

• Radiologic evaluation of bone age
• Central nervous system imaging to evaluate
the hypothalamus/pituitary and to exclude
other conditions

Laboratory
evaluation

• Measurements of IGF-­1 and IGF-­binding
protein levels
• Assess thyroid function
• Exclude chronic medical illness
CBC, metabolic profile, inflammatory
markers, celiac testing, urinalysis
• Determination of peak GH levels after
stimulation test

Treatment
considerations

• Replacement with rhGH
• Dosage adjustment
IGF-­1
Height velocity
Pubertal status
Body weight
• Predictors of improved response to
treatment
Early initiation of treatment
Higher rhGH dose
• Monitor during treatment
Height velocity
IGF-­1 levels
Glucose metabolism
Skeletal age
Thyroid function, adrenal function

GH, Growth hormone; IGF, insulin-­like growth factor; rhGH, recombinant human growth
hormone.

the first percentile for age and sex or height >2 SD below sex-­adjusted
mid-­parent height. Acquired GHD can occur at any age, and when it
is of acute onset, height may be within the normal range. In both congenital and acquired GH deficiency, height velocity will be low relative to sex-­and bone age–matched peers. A strong clinical suspicion
is important in establishing the diagnosis because laboratory measures
of GH sufficiency lack specificity. Random GH levels are not helpful in
the evaluation of toddlers and older children because of the pulsatile
secretion of GH, whereas measurement of GH may be useful in the first
2 weeks of life when levels are tonically increased. Observation of low
serum levels of IGF-­1 and the GH-­dependent IGF-­BP3 can be helpful,
but IGF-­1 and IGF-­BP3 levels should be matched to normal values for
skeletal age and sexual maturity rating, rather than chronological age.
Values in the upper part of the normal range for age effectively exclude
GHD. IGF-­1 values in the lower part of the normal range may occur in
normally growing children, children with impaired nutrition, or those
with hypopituitarism. The expected range for IGF-­1 in normal and
GH-­deficient children overlaps somewhat during infancy and early
childhood. IGF-­1 levels in isolation should not be used to diagnose
GH deficiency.
After infancy, a definitive diagnosis of GHD traditionally requires
demonstration of absent or low levels of GH in response to stimulation, but provocative testing may be omitted if the patient has the
expected auxologic findings, a documented hypothalamic or pituitary
defect, and at least one other pituitary hormone deficiency. A variety
of provocative tests have been devised that rapidly increase the level of
GH in normal children. These include administration of insulin, arginine, clonidine, levodopa, or glucagon. Macimorelin is an oral ghrelin
agonist approved in the United States for growth hormone stimulation testing in adults, but not in children. Because thyroid hormone is
a prerequisite for normal GH synthesis, it must always be assessed and
replaced, if needed, before provocative GH testing. In chronic GHD, the
demonstration of subnormal linear growth, a delayed skeletal age, and
low peak levels of GH (<10 ng/mL) in each of two provocative tests are
compatible with the diagnosis. In acute GHD, a high clinical suspicion
of GHD and low peak levels of GH (<10 ng/mL) in each of two provocative tests are compatible with the diagnosis. This rather arbitrary
cutoff point is higher than the criteria used for diagnosis of adult GHD.
There is no consensus regarding adoption of criteria that account for
age, sex, and GH assay characteristics. Some studies indicate that many
GH-­sufficient prepubertal children fail to achieve GH values >10 ng/
mL with two pharmacologic tests; pretest, short-­term sex steroid priming has been proposed to increase the diagnostic specificity of this
testing.
In addition to establishing the diagnosis of GHD, it is necessary to
examine other pituitary functions. Levels of TSH, free thyroxine or total
thyroxine with T3 resin uptake, ACTH, cortisol, gonadotropins, and
gonadal steroids might provide evidence of other pituitary hormonal
deficiencies. Antidiuretic hormone deficiency may be established by
appropriate studies (see Chapter 596). Infants with clear clinical and
biochemical evidence of multiple pituitary hormone deficiencies and
supportive anatomic variants demonstrated on MRI of the brain may
not require provocative GH testing.

RADIOLOGIC FINDINGS

Neurologic imaging should be obtained when the cause of hypopituitarism is not known. CT is appropriate for recognizing suprasellar
calcification associated with craniopharyngiomas and bony changes
accompanying histiocytosis. However, MRI is usually used as the initial test to anatomically characterize the pituitary and hypothalamus,
as MRI provides a much more detailed view of the relevant anatomy.
Many cases of severe early-­onset MPHD show the triad of a small
anterior pituitary gland, a missing or attenuated pituitary stalk, and
an ectopic posterior pituitary bright spot at the base of the hypothalamus (Fig. 595.3). Subnormal anterior pituitary height, implying a small
anterior pituitary, is common in genetic and idiopathic causes of isolated GHD. Craniopharyngiomas are rare tumors in childhood, but
common causes of acquired hypopituitarism, whereas pituitary adenomas rarely cause hypopituitarism in children. Both hypoplastic and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3370 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System

Fig. 595.3 Sagittal T1 weighted MRI shows an ectopic posterior pi-

tuitary (white arrow) and a small anterior pituitary (black arrow). (From
Giannopoulou EZ, Rohrer T, Hoffmann P, et al. Solitary median maxillary
central incisor. J Pediatr. 2015;167:770, App Fig. 1.)

markedly enlarged anterior pituitary glands are seen in patients with
PROP1 or LHX3 gene alterations. Structural lesions causing isolated,
acquired GHD are not common, but are important from a therapeutic
perspective, such that MRI is usually recommended at the time of the
diagnosis of GHD.
Skeletal maturation may be assessed with a plain film of the hand
(bone age) and is delayed in patients with isolated GHD and may be
even more delayed when there is combined GH and TSH deficiency.
Importantly, in very recent or acute onset of hypopituitarism, initial
assessment of skeletal age may not demonstrate the delay classically
reported in congenital or long-­standing hypopituitarism. Further,
comorbid central precocious puberty may accelerate skeletal development when both precocious puberty and GHD are present, as
may be seen in some patients with GHD after cranial irradiation.
Dual-­
photon x-­
ray absorptiometry shows deficient bone mineralization, deficiencies in lean body mass, and a corresponding
increase in adiposity, but it is not routinely recommended in the
initial evaluation of pediatric GHD.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The causes of growth disorders are numerous. The differential diagnosis can be summarized broadly as follows: hormonal disorders, chronic
illness, undernutrition, genetic conditions, nonsyndromic family trait,
and constitutional delay of growth and development. Hormonal disorders include primary hypothyroidism and Cushing disease. Systemic
conditions, such as inflammatory bowel disease, celiac disease, occult
renal disease, and anemia, must be considered. Patients with systemic
conditions often have a greater deficit of weight than length. Severe
psychosocial deprivation may result in growth failure that mimics GH deficiency. Numerous syndromic genetic conditions include
short stature as a manifestation, among other findings, whereas some
specific genetic alterations may present with isolated short stature.
These include Turner syndrome (see Chapter 99.4), pathogenic variants and deletions in SHOX, ACAN, PTPN11, and IHH, the skeletal
dysplasias (see Chapter 735), and identifiable syndromes including
Donohue (INSR), Kabuki (KMT2D, KDM6A), Noonan (RASopathy),
Smith-­Lemli Opitz (DHCR7), and Cornelia de Lange (NIPBL, SMC1A,
HDAC8, RAD21, SMC3). Prenatal-­onset short stature associated with
being small for gestational age that persists during childhood may also
be syndromic. Whole exome sequencing is helpful in identifying the
specific syndrome.

Some otherwise normal children are short (i.e., >2.25 SD below
the mean for age) and grow 5 cm/year or less but have normal levels of GH in response to provocative tests and normal spontaneous
episodic secretion; this is often termed idiopathic short stature.
Most of these children show increased rates of growth when treated
with GH in doses comparable with those used to treat children with
hypopituitarism. Plasma levels of IGF-­1 in these patients may be
normal or low. Several groups of treated children have achieved
final or near-­
final adult heights. Different studies have found
changes in adult height that range from −2.5 to +7.5 cm compared
with pretreatment predictions. There are no methods that can reliably predict which of these children will become taller in adulthood
as a result of GH treatment and which will have compromised adult
height despite treatment.
Diagnostic strategies for distinguishing between permanent GH
deficiency and other causes of impaired growth are imperfect. Children with a combination of genetic short stature and constitutional
delay of growth have short stature, below-­average growth rates, and
delayed bone ages. Many of these children exhibit minimal GH
secretory responses to provocative stimuli and may be treated with
GH therapy. When children in whom idiopathic or acquired isolated GHD is diagnosed are treated with recombinant human GH
and retested as adults, the majority have peak GH levels within the
normal range.

Constitutional Growth Delay

Constitutional growth delay is one of the variants of normal growth
commonly encountered by the pediatrician. Length and weight
measurements of affected children are normal at birth, and growth
is normal for the first 4-­12 months of life. Height is sustained at
a lower percentile during childhood. The pubertal growth spurt is
delayed, so their growth rates persist at a lower prepubertal rate
after their classmates have begun to accelerate. Detailed questioning often reveals other family members (often one or both parents)
with histories of short stature in childhood, delayed puberty, and
eventual normal stature. IGF-­1 levels tend to be low for chronological age but within the normal range for bone age and sexual maturation rating. GH responses to provocative testing tend to be lower
than in children with a more typical timing of puberty. The prognosis for these children to achieve normal adult height is guarded. Predictions based on height and bone age tend to overestimate eventual
height to a greater extent in males than in females. Males with >2
years of pubertal delay can benefit from a short course of testosterone therapy to hasten puberty after 14 years of age. The cause of this
variant of normal growth is thought to be persistence of the relative
hypogonadotropic state of childhood.

TREATMENT

Although well-­established treatments are available to replace the
classical anterior pituitary hormone deficiencies, treatment must
take into account patient age, pubertal maturation, and patient
goals. Lifelong attention to correct administration of hormone
replacement and monitoring for comorbidities are needed to optimize patient outcomes.
Recombinant human GH (rhGH) has been available by prescription
since the 1980s. Multiple brands are marketed in the United States,
which are therapeutically equivalent, with the major differences consisting of proprietary devices for subcutaneous injection and availability of solubilized liquid forms versus powders needing reconstitution
before injection. Long-­acting forms are under development and will
need to demonstrate comparable efficacy, safety, and tolerability to the
daily injections currently available.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved
eight pediatric indications for rhGH treatment to promote linear growth. They are GHD, Turner syndrome, chronic renal

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 595 u Hypopituitarism 3371
failure before transplantation, idiopathic short stature, small-­for-­
gestational-­age short stature, Prader-­Willi syndrome, SHOX gene
abnormality, and Noonan syndrome. In the United States, FDA
approval for a given indication does not ensure that a patient’s
insurance carrier will approve payment for the drug. Treatment
should be started as soon as possible to narrow the gap in height
between patients and their classmates during childhood and to have
the greatest effect on mature height. For some infants with MPHD,
initiation of rhGH treatment may be urgent to reduce the frequency
and severity of episodes of hypoglycemia. The recommended initial
dose of rhGH for treatment of GHD is 0.16-­0.24 mg/kg/wk (22-­35
μg/kg/day). Higher doses have been used during puberty and for
non-­GHD indications. Most currently available forms of rhGH are
administered subcutaneously once daily, but a weekly preparation
has been recently FDA approved for use in the United States.
Maximal response to rhGH occurs in the first year of treatment.
Growth velocity during this first year is typically above the 95th percentile for age. With each successive year of treatment, the growth rate
tends to decrease until it approximates a typical height velocity for
skeletal age. If the growth rate drops below the 25th percentile, adherence should be evaluated before the dose is increased. IGF-­1 may be
measured as an objective assessment of adherence. GH therapy should
be continued until near-­final height is achieved. Criteria for stopping
GH treatment include a decision by the adolescent that they are tall
enough, a growth rate less than 1 inch per year, and a bone age greater
than 14 years in females and greater than 16 years in males. Adolescents who have completed treatment for promotion of adult stature
should be reevaluated for GHD based on adult criteria after treatment
is complete. Some adolescents or young adults, particularly those with
profound GHD and/or MPHD, may benefit from continuation of
rhGH treatment as adults. The dose of rhGH is much lower in adults
relative to growing teens. Children with hypopituitarism require coordinated transition to adult care and lifelong attention to their endocrine deficiencies.
Concurrent treatment with rhGH and a gonadotropin-­releasing
hormone agonist has been used in the hope that interruption of
puberty will delay epiphyseal fusion and prolong growth. This strategy may increase adult height. Risks include increasing the discrepancy in physical maturity between GH-­deficient children and their
age peers, decreasing the upper to lower segment ratio, and impairing
bone mineralization. There have also been attempts to forestall epiphyseal fusion in males by giving aromatase inhibitors, which inhibit
the enzyme responsible for converting androgens to estrogens. These
agents are not approved for this purpose in the United States, but
some clinical trials have demonstrated an increase in predicted adult
height with this approach.
Some patients develop either primary or central hypothyroidism
while under treatment with GH. Similarly, there is a risk of developing adrenal insufficiency as an associated component of hypopituitarism. If unrecognized, this can be fatal. Periodic evaluation of
thyroid and adrenal function is indicated for all patients diagnosed
with GHD.
rhGH treatment may enhance the growth of non-­GHD children
as well. Intensive investigation is in progress to determine the full
spectrum of short children who may benefit from treatment with
GH. The FDA approval for use of GH in idiopathic short stature
specifies a height below the 1.2 percentile (−2.25 SD) for age and
sex, a predicted height below the 5th percentile, and open epiphyses. Studies of the effect of GH treatment on adult height suggest
a median gain of 2-­3 inches, depending on dose and duration of
treatment.

In children with MPHD, replacement should also be directed at
other hormonal deficiencies. In TSH-­deficient patients, thyroid hormone replacement (levothyroxine) is given in full replacement doses.
In ACTH-­
deficient patients, hydrocortisone should be prescribed
in physiologic doses, about 8-­12 mg/m2/day. In patients deficient in
both TSH and ACTH, initiation of adrenal replacement before thyroid hormone replacement is mandatory to reduce the risk of adrenal crisis. Individualized dose adjustment of hydrocortisone is needed
to minimize the risk of side effects associated with excess glucocorticoid administration and prevent symptoms of adrenal insufficiency.
Increased doses of hydrocortisone are required to support vital functions
and prevent adrenal crisis during illness or during and after surgical procedures (so-­called “stress dosing.”)
In patients with a deficiency of gonadotropins, gonadal steroids
are given at the appropriate time. Consideration of chronological age,
height age, bone age, and psychosocial development may all play a role
in determining the timing of initiation of low-­dose sex steroid replacement in young adolescents. For infants with micropenis, one or two
3-­month courses of monthly intramuscular injections of 25 mg of testosterone cypionate or testosterone enanthate can bring the penis to
near-­normal size without an inordinate effect on osseous maturation.
Recombinant IGF-­1 (mecasermin) is approved for use in the United
States for primary IGF-­1 deficiency. It is given subcutaneously twice a
day. Side effects are similar to rhGH, except that mecasermin can cause
hypoglycemia. The risk of hypoglycemia is reduced by giving the injections concurrently with a meal or snack. In some situations, its use may
be more efficacious than use of GH. These conditions include abnormalities of the GH receptor and STAT5b genes that alter GH signaling
downstream. It may have utility for severe GHD in the rare patients
who have developed clinically significant antibodies to administered
rhGH. However, mecasermin is not an indicated treatment for most
patients with GHD.

COMPLICATIONS AND ADVERSE EFFECTS OF
GROWTH HORMONE TREATMENT

GH treatment influences glucose homeostasis. Fasting and postprandial insulin levels are characteristically low before treatment, and they
normalize during GH replacement. GH treatment is associated with an
increase in the risk for type 2 diabetes and no significant increase in the
risk for type 1 diabetes.
Concerns have been raised about the safety of GH treatment in
children who become deficient after treatment of brain tumors, leukemia, and other neoplasms. Long-­term studies show no increase in
risk of recurrence of craniopharyngioma, other brain tumors, or leukemia. Some studies indicate an increased risk of second neoplasms
in cancer survivors treated with GH. However, other studies have
found no increased risk for secondary brain tumors after adjustment
for radiation therapy. Looking more broadly at young adults treated in
childhood with GH for a variety of indications, the Safety and Appropriateness of Growth hormone treatments in Europe consortium
(SAGhE) has reported an increase in cause-­specific mortality due to
circulatory and hematologic conditions, but no increase in all-­cause
mortality for youth treated with GH.
Other reported side effects include pseudotumor cerebri, slipped
capital femoral epiphysis, gynecomastia, coarsening of features, and
worsening of scoliosis. The risk of late development of Creutzfeldt-­
Jakob disease was limited to recipients of contaminated lots of extracted
pituitary GH. No comparable risks have been seen with rhGH, which is
the only pharmacologic form of hGH currently in clinical use.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3372 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System

Chapter 596

Diabetes Insipidus
Carmen L. Soto-­Rivera, David T. Breault,
and Joseph A. Majzoub
Diabetes insipidus (DI) manifests clinically with polyuria and polydipsia
and can result from either vasopressin deficiency (central DI, also known
as arginine vasopressin [AVP] deficiency) or vasopressin insensitivity
at the level of the kidney (nephrogenic DI [NDI], also known as AVP
resistance). Both central DI and NDI can arise from inherited defects of
congenital or neonatal onset or can be secondary to a variety of causes
(Table 596.1).

PHYSIOLOGY OF WATER BALANCE

The control of extracellular tonicity (osmolality) and volume within
a narrow range is critical for normal cellular structure and function
(see Chapter 73.2). Extracellular fluid tonicity is regulated almost
exclusively by water intake and excretion, whereas extracellular
volume is regulated by sodium intake and excretion. The control
of plasma tonicity and intravascular volume involves a complex
integration of endocrine, neural, behavioral, and paracrine systems
(Fig. 596.1). Vasopressin, secreted from the posterior pituitary, is
the principal regulator of tonicity, with its release largely stimulated by increases in plasma osmolality over 283 mOsm/kg H2O.
Volume homeostasis is largely regulated by the renin-­angiotensin-­
aldosterone system, with contributions from both vasopressin and
the natriuretic peptide family.
Vasopressin, a 9–amino acid peptide, has both antidiuretic and
vascular pressor activity and is synthesized in the paraventricular
and supraoptic nuclei of the hypothalamus. It is transported to the
posterior pituitary via axonal projections, where it is stored awaiting
release into the systemic circulation. The half-­life of vasopressin in
the circulation is 5-­10 minutes, as it is rapidly degraded by a cysteine
aminoterminal peptidase. The carboxyterminus of the vasopressin
precursor, copeptin, is more stable than vasopressin, and blood concentrations of the two peptides are highly correlated when evaluating
response to osmotic stimuli.
In addition to responding to osmotic stimuli, vasopressin is secreted
in response to significant decreases in intravascular volume and pressure (minimum of 8% decrement) via afferent baroreceptor pathways
arising from the aortic arch (carotid sinus) and volume receptor pathways in the cardiac atria and pulmonary veins. Osmotic and hemodynamic stimuli interact synergistically. Nausea is also a potent stimulus
for vasopressin secretion.
The sensation of thirst and the release of vasopressin are regulated by cortical and hypothalamic neurons. The thirst threshold is
approximately 10 mOsm/kg H2O higher (i.e., 293 mOsm/kg H2O)
than the osmotic threshold for vasopressin release. Consequently,
under conditions of hyperosmolality, vasopressin is released
before thirst is initiated, allowing ingested water to be retained.
Subsequently, anticipation of water ingestion by cortical and
vasopressin-­secreting neurons leads to a decrease in vasopressin
release immediately before water ingestion, presumably to prevent
subsequent hyponatremia. Chemoreceptors present in the oropharynx also downregulate vasopressin release after water ingestion. In
addition, thirst drive decreases even before the ingested fluid lowers blood osmolality, presumably to prevent overdrinking leading
to hyponatremia.
Vasopressin exerts its principal effect on the kidney via V2
(AVPR2) receptors located primarily in the collecting tubule, the
thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle, and the periglomerular
tubules. The human V2 receptor gene (AVPR2) is located on the
long arm of the X chromosome (Xq28) at the locus associated with

Table 596.1  Causes of Hypotonic Polyuria
CENTRAL (NEUROGENIC) DIABETES INSIPIDUS (DI)
Congenital (congenital malformations, autosomal dominant, arginine
vasopressin [AVP] neurophysin pathogenic variants)
Drug or toxin induced (ethanol, diphenylhydantoin, snake venom)
Granulomatous (histiocytosis, sarcoidosis)
Neoplastic (craniopharyngioma, germinoma, lymphoma, leukemia,
meningioma, pituitary tumor, metastases)
Infectious (meningitis, tuberculosis, encephalitis)
Inflammatory, autoimmune (lymphocytic
infundibuloneurohypophysitis, immune check point inhibitors)
Trauma (neurosurgery, deceleration injury)
Vascular (cerebral hemorrhage or infarction, brain death)
Idiopathic
OSMORECEPTOR DYSFUNCTION
Granulomatous (histiocytosis, sarcoidosis)
Neoplastic (craniopharyngioma, pinealoma, meningioma,
metastases)
Vascular (anterior communicating artery aneurysm or ligation,
intrahypothalamic hemorrhage)
Other (hydrocephalus, ventricular or suprasellar cyst, trauma,
degenerative diseases)
Idiopathic
INCREASED AVP METABOLISM
Pregnancy
NEPHROGENIC DIABETES INSIPIDUS
Congenital (X-­linked recessive, AVP V2 receptor pathogenic variants,
autosomal recessive or dominant, aquaporin-­2 water channel
pathogenic variants)
Drug induced (lithium, demeclocycline, cisplatin, methoxyflurane)
Hypercalcemia
Hypokalemia
Infiltrating lesions (sarcoidosis, amyloidosis)
Vascular (sickle cell anemia)
Mechanical (polycystic kidney disease, bilateral ureteral obstruction)
Solute diuresis (glucose, mannitol, sodium, radiocontrast dyes)
Idiopathic
PRIMARY POLYDIPSIA
Psychogenic (schizophrenia, obsessive-­compulsive behaviors)
Dipsogenic (downward resetting of thirst threshold, idiopathic or
similar lesions, as with central DI)
From Verbalis JG. Disorders of water balance. In Skorecki K, Chertow GM, Marsden PA,
et al., eds. Brenner & Rector’s The Kidney, 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Table
16.2.

congenital, X-­linked, vasopressin-­resistant DI. Activation of the
V2 receptor results in increases in intracellular cyclic adenosine
monophosphate, which leads to the insertion of the aquaporin­2 water channel into the apical (luminal) membrane. This allows
water movement along its osmotic gradient into the hypertonic
inner medullary interstitium from the tubule lumen and excretion
of concentrated urine. In contrast to aquaporin-­2, aquaporin-­3 and
aquaporin-­4 are expressed on the basolateral membrane of the collecting duct cells, and aquaporin-­1 is expressed in the proximal
tubule. These channels may also contribute to urinary concentrating ability.
Atrial natriuretic peptide, initially isolated from cardiac atrial
muscle but also expressed in the brain, has several important effects
on salt and water balance, including stimulation of natriuresis, inhibition of sodium resorption, inhibition of vasopressin secretion, and
inhibition of vasopressin and aldosterone action in the renal tubules.
Atrial natriuretic peptide is expressed in endothelial cells and vascular smooth muscle, where it appears to regulate relaxation of arterial
smooth muscle. Brain natriuretic peptide (BNP), synthesized and
secreted by cardiac ventricular tissue, similarly induces natriuresis,
whereas the physiologic role of C-­type natriuretic peptide (CNP) has
yet to be defined.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 596 u Diabetes Insipidus 3373
Both cases may be associated with a large volume (>200 mL/m2/hr) of
dilute urine, although in patients with DI, the serum osmolality is high
in comparison with patients undergoing postoperative diuresis.

Nausea
Hypoglycemia
Pain
VP secretion

Renal water
reabsorption

CAUSES OF HYPERNATREMIA

Hypernatremia is discussed in Chapter 73.3.

Osmosensor
Barosensor

Central Diabetes Insipidus

Thirst

Hyperosmolality
Hypotension
Hypovolemia

Drinking

Fig. 596.1 Regulation of vasopressin secretion and serum osmolality.

Hyperosmolality, hypovolemia, and hypotension are sensed by osmosensors, volume sensors, and barosensors, respectively. These stimulate
both vasopressin secretion and thirst. Vasopressin, acting on the kidney,
causes increased reabsorption of water (antidiuresis). Thirst causes increased water ingestion. The results of these dual negative feedback
loops cause a reduction in hyperosmolality or in hypotension or hypovolemia. Additional stimuli for vasopressin secretion include nausea,
hypoglycemia, and pain. (From Srivasta A, Majzoub JA. Disorders of the
posterior pituitary. In: Sperling MA, ed. Pediatric Endocrinology, 5th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020: Fig. 12.6.)

APPROACH TO THE PATIENT WITH POLYURIA,
POLYDIPSIA, AND HYPERNATREMIA

The cause of pathologic polyuria or polydipsia (exceeding 2 L/m2/24
hr) may be difficult to establish in children. Infants can present with
irritability, failure to thrive, and intermittent fever. Patients with suspected DI should have a careful history taken, which should quantify the child’s daily fluid intake and output and establish the voiding
pattern, nocturia, and primary or secondary enuresis. A complete
physical examination should establish the patient’s hydration status,
and the physician should search for evidence of visual and central
nervous system dysfunction, as well as for other pituitary hormone
deficiencies.
If pathologic polyuria or polydipsia is present, the following should
be obtained: serum for osmolality, sodium, potassium, blood urea
nitrogen, creatinine, glucose, hemoglobin A1c, and calcium and urine
for osmolality, specific gravity, and glucose determination. The diagnosis of DI is established if the serum osmolality is >300 mOsm/kg H2O
and the urine osmolality is <300 mOsm/kg. A baseline copeptin level
above 20 pmol/L in this setting can confirm nephrogenic DI.
DI is unlikely if the serum osmolality is <270 mOsm/kg H2O or the
urine osmolality is >600 mOsm/kg. If the patient’s serum osmolality is
<300 mOsm/kg H2O (but >270 mOsm/kg H2O) and pathologic polyuria and polydipsia are present, a water deprivation test is indicated to
establish the diagnosis of DI and to differentiate central from nephrogenic causes by assessing response to aqueous vasopressin at the end
of the test.
Now that copeptin measurement is clinically available, test protocols aim to measure copeptin instead of AVP during water deprivation.
Hypertonic saline infusion (3% saline) can also be given as an osmotic
stimulus for copeptin secretion (instead of water deprivation tests), with
a potentially higher diagnostic accuracy than water deprivation alone.
In the inpatient postneurosurgical setting, central DI is likely if hyperosmolality (serum osmolality >300 mOsm/kg) is associated with urine
osmolality less than serum osmolality. It is important to distinguish
between polyuria resulting from postsurgical central DI and polyuria
resulting from the normal diuresis of fluids received intraoperatively.

Central DI can result from multiple etiologies, including pathogenic
variants in the vasopressin (AVP) gene; trauma (accidental or surgical)
to vasopressin neurons; congenital malformations of the hypothalamus or pituitary; neoplasms; infiltrative, autoimmune, and infectious
diseases affecting vasopressin neurons or fiber tracts; and increased
metabolism of vasopressin. In approximately 10% of children with central DI, the etiology is idiopathic. Other pituitary hormone deficiencies
may be present (see Chapter 595). Over time, up to 35% of those with
idiopathic central DI will develop other hormone deficiencies or have an
underlying etiology identified.
Autosomal dominant central DI usually occurs within the first 5
years of life and results from pathogenic variants in AVP. A number of these genetic variants can cause gene-­processing defects in
a subset of vasopressin-­e xpressing neurons, which have been postulated to result in endoplasmic reticulum stress and cell death.
Wolfram syndrome, which includes DI, diabetes mellitus, optic
atrophy, and deafness, also results in vasopressin deficiency. Autosomal recessive pathogenic variants in the WFS1 (most common)
or WFS2 (CISD2) genes, which give rise to endoplasmic reticulum proteins, are associated with this condition. Congenital brain
abnormalities (see Chapter 631) such as optic nerve hypoplasia
syndrome with agenesis of the corpus callosum, Niikawa-­Kuroki
syndrome, holoprosencephaly, and familial pituitary hypoplasia
with absent stalk may be associated with central DI and defects in
thirst perception (adipsia). Empty sella syndrome, possibly resulting from unrecognized pituitary infarction, can be associated with
DI in children.
Trauma to the base of the brain and neurosurgical intervention
in the region of the hypothalamus or pituitary are common causes
of central DI. The triphasic response after surgery refers to an initial phase of transient DI, lasting 12-­48 hours, followed by a second
phase of syndrome of inappropriate antidiuresis (SIAD), lasting
up to 10 days, which may be followed by permanent (or partial)
DI. The initial phase may be the result of local edema interfering
with normal vasopressin secretion; the second phase results from
unregulated vasopressin release from dying neurons, whereas in the
third phase, permanent DI results if more than 90% of the neurons
have been destroyed.
Given the anatomic distribution of vasopressin neurons over a
large area within the hypothalamus, tumors causing DI must either
be very large and infiltrative or be strategically located near the
base of the hypothalamus, where vasopressin axons converge before
their entry into the posterior pituitary. Germinomas and pinealomas typically arise in this region and are among the most common
primary brain tumors associated with DI. Germinomas can be very
small and undetectable by MRI for several years after the onset of
polyuria. Quantitative measurement of α-­fetoprotein and β-­human
chorionic gonadotropin, often secreted by germinomas, should be
performed in children with idiopathic or unexplained DI in addition to serial MRI scans. Craniopharyngiomas and optic gliomas
can also cause central DI when they are very large, although this is
more often a postoperative complication of the treatment for these
tumors (see Chapter 546). Hematologic malignancies, such as acute
myelocytic leukemia, can cause DI via infiltration of the pituitary
stalk and sella.
Langerhans cell histiocytosis (see Chapter 556.2) and lymphocytic
hypophysitis are common types of infiltrative disorders causing central DI, with hypophysitis as the cause in 50% of cases of “idiopathic”
central DI. Infections involving the base of the brain (see Chapter
643), including meningitis (meningococcal, cryptococcal, listerial,
toxoplasmal), congenital cytomegalovirus infection, and nonspecific

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3374 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
inflammatory diseases of the brain, may give rise to central DI that
is often transient. Drugs associated with the inhibition of vasopressin
release include ethanol, phenytoin, opiate antagonists, halothane, and
α-­adrenergic agents.

Nephrogenic Diabetes Insipidus

NDI can result from genetic or acquired causes. Genetic causes
are less common but more severe than acquired forms of NDI.
The polyuria and polydipsia associated with genetic NDI usually
occur within the first several weeks of life but may become apparent
only after weaning or with longer periods of nighttime sleep. Many
infants initially present with fever, vomiting, and dehydration. Failure to thrive may be secondary to the ingestion of large amounts
of water, resulting in caloric malnutrition. Long-­standing ingestion
and excretion of large volumes of water can lead to nonobstructive
hydronephrosis, hydroureter, and megabladder.
Congenital X-­linked NDI results from inactivating pathogenic
variants of the vasopressin V2 receptor, AVPR2. Congenital autosomal
recessive NDI results from defects in the aquaporin-­2 gene, AQP2. An
autosomal dominant form of NDI is associated with processing variants of the AQP2 gene.
Acquired NDI can result from hypercalcemia or hypokalemia and
is associated with lithium, demeclocycline, foscarnet, clozapine,
amphotericin, methicillin, and rifampin. Impaired renal concentrating ability can also be seen with ureteral obstruction, chronic
renal failure, polycystic kidney disease, medullary cystic disease,
Sjögren syndrome, and sickle cell disease. Decreased protein or
sodium intake or excessive water intake, as in primary polydipsia,
can lead to diminished tonicity of the renal medullary interstitium,
which impairs water reabsorption and thus the ability to concentrate the urine, leading to NDI.

TREATMENT OF CENTRAL DIABETES INSIPIDUS
Fluid Therapy

With an intact thirst mechanism and free access to oral fluids, a person with complete DI can maintain plasma osmolality and sodium in
the high-­normal range, although at great inconvenience. Neonates and
young infants are often best treated solely with fluid therapy, given their
requirement for large volumes (∼3 L/m2/24 hr) of nutritive fluid. The
use of vasopressin analogs in patients with obligate high fluid intake
is difficult given the risk of life-­threatening hyponatremia. Although
not FDA approved, the use of DDAVP (desmopressin) administered
to infants with central DI, both as the diluted parenteral form given
subcutaneously and as the diluted intranasal form given via the buccal mucosa, has been successful without causing severe hyponatremia.
Patients with both central DI and NDI should ingest a diet without
excessive solute (e.g., sodium chloride) to help decrease urine output
when vasopressin action wanes.

Vasopressin Analogs

Treatment of central DI in older children is best accomplished with
the use of DDAVP. DDAVP is available in an intranasal preparation (onset 5-­10 minutes) and more commonly as tablets (onset
15-­30 minutes). The intranasal preparation of DDAVP (10 μg/0.1
mL) can be administered by rhinal tube (allowing dose titration)
or by nasal spray (10 μg/puff). Use of DDAVP oral tablets requires
at least a 10-­fold increase in the dosage compared with the intranasal preparation. Oral dosages of 25-­300 micrograms every 8-­12
hours are safe and effective in children. The appropriate dosage and
route of administration are determined empirically based on the
desired length of antidiuresis and patient preference. The use of oral

DDAVP for the treatment of enuresis in older children should be
regarded as a temporizing measure, given that it does not affect the
underlying condition, and should be used with great caution given
the risk of hyponatremia if water intake exceeds the capacity for
renal clearance. To prevent water intoxication, patients should have
at least 1 hour of urinary breakthrough between doses each day and
be advised to drink only in response to thirst sensation, if present.
The use of DDAVP nasal spray for childhood enuresis is no longer
approved because of its risk of causing hyponatremia.

Aqueous Vasopressin

Central DI of acute onset after neurosurgery is best managed
with continuous administration of synthetic aqueous vasopressin
(Pitressin). Under most circumstances, total fluid intake must be
limited to 1 L/m2/24 hr during antidiuresis. A typical dosage for
intravenous vasopressin therapy is 1.5 mU/kg/hr, which results in
a blood vasopressin concentration of approximately 10 pg/mL. On
occasion, after hypothalamic (but not transsphenoidal) surgery,
higher initial concentrations of vasopressin may be required to treat
acute DI, which has been attributed to the release of a vasopressin inhibitory substance. Vasopressin concentrations >1,000 pg/mL
should be avoided because they can cause cutaneous necrosis, rhabdomyolysis, cardiac rhythm disturbances, and hypertension. Postneurosurgical patients treated with vasopressin infusion should be
switched from intravenous to oral fluids as soon as possible to allow
thirst sensation, if intact, to help regulate osmolality.
Individuals with central DI caused by intracranial tumors that
require chemotherapy often need hyperhydration with large amounts
of intravenous fluids to prevent nephrotoxicity during treatment. Using
a low-­dose vasopressin continuous infusion to minimally concentrate
urine above baseline can allow infusion of fluids over 1 L/m2/day, while
preventing the discomfort of full diuresis if done under careful monitoring of volume status and sodium levels.

TREATMENT OF NEPHROGENIC DIABETES
INSIPIDUS

The treatment of acquired NDI focuses on eliminating, if possible,
the underlying disorder, such as offending drugs, hypercalcemia,
hypokalemia, or ureteral obstruction. Congenital NDI is often difficult to treat. The main goals are to ensure the intake of adequate
calories for growth and to avoid severe dehydration. Foods with the
highest ratio of caloric content to osmotic load (Na <1 mmol/kg/24
hr) should be ingested to maximize growth and to minimize the urine
volume required to excrete the solute load. However, even with the
early institution of therapy, growth failure and developmental disabilities are common.
Pharmacologic approaches to the treatment of NDI include the
use of thiazide diuretics and are intended to decrease the overall
urine output. Thiazides appear to induce a state of mild volume
depletion by enhancing sodium excretion at the expense of water
and by causing a decrease in the glomerular filtration rate, which
results in proximal tubular sodium and water reabsorption. Indomethacin and amiloride may be used in combination with thiazides
to further reduce polyuria. High-­dose DDAVP therapy, in combination with indomethacin, has been used in some subjects with NDI.
This treatment could prove useful in patients with genetic defects
in the V2 receptor associated with a reduced binding affinity for
vasopressin.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 597 u Other Abnormalities of Arginine Vasopressin Metabolism and Action

3375

Runner’s Hyponatremia

Chapter 597

Other Abnormalities of
Arginine Vasopressin
Metabolism and Action
Carmen L. Soto-­Rivera, David T. Breault,
and Joseph A. Majzoub
Hyponatremia (serum sodium <130 mEq/L) in children is usually
associated with severe systemic disorders and is most often a result of
intravascular volume depletion, excessive salt loss, or hypotonic fluid
overload, especially in infants (see Chapter 73).
The initial approach to the patient with hyponatremia begins with
determination of the volume status. A careful review of the patient’s
history, physical examination (including changes in weight), and vital
signs helps to determine whether the patient is hypovolemic or hypervolemic. Supportive evidence includes laboratory data such as serum
electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, uric acid, urine sodium,
specific gravity, and osmolality (Tables 597.1 and 597.2; see Chapter 73).

CAUSES OF HYPONATREMIA
Systemic Dehydration

The initial manifestation of systemic dehydration is often hypernatremia and hyperosmolality, which subsequently lead to the activation of vasopressin secretion and a decrease in water excretion. As
dehydration progresses, hypovolemia and/or hypotension become a
major stimulus for vasopressin release, further decreasing free water
clearance. Excessive free water intake (orally or intravenous infusion
of hypotonic fluids) with ongoing salt loss can produce hyponatremia. Urinary sodium excretion is low (usually <20 mEq/L), owing
to a low glomerular filtration rate and concomitant activation of the
renin-­angiotensin-­aldosterone system unless primary renal disease or
diuretic therapy is present.
Table 597.1  Differential Diagnosis of Hyponatremia
DISORDER

INTRAVASCULAR
VOLUME STATUS

URINE
SODIUM

Systemic dehydration

Low

Low

Decreased effective
plasma volume

Low

Low

Primary salt loss (nonrenal)

Low

Low

Primary salt loss (renal)

Low

High

Adrenal insufficiency

Low

High

SIAD

High

High

Cerebral salt wasting

Low

Very high

Decreased free water
clearance

Normal or high

Normal or high

Primary polydipsia

Normal or high

Normal

Runner’s hyponatremia

Low

Low

NSIAD

High

High

Pseudohyponatremia

Normal

Normal

Factitious hyponatremia

Normal

Normal

NSIAD, Nephrogenic syndrome of inappropriate antidiuresis; SIAD, syndrome of
inappropriate antidiuresis.

Excess hypotonic fluid ingestion during long-­distance running (e.g., marathon running) can result in severe hyponatremia from hypovolemia-­
induced activation of arginine vasopressin secretion coupled with
excessive water ingestion and is correlated with weight gain, long racing
time, and extremes of body mass index.

Decreased Effective Plasma Volume

Hyponatremia can result from decreased effective plasma volume, as
found in congestive heart failure, cirrhosis, nephrotic syndrome, positive
pressure mechanical ventilation, severe burns, bronchopulmonary dysplasia in neonates, cystic fibrosis with obstruction, and severe asthma.
The resulting decrease in cardiac output leads to reduced water and salt
excretion, as with systemic dehydration, and an increase in vasopressin
secretion. In patients with impaired cardiac output and elevated atrial
volume (congestive heart failure, lung disease), atrial natriuretic peptide
concentrations are elevated further, leading to hyponatremia by promoting natriuresis. However, owing to the marked elevation of aldosterone
in these patients, their urine sodium remains low (<20 mEq/L) despite
this. Unlike dehydrated patients, these patients also have excess total
body sodium from activation of the renin-­angiotensin-­aldosterone system and can demonstrate peripheral edema as well.

Syndrome of Inappropriate Antidiuresis

The syndrome of inappropriate antidiuresis (SIAD) is characterized
by hyponatremia, an inappropriately concentrated urine (often >800
mOsm/kg H2O), normal or slightly elevated plasma volume, normal-­
to-­high urine sodium, and low serum uric acid. SIAD is uncommon
in children, and most cases result from excessive administration of
vasopressin in the treatment of central diabetes insipidus (vasopressin deficiency). It can also occur with increased intracranial pressure, encephalitis, brain tumors, head trauma, psychiatric disease,
prolonged nausea, pneumonia, tuberculous and bacterial meningitis, AIDS, and in the postictal phase after generalized seizures (Table
597.3). SIAD is the cause of the hyponatremic second phase of the triphasic response seen after hypothalamic-­pituitary surgery. It is found
in up to 35% of patients 1 week after surgery and can result from
retrograde neuronal degeneration with cell death and vasopressin
release. Common drugs that have been shown to increase vasopressin secretion or mimic vasopressin action, resulting in hyponatremia,
include oxcarbazepine, carbamazepine, chlorpropamide, vinblastine,
vincristine, and tricyclic antidepressants.

Nephrogenic Syndrome of Inappropriate Antidiuresis

Gain-­of-­function pathogenic variants in the V2 vasopressin receptor gene, AVPR2, on chromosome Xq28 have been described in male
Table 597.2  Clinical Parameters to Distinguish Among
Syndrome of Inappropriate Antidiuresis
(SIAD), Cerebral Salt Wasting, and Central
Diabetes Insipidus (DI)
CLINICAL
PARAMETER

SIAD

CEREBRAL
SALT WASTING

CENTRAL DI

Serum sodium

Low

Low

High

Urine output

Normal or low

High

High

Urine sodium

High

Very high

Low

Intravascular
volume status

Normal or high

Low

Low

Blood pressure

Normal

Decreased/
orthostatic
hypotension

Decreased/
orthostatic
hypotension

Vasopressin
level

High

Low

Low

BUN

Low

High

High

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3376 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 597.3  Disorders Associated with Syndrome of Inappropriate Antidiuresis
CANCER

PULMONARY DISORDERS

CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM DISORDERS

OTHER DISORDERS

Thymoma
Lymphoma
Ewing sarcoma
Oropharyngeal
tumor

Viral pneumonia
Bacterial pneumonia
Pulmonary abscess
Tuberculosis
Aspergillosis
Positive pressure ventilation
Asthma
Pneumothorax
Cystic fibrosis

Encephalitis (viral or bacterial)
Meningitis (viral, bacterial, tuberculous, fungal)
Head trauma
Brain abscess
Guillain-­Barré syndrome
Subarachnoid hemorrhage or subdural hematoma
Cerebellar and cerebral atrophy
Cavernous sinus thrombosis
Neonatal hypoxia
Shy-­Drager syndrome
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Delirium tremens
Cerebrovascular accident (cerebral thrombosis or
hemorrhage)
Acute psychosis
Peripheral neuropathy
Multiple sclerosis

AIDS
Prolonged exercise
Idiopathic (in older individuals)
Nephrogenic
Acute intermittent porphyria

Modified from Verbalis JG. Disorders of water balance. In Skorecki K, Chertow GM, Marsden PA, et al., eds, Brenner & Rector’s The Kidney, 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Table 16.6.

neonates with an SIAD-­like clinical picture with undetectable vasopressin levels. Females are most often asymptomatic carriers. It is most
commonly treated by fluid restriction, but oral urea has also been used
to promote osmotic diuresis and increase water clearance. Germline
activating pathogenic variants in GNAS have also been found in infants
presenting with hyponatremia. Activating variants in the aquaporin-­2
gene (AQP2) also give rise to the same syndrome.

Cerebral Salt Wasting

Cerebral salt wasting appears to be the result of hypersecretion of
natriuretic peptides and is seen primarily with central nervous system
disorders, including brain tumors, head trauma, hydrocephalus, neurosurgery, cerebrovascular accidents, and brain death. Hyponatremia is
accompanied by elevated urinary sodium excretion (often >150 mEq/L),
excessive urine output, hypovolemia, normal or high uric acid, and elevated atrial natriuretic peptide concentrations (>20 pmol/L). Thus it is
distinguished from SIAD, in which normal or decreased urine output,
normal or elevated blood volume, only modestly elevated urine sodium
concentration, and an elevated vasopressin level occur. The distinction
between cerebral salt wasting and SIAD is important because the treatment of the two disorders differs markedly. The existence of cerebral
salt wasting has been controversial; however, current data support this
entity as different from SIAD.

Primary Polydipsia (Increased Water Ingestion)

In patients with normal renal function, the kidney can excrete dilute urine
with an osmolality as low as 50 mOsm/kg H2O. To excrete a daily solute
load of 500 mOsm/m2 under these circumstances, the kidney must produce 10 L/m2 of urine per day. Therefore to avoid hyponatremia, the maximum amount of water a person with normal renal function can consume
daily is 10 L/m2, or less if solute intake is lower. However, neonates cannot
dilute their urine to this degree, putting them at risk for water intoxication if water intake exceeds 4 L/m2/day (approximately 60 mL/hr in a newborn). Infants may develop transient hyponatremic seizures after being fed
pure water without electrolytes rather than breast milk or formula.

Primary Salt Loss

Hyponatremia can result from the primary loss of sodium chloride, as
seen in specific disorders of the kidney (congenital polycystic kidney
disease, acute interstitial nephritis, chronic renal failure), gastrointestinal tract (gastroenteritis), and sweat glands (cystic fibrosis). The
hyponatremia is not solely caused by salt loss, as it is often associated
with hypovolemia, leading to an increase in vasopressin. Mineralocorticoid deficiency (hypoaldosteronism), pseudohypoaldosteronism
(genetic or sometimes seen in children with urinary tract obstruction
or infection), and diuretics can also result in loss of sodium chloride

(Table 597.4). Low aldosterone states, such as primary adrenal insufficiency (Addison disease), are associated with salt wasting, hypovolemia, hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, and failure to thrive.

Decreased Free Water Clearance

Hyponatremia as a consequence of decreased renal free water clearance, even in the absence of an increase in vasopressin secretion, can
result from adrenal insufficiency or thyroid deficiency or can be related
to a direct effect of drugs on the kidney. Glucocorticoids are required
for normal free water clearance in a vasopressin-­independent manner.
In patients with unexplained hyponatremia, adrenal and thyroid insufficiency should be considered. Patients with coexisting adrenal failure
and diabetes insipidus might have no symptoms of the latter until glucocorticoid therapy unmasks the need for vasopressin replacement.
Certain drugs can inhibit renal water excretion through direct effects
on the nephron, thus causing hyponatremia; these drugs include high-­
dose cyclophosphamide, vinblastine, cisplatinum, carbamazepine, and
oxcarbazepine.

Pseudohyponatremia and Other Causes of
Hyponatremia

Pseudohyponatremia can result from hypertriglyceridemia (see Chapter 73.3). Elevated lipid levels result in a relative decrease in serum
water content. As electrolytes are dissolved in the aqueous phase of the
serum, they appear low when expressed as a fraction of the total serum
volume. However, as a fraction of serum water, electrolyte content is
normal. Modern laboratory methods that measure sodium concentration directly, independent of sample volume, do not cause this anomaly. Factitious hyponatremia can result from obtaining a blood sample
downstream to the site of intravenous hypotonic fluid infusion.
Hyponatremia is also associated with hyperglycemia, which causes
the influx of water into the intravascular space. Serum sodium decreases
by ∼1.6 mEq/L for every 100 mg/dL increment in blood glucose >100
mg/dL. Glucose is not ordinarily an osmotically active agent and does
not stimulate vasopressin release, probably because it can equilibrate
freely across plasma membranes. However, in the presence of insulin
deficiency and hyperglycemia, glucose acts as an osmotic agent, presumably because its normal intracellular access to osmosensor sites
is prevented. Under these circumstances, an osmotic gradient exists,
stimulating vasopressin release.

TREATMENT

Patients with systemic dehydration and hypovolemia should be rehydrated
with salt-­containing fluids such as normal saline or lactated Ringer’s solution. Because of activation of the renin-­angiotensin-­aldosterone system,
the administered sodium is avidly conserved, and water diuresis quickly

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 597 u Other Abnormalities of Arginine Vasopressin Metabolism and Action

3377

Table 597.4  Pathogenic Gene Variants Associated with Hypoaldosteronism/ Pseudohypoaldosteronism (Type IV Renal
Tubular Acidosis)
GENE CHROMOSOME OMIM
PRIMARY HYPOALDOSTERONISM
CYP21A2—cytochrome P450,
subfamily XXIA, polypeptide 2
6p21.3 613815
CYP11B2—cytochrome P450,
subfamily XIB, polypeptide 2 8q21
124080

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

PATHOGENIC VARIANT–CLINICAL
MANIFESTATIONS–OMIM–INHERITANCE

P450c21—steroid 21-­hydroxylase that converts 17
α-­hydroxyprogesterone to 11-­deoxycortisol and
progesterone to 11-­deoxycorticosterone in the
adrenal zona fasciculata

Loss-­of-­function pathogenic variants decrease
synthesis of cortisol and aldosterone, the
latter resulting in the salt-­losing form of classic
congenital adrenal hyperplasia, AR–201910

P450c11B2—aldosterone synthase/corticosterone
Loss-­of-­function pathogenic variants associated
methyloxidase types I and II expressed only in the
with severe salt loss and volume depletion but
zona glomerulosa; hydroxylates deoxycorticosterone
not with abnormalities of genital formation or
at carbon-­11 and corticosterone at carbon-­18 and
glucocorticoid synthesis AR (CMOI 203400;
oxidizes 18-­hydroxycorticosterone to aldosterone
CMOII 610600)

PSEUDOHYPOALDOSTERONISM TYPE I (PHA1)
NR3C2—nuclear receptor subfamily
Ligand-­activated nuclear transcription factor that
3, group C, member 2 (MR-­
transmits aldosterone-­mediated control of gene
mineralocorticoid receptor), 4q31.1
expression by binding to the mineralocorticoid
600983
response element in the promoter region of the
target gene

Loss-­of-­function pathogenic variants in the MR
lead to mineralocorticoid resistance and salt
wasting, PHA1A, AD–177735

SCNN1A—sodium channel, non–
voltage-­gated, α-­subunit 12p13.31
600228

Inactivating pathogenic variant of α-­subunit of the
epithelial sodium channel

Loss-­of-­function pathogenic variants in
the epithelial sodium channel lead to
mineralocorticoid resistance and salt wasting,
PHA1B, AR–264350

SCNN1B—sodium channel, non–
voltage-­gated, β-­subunit 16p12.2
600760

Inactivating mutation of β-­subunit of the epithelial
sodium channel

Loss-­of-­function pathogenic variants in
the epithelial sodium channel lead to
mineralocorticoid resistance and salt wasting,
PHA1B, AR–264350

SCNN1G—sodium channel, non–
voltage-­gated, γ-­subunit 16p12.2
600761

Inactivating mutation of γ-­subunit of the epithelial
sodium channel

Loss-­of-­function pathogenic variants in
the epithelial sodium channel lead to
mineralocorticoid resistance and salt wasting,
PHA1B AR–264350

PSEUDOHYPOALDOSTERONISM TYPE II (PHA2) (GORDON SYNDROME)
WNK4—protein kinase, lysine-­
Multifunctional serine-­threonine protein kinase whose
deficient 4 17q21.31 601844
substrate is SLC12A3, the thiazide-­sensitive sodium/
chloride co-transporter (NCCT)—OMIM 600968—
that also regulates lysosomal degradation of NCCT
and endocytosis of the KCNJ1 potassium channel

Gain-­of-­function pathogenic variants lead to
hyperkalemia and hypertension, PHA2B,
AD–614491

WNK1—protein kinase, lysine-­
deficient 1 12p13.33 605232

Serine-­threonine protein kinase that inactivates WNK4
by phosphorylating its kinase domain

Gain-­of-­function pathogenic variants lead to
hyperkalemia and hypertension, PHA2C,
AD–614492

KLH3—Kelch-­like 3 5q31.2 605775

Adaptor protein within the ubiquitination sequence
that links WNK1 and WNK4 to CUL3

Gain-­of-­function pathogenic variants lead to
hyperkalemia and hypertension, PHA2D, AD/
AR–614495

CUL3—Cullin 3 2q36.2 603136

Scaffold protein that links to RING-­box E3 ligase
facilitating WNK4 ubiquitination and proteasomal
destruction of WNK4

Gain-­of-­function pathogenic variants lead to
hyperkalemia and hypertension, PHA2E,
AD–614496

AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; CMO, corticosterone methyloxidase; OMIM, Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man.
From Root AW. Disorders of aldosterone synthesis, secretion, and cellular function. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2014;26:480–486, Table 1.

ensues as volume is restored and vasopressin concentrations decrease.
Under these conditions, caution must be taken to prevent a too-­rapid correction of hyponatremia (with a goal increase of <0.5 mEq/L/hr), which
can result in central pontine myelinolysis characterized by discrete regions
of axonal demyelination and the potential for irreversible brain damage.
Hyponatremia from a decrease in effective plasma volume caused
by cardiac, hepatic, renal, or pulmonary dysfunction is more difficult
to reverse. The most effective therapy is treatment of the underlying
systemic disorder. Patients weaned from positive pressure ventilation
undergo a prompt water diuresis and resolution of hyponatremia as
cardiac output is restored and vasopressin concentrations decrease.
Vaptans are a class of small-­molecule arginine vasopressin V2 receptor antagonists (aquaretics) useful for the treatment of hypervolemic hyponatremia associated with severe congestive heart failure
and chronic liver failure. Although these agents successfully increase

plasma sodium, they also lead to increased thirst and plasma vasopressin levels, which can limit their effectiveness, can increase serum
sodium more rapidly than is safe, and may cause hepatoxicity.
Patients with hyponatremia from primary salt loss require supplementation with sodium chloride and fluids. Initially, intravenous replacement
with isotonic fluids containing sodium chloride (150 mEq/L) may be necessary. Hypertonic fluids (450 mEq/L sodium choride) should be reserved
for treatment of acute neurologic deterioration caused by severe hyponatremia. Oral salt supplementation may be required subsequently. This
treatment contrasts with that of SIAD, in which water restriction without
sodium supplementation is the mainstay.

Emergency Treatment of Hyponatremia

The development of acute hyponatremia (onset <12 hr) or a serum
sodium concentration <120 mEq/L may be associated with lethargy,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3378 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
psychosis, coma, or generalized seizures, especially in younger children.
Acute hyponatremia can cause cell swelling and lead to neuronal dysfunction or to cerebral herniation. The emergency treatment of cerebral
dysfunction resulting from acute hyponatremia includes water restriction
and can require rapid correction with hypertonic 3% sodium chloride. If
hypertonic saline treatment is undertaken, the serum sodium should
be raised only high enough to cause an improvement in mental status
and, in no case, faster than 0.5 mEq/L/hr or 12 mEq/L/24 hr.

Treatment of Syndrome of Inappropriate Antidiuresis

Chronic SIAD is best treated by oral fluid restriction. With full antidiuresis (urine osmolality of 1,000 mOsm/kg H2O), a normal daily obligate renal solute load of 500 mOsm/m2 would be excreted in 500 mL/
m2 water. This, plus a daily nonrenal water loss of 500 mL/m2, would
require that oral fluid intake be limited to 1,000 mL/m2/24 hr to avoid
hyponatremia. In young children, this degree of fluid restriction might
not provide adequate calories for growth. In this situation, a vaptan
such as tolvaptan, although not FDA approved in children and may
cause initial correction of hyponatremia too rapidly, may allow sufficient fluid intake for normal growth without concomitant hyponatremia. Urea has also been safely used to induce an osmotic diuresis in
infants and children.

Treatment of Cerebral Salt Wasting

Treatment of patients with cerebral salt wasting consists of restoring
intravascular volume with sodium chloride and water, as for the treatment of other causes of systemic dehydration. The underlying cause of
the disorder, which is usually the result of acute brain injury, should
also be treated if possible. Treatment involves the ongoing replacement
of urine and sodium losses volume for volume.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 598

Hyperpituitarism
Omar Ali
Hyperpituitarism is defined as the excessive secretion or production
of one or more of the hormones produced by the pituitary gland.
The anterior pituitary normally produces prolactin, growth hormone
(GH), thyroid-­stimulating hormone (TSH), adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), and the gonadotropin hormones (luteinizing hormone
[LH] and follicle-­stimulating hormone [FSH]); overproduction of any
of these hormones is possible, though all are relatively rare. The posterior pituitary stores and releases antidiuretic hormone (ADH) and
oxytocin, both produced by neurons in the hypothalamus. Although
extremely rare cases of hypothalamic neurocytomas producing excess
ADH have been reported (mostly in adults), these are vanishingly rare
and will not be considered any further. Hyperpituitarism refers to the
overproduction of one or more of the anterior pituitary hormones.

SECONDARY HYPERPITUITARISM

Several of the anterior pituitary hormones (all except GH and prolactin) act on other endocrine glands and regulate their secretion. They
are regulated by negative feedback loops from their target glands, and
their secretion increases if the end organ is not producing enough hormone. This can lead in extreme cases to severe hypertrophy of the relevant anterior pituitary cells and is a normal physiologic response to
target hormone deficiencies resulting in decreased hormonal feedback,
such as in hypogonadism, hypoadrenalism, or hypothyroidism. In these
cases of secondary hyperpituitarism, chronic pituitary hypersecretion
occurs in response to target hormone deficiencies that leads to pituitary

hyperplasia; in extreme cases this can even enlarge and erode the sella
and, on rare occasions, increase intracranial pressure. Such enlargements
should not be confused with primary pituitary tumors; they disappear,
and elevated pituitary hormone levels readily suppress to normal when
the underlying hormone deficiency is treated by replacement of end-­
organ hormones.
Primary hypersecretion of pituitary hormones is uncommon in childhood. The most commonly diagnosed adenoma during childhood is prolactinoma, followed by corticotropinoma, and then somatotropinoma,
which secrete prolactin, corticotropin, and GH, respectively. There are a
handful of case reports of thyrotropinoma in children and adolescents.
There are no pediatric reports of gonadotropinoma, but hypothalamic
hamartomas that secrete excess gonadotropin-­releasing hormone are
one cause of precocious puberty. In very rare cases, pituitary hyperplasia
can also occur in response to stimulation by ectopic production of releasing hormones such as that seen occasionally in patients with Cushing
syndrome secondary to corticotropin-­releasing hormone excess or in
children with acromegaly secondary to growth hormone–releasing hormone (GHRH) produced by a variety of systemic tumors.
The monoclonal nature of most pituitary adenomas implies that
most originate from a clonal event in a single cell. In some cases, the
pituitary tumors result from stimulation with hypothalamic-­releasing
hormones and in other instances, as in McCune-­Albright syndrome
(MAS), the tumor is caused by activating pathogenic variants of the
GNAS1 gene that codes for the α subunit of Gsα, a guanine nucleotide-­
binding protein. The clinical presentation typically depends on the
pituitary hormone that is hypersecreted. In addition, disruptions of
growth regulation and/or sexual maturation are common as a result
of either hormone hypersecretion or local compression by the tumor.
MAS also features polyostotic fibrous dysplasia of bone and café-­au-­lait
spots in a distinct distribution.

EXCESS GROWTH HORMONE SECRETION AND
PITUITARY GIGANTISM

In young persons with open epiphyses, overproduction of GH results
in gigantism; in persons with closed epiphyses, the result is acromegaly. Often some acromegalic features are seen with gigantism, even in
children and adolescents. After closure of the epiphyses, the acromegalic features become more prominent.
Gigantism is rare, with only several hundred reported cases worldwide to date. It must be emphasized that the vast majority of patients
with tall stature will not have gigantism. The normal distribution of
height predicts that 2.3% of the population will be taller than 2 standard deviations (SD) (97.7%) above the mean, and many cases of tall
stature will therefore be normal-­variant familial tall stature; if their
growth is in line with their midparental height and no other concerning features are present, then no further investigation is needed. In
cases where the tall stature is unexpected or extreme, other etiologies
of rapid linear growth such as precocious puberty and hyperthyroidism should be carefully excluded. Coexisting findings (e.g., dysmorphic facial features, neurocognitive problems, hemihypertrophy) may
suggest syndromic or chromosomal causes of tall stature, such as Sotos,
Weaver, Klinefelter, or XYY syndrome.
The cardinal clinical feature of gigantism is longitudinal growth
acceleration secondary to GH excess. The usual manifestations consist of coarse facial features and enlarging hands and feet. In young
children, rapid growth of the head can precede linear growth. Some
patients have behavioral and visual problems. In most recorded cases,
the abnormal growth became evident at puberty, but the condition has
been established as early as the newborn period. Giants have rarely
been reported to grow to a height of over 8 feet. In some cases, the
patient may present with local effects of the pituitary tumor (headache,
visual field defects, and other pituitary hormone deficiencies) as the
main complaint, and there is at least one report of a patient presenting
with diabetic ketoacidosis induced by GH excess. The presentation of
gigantism is usually dramatic, unlike the insidious onset of acromegaly
in adults.
Pituitary adenomas secreting GH are more common in males, but
females may present at an earlier age. Tumors with AIP pathogenic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3378 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
psychosis, coma, or generalized seizures, especially in younger children.
Acute hyponatremia can cause cell swelling and lead to neuronal dysfunction or to cerebral herniation. The emergency treatment of cerebral
dysfunction resulting from acute hyponatremia includes water restriction
and can require rapid correction with hypertonic 3% sodium chloride. If
hypertonic saline treatment is undertaken, the serum sodium should
be raised only high enough to cause an improvement in mental status
and, in no case, faster than 0.5 mEq/L/hr or 12 mEq/L/24 hr.

Treatment of Syndrome of Inappropriate Antidiuresis

Chronic SIAD is best treated by oral fluid restriction. With full antidiuresis (urine osmolality of 1,000 mOsm/kg H2O), a normal daily obligate renal solute load of 500 mOsm/m2 would be excreted in 500 mL/
m2 water. This, plus a daily nonrenal water loss of 500 mL/m2, would
require that oral fluid intake be limited to 1,000 mL/m2/24 hr to avoid
hyponatremia. In young children, this degree of fluid restriction might
not provide adequate calories for growth. In this situation, a vaptan
such as tolvaptan, although not FDA approved in children and may
cause initial correction of hyponatremia too rapidly, may allow sufficient fluid intake for normal growth without concomitant hyponatremia. Urea has also been safely used to induce an osmotic diuresis in
infants and children.

Treatment of Cerebral Salt Wasting

Treatment of patients with cerebral salt wasting consists of restoring
intravascular volume with sodium chloride and water, as for the treatment of other causes of systemic dehydration. The underlying cause of
the disorder, which is usually the result of acute brain injury, should
also be treated if possible. Treatment involves the ongoing replacement
of urine and sodium losses volume for volume.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 598

Hyperpituitarism
Omar Ali
Hyperpituitarism is defined as the excessive secretion or production
of one or more of the hormones produced by the pituitary gland.
The anterior pituitary normally produces prolactin, growth hormone
(GH), thyroid-­stimulating hormone (TSH), adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), and the gonadotropin hormones (luteinizing hormone
[LH] and follicle-­stimulating hormone [FSH]); overproduction of any
of these hormones is possible, though all are relatively rare. The posterior pituitary stores and releases antidiuretic hormone (ADH) and
oxytocin, both produced by neurons in the hypothalamus. Although
extremely rare cases of hypothalamic neurocytomas producing excess
ADH have been reported (mostly in adults), these are vanishingly rare
and will not be considered any further. Hyperpituitarism refers to the
overproduction of one or more of the anterior pituitary hormones.

SECONDARY HYPERPITUITARISM

Several of the anterior pituitary hormones (all except GH and prolactin) act on other endocrine glands and regulate their secretion. They
are regulated by negative feedback loops from their target glands, and
their secretion increases if the end organ is not producing enough hormone. This can lead in extreme cases to severe hypertrophy of the relevant anterior pituitary cells and is a normal physiologic response to
target hormone deficiencies resulting in decreased hormonal feedback,
such as in hypogonadism, hypoadrenalism, or hypothyroidism. In these
cases of secondary hyperpituitarism, chronic pituitary hypersecretion
occurs in response to target hormone deficiencies that leads to pituitary

hyperplasia; in extreme cases this can even enlarge and erode the sella
and, on rare occasions, increase intracranial pressure. Such enlargements
should not be confused with primary pituitary tumors; they disappear,
and elevated pituitary hormone levels readily suppress to normal when
the underlying hormone deficiency is treated by replacement of end-­
organ hormones.
Primary hypersecretion of pituitary hormones is uncommon in childhood. The most commonly diagnosed adenoma during childhood is prolactinoma, followed by corticotropinoma, and then somatotropinoma,
which secrete prolactin, corticotropin, and GH, respectively. There are a
handful of case reports of thyrotropinoma in children and adolescents.
There are no pediatric reports of gonadotropinoma, but hypothalamic
hamartomas that secrete excess gonadotropin-­releasing hormone are
one cause of precocious puberty. In very rare cases, pituitary hyperplasia
can also occur in response to stimulation by ectopic production of releasing hormones such as that seen occasionally in patients with Cushing
syndrome secondary to corticotropin-­releasing hormone excess or in
children with acromegaly secondary to growth hormone–releasing hormone (GHRH) produced by a variety of systemic tumors.
The monoclonal nature of most pituitary adenomas implies that
most originate from a clonal event in a single cell. In some cases, the
pituitary tumors result from stimulation with hypothalamic-­releasing
hormones and in other instances, as in McCune-­Albright syndrome
(MAS), the tumor is caused by activating pathogenic variants of the
GNAS1 gene that codes for the α subunit of Gsα, a guanine nucleotide-­
binding protein. The clinical presentation typically depends on the
pituitary hormone that is hypersecreted. In addition, disruptions of
growth regulation and/or sexual maturation are common as a result
of either hormone hypersecretion or local compression by the tumor.
MAS also features polyostotic fibrous dysplasia of bone and café-­au-­lait
spots in a distinct distribution.

EXCESS GROWTH HORMONE SECRETION AND
PITUITARY GIGANTISM

In young persons with open epiphyses, overproduction of GH results
in gigantism; in persons with closed epiphyses, the result is acromegaly. Often some acromegalic features are seen with gigantism, even in
children and adolescents. After closure of the epiphyses, the acromegalic features become more prominent.
Gigantism is rare, with only several hundred reported cases worldwide to date. It must be emphasized that the vast majority of patients
with tall stature will not have gigantism. The normal distribution of
height predicts that 2.3% of the population will be taller than 2 standard deviations (SD) (97.7%) above the mean, and many cases of tall
stature will therefore be normal-­variant familial tall stature; if their
growth is in line with their midparental height and no other concerning features are present, then no further investigation is needed. In
cases where the tall stature is unexpected or extreme, other etiologies
of rapid linear growth such as precocious puberty and hyperthyroidism should be carefully excluded. Coexisting findings (e.g., dysmorphic facial features, neurocognitive problems, hemihypertrophy) may
suggest syndromic or chromosomal causes of tall stature, such as Sotos,
Weaver, Klinefelter, or XYY syndrome.
The cardinal clinical feature of gigantism is longitudinal growth
acceleration secondary to GH excess. The usual manifestations consist of coarse facial features and enlarging hands and feet. In young
children, rapid growth of the head can precede linear growth. Some
patients have behavioral and visual problems. In most recorded cases,
the abnormal growth became evident at puberty, but the condition has
been established as early as the newborn period. Giants have rarely
been reported to grow to a height of over 8 feet. In some cases, the
patient may present with local effects of the pituitary tumor (headache,
visual field defects, and other pituitary hormone deficiencies) as the
main complaint, and there is at least one report of a patient presenting
with diabetic ketoacidosis induced by GH excess. The presentation of
gigantism is usually dramatic, unlike the insidious onset of acromegaly
in adults.
Pituitary adenomas secreting GH are more common in males, but
females may present at an earlier age. Tumors with AIP pathogenic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 598 u Hyperpituitarism 3379
variants (familial isolated pituitary adenoma) are more common in
males, are larger and invasive, and secrete GH or prolactin. X-­LAG
syndrome (X-­linked acrogigantism) is a recognized cause of familial
pituitary adenomas, and in these patients the rapid growth begins in
infancy and is more frequent in females. Patients with MAS will usually
exhibit other features, including polyostotic fibrous dysplasia, café-­au-­
lait spots, and precocious puberty.
Pituitary tumors secrete extremely high levels of GH; approximately
50% of pituitary adenomas also exhibit hyperprolactinemia because
they secrete both GH and prolactin. Adenomas can compromise
other anterior pituitary function through growth or cystic degeneration. Secretion of gonadotropins, thyrotropin, or corticotropin may
be impaired. Delayed sexual maturation or hypogonadism can occur.
When GH hypersecretion is accompanied by gonadotropin deficiency,
accelerated linear growth can persist for decades. In some cases, the
tumor spreads outside the sella, invading the sphenoid bone, optic
nerves, and brain. GH-­secreting tumors in pediatric patients are more
likely to be locally invasive or aggressive than are those in adults.
Acromegalic features consist chiefly of enlargement of the distal
parts of the body, but manifestations of abnormal growth involve all
portions. The circumference of the skull increases, the nose becomes
broad, and the tongue is often enlarged, with coarsening of the facial
features. The mandible grows excessively, and the teeth become separated. Visual field defects and neurologic abnormalities are common;
signs of increased intracranial pressure appear later. The fingers and
toes grow chiefly in thickness. There may be dorsal kyphosis. Fatigue
and lassitude are early symptoms. GH levels are elevated and occasionally exceed 100 ng/mL. There is usually no suppression of GH levels by the hyperglycemia of a glucose tolerance test, and insulin-­like
growth factor 1 (IGF1) and insulin-­like growth factor binding protein 3
(IGFBP-­3) levels are consistently elevated in acromegaly and pituitary
gigantism.

Diagnosis

GH hypersecretion should be screened for by testing IGF1 and IGFBP­3 levels. An elevated IGF1 level in a patient with appropriate clinical
suspicion usually indicates GH excess. Potential confusion can arise in
the evaluation of normal adolescents because significantly higher IGF1
levels occur during puberty than in adulthood; the IGF1 level must
be age and gender matched. Serum IGFBP-­3 levels are also sensitive
markers of GH elevations and will be elevated in almost all cases. If
IGF1 and/or IGFBP-­3 levels are elevated, then the next step is to test for
GH excess by doing an oral glucose-­suppression test. The gold standard
for the diagnosis of GH excess in adults is the failure to suppress serum
GH levels to <1 ng/dL at any time during a 2-­hour oral glucose tolerance test with 1.75 g/kg oral glucose challenge (maximum: 75 g). GH
levels may not be suppressed to this level in normal adolescents, and a
cutoff of 5 ng/mL may be more appropriate in this age-­group. If laboratory findings suggest GH excess, the presence of a pituitary adenoma
should be confirmed by MRI of the brain. In rare cases, a pituitary mass
is not identified. This might be from an occult pituitary microadenoma
or ectopic production of GHRH or GH. CT is acceptable when MRI is
unavailable.
Genetic causes: Genetic pathogenic variants are recognized as being
present in ∼50% of cases, though many are sporadic. In a large series,
detailed genetic testing revealed pathogenic variants in AIP in 29% of
cases, X-­LAG due to microdeletions at Xq26.3 in 10% of the cases, and
MAS in 5% of the cases. No genetic abnormality was identified in 54%
of the cases. Although GH-­secreting adenomas eventually develop in
up to 60% of patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia 1 (MEN1),
most of these occur in adults and therefore cause acromegaly rather
than gigantism. Increased GH secretion and GH-­secreting adenomas
may also be seen in neurofibromatosis; tuberous sclerosis; MEN4; Carney complex; and the paraganglioma, pheochromocytoma, and pituitary adenoma association known as 3PA.
A genetics consultation and appropriate genetic testing is therefore
indicated in all cases of pituitary gigantism.

Treatment

The goals of therapy are to remove or shrink the pituitary mass, to
restore GH and secretory patterns to normal, to restore IGF1 and
IGFBP-­3 levels to normal, to retain the normal pituitary secretion of
other hormones, and to prevent recurrence of disease.
For well-­circumscribed pituitary adenomas, trans-­sphenoidal surgery is the treatment of choice and may be curative. The tumor should
be removed completely. The likelihood of surgical cure depends greatly
on the surgeon’s expertise and on the size and extension of the mass.
Intraoperative GH measurements can improve the results of tumor
resection. Trans-­sphenoidal surgery to resect the tumors is as safe in
children as in adults. At times, a transcranial approach might be necessary. The primary goal of treatment is to normalize GH and IGF1
levels. GH levels (<1 ng/mL within 2 hours after a glucose load) and
serum IGF1 levels (age-­adjusted normal range) are the best tests to
define a biochemical cure.
If GH secretion and IGF1 levels are not normalized by surgery, the
options include pituitary irradiation and medical therapy. Further
growth of the tumor is prevented by irradiation in >99% of patients.
The main disadvantage is the delayed efficacy in decreasing GH levels.
GH is reduced by approximately 50% from the initial concentration by
2 years, by 75% by 5 years, and approaches 90% by 15 years. Multiple
pituitary hormone deficiency is a predictable result of pituitary radiation, occurring in 40–50% of patients 10 years after irradiation.
Surgery fails to cure a significant number of patients, and radiotherapy may not work fast enough, so medical therapy has an important
role in treating patients with GH excess. Treatment is effective and well
tolerated with GH antagonists, long-­acting somatostatin analogs, and
in some cases, by dopamine agonists.
Pegvisomant is a GH-­
receptor antagonist that competes with
endogenous GH for binding to the GH receptor. It effectively suppresses GH and IGF1 levels in patients with acromegaly caused by
pituitary tumors and ectopic GHRH hypersecretion. Normalization of
IGF1 levels occurs in up to 90% of patients treated daily with this drug
for 3 months or longer. The adult dosage is 10-­40 mg via subcutaneous
injection once daily, although twice-­weekly protocols have also been
reported as highly successful. IGF1 levels and hepatic enzymes must be
monitored. Combined therapy with somatostatin analogs and weekly
pegvisomant injections also is effective. Pediatric experience is limited,
but case reports indicate that it can successfully suppress IGF1 levels
when used in doses of 10-­30 mg/day.
The somatostatin analogs are frequently effective in the treatment of patients with GH excess. Octreotide suppresses GH to <2.5
ng/mL in 65% of patients with acromegaly and normalizes IGF1
levels in 70%. The effects of octreotide are well sustained over time.
Tumor shrinkage also occurs with octreotide but is generally modest. Consistent GH suppression can be obtained with a continuous
subcutaneous (SC) pump infusion of octreotide or with long-­acting
formulations, including long-­
acting octreotide and lanreotide.
Octreotide injection in the pediatric population has been used at
doses of 1-­40 μg/kg/24 hr. In adults the long-­acting form is used in
a dose of 10-­40 mg every month, but no pediatric dose range has
been established.
For patients with both GH and prolactin oversecretion, dopamine
agonists, such as bromocriptine and cabergoline, which bind to
pituitary dopamine type 2 receptors and may also suppress GH secretion, can also be considered. Prolactin levels are often adequately suppressed, but GH levels and IGF1 levels are rarely normalized with this
treatment modality alone. Tumor shrinkage occurs in a minority of
patients. The effectiveness of these agents may be additive to that of
octreotide. Cabergoline therapy at doses of 0.25-­4.0 mg/wk (given 1-­2
times per week) has been used in adults with acromegaly, and because
of its less frequent dosing and lower incidence of side effects as compared to bromocriptine, this is now considered the dopamine agonist
of choice in both adults and children. Side effects can include nausea,
vomiting, abdominal pain, arrhythmias, nasal stuffiness, orthostatic
hypotension, sleep disturbances, and fatigue.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3380 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System

A

B

TREATMENT OF NORMAL-­VARIANT TALL STATURE

Patients who have familial tall stature and no other underlying pathology usually require no treatment other than reassurance. The use of the
bone age to predict adult height might provide some comfort for them,
as will general supportive discussions on the social acceptability of this
condition. Although treatment is possible for females and males with
excessive growth, its use should be restricted to patients with predicted
adult height >3-­4 SD above the mean (79 inches or 200 cm in males, 73
inches or 185 cm in females) and evidence of significant psychosocial
impairment.
Sex steroids have been used in the treatment of tall stature and are
designed to accelerate puberty and to promote epiphyseal fusion;
these are therefore of little benefit when given in late puberty. The
lack of extensive experience with this form of therapy and the risks
of estrogen or androgen treatment for tall stature should be carefully
weighed and discussed with the family, and treatment should be discouraged except in the most extreme cases. Detailed discussion with
the child at the child’s level is also advisable, as up to 40% of those
who underwent such treatments are dissatisfied as adults and feel they
were not sufficiently consulted about this course of action. Therapy is
initiated ideally before puberty or in early puberty (no later than bone
age of 14). In the extremely rare instances where treatment is desired,
testosterone enanthate is used at a dose of 250-­500 mg intramuscularly every 2 weeks for 6 months in males. In females, oral estrogens
in various doses have been used to reduce the predicted height, but
average height reduction may be only 1.1-­2.4 cm. Therapy must begin
before the bone age has reached 12 years. In the rare case where treatment is advised, oral ethinyl estradiol has been used at a dose of 0.15-­
0.5 mg/day until cessation of growth occurs. Short-­term side effects
have included benign breast disease, cholelithiasis, hypertension,
menstrual irregularities, weight gain, nausea, limb pain, galactorrhea,
and thrombosis. Reduced fertility later in life may be a potential long-­
term complication. An alternative to sex-­steroid therapy is the use
of epiphysiodesis (destruction of the growth plates) around the knee
to limit linear growth, but this intervention also remains controversial, and its long-­term safety profile and psychologic risks and benefits
remain unknown.

HYPERSECRETION OF OTHER PITUITARY
HORMONES
Prolactinoma

Prolactin-­secreting pituitary adenomas are the most common pituitary tumors in adolescents. With the use of MRI, more of these
tumors, particularly microadenomas (<1 cm in diameter), are being
detected (Fig. 598.1). The most common presenting manifestations
are headache, primary or secondary amenorrhea, and galactorrhea.
The disorder affects more than twice as many females as males; most

Fig. 598.1 Sagittal (A) and coronal
(B) post-­gadolinium T1-­weighted
MRI scans of a female with a microprolactinoma on the right side
of the sella, who presented with
amenorrhea and galactorrhea. Her
serum prolactin was 89 ng/mL.
(From Wong A, Eloy JA, Couldwell
WT, Liu JK. Update on prolactinomas. Part 1: clinical manifestations
and diagnostic challenges. J Clin
Neurosci. 2015;22:1562–1567, Fig.
1, p. 1563.)

patients have undergone normal puberty before becoming symptomatic. Only a few have delayed puberty. In some kindreds with type
I multiple endocrine neoplasia syndrome, prolactinomas are the
presenting feature during adolescence. Familial cases and sporadic
cases with de novo pathogenic variants of the AIP gene and X-­LAG
are being recognized more often as genetic testing becomes more
common.
Prolactin levels may be elevated mildly (40-­50 ng/mL) or markedly (10,000-­15,000 ng/mL), and there is a correlation between
tumor size and prolactin levels. Most prolactinomas in children
are large (macroadenomas), cause the sella to enlarge, and, in some
cases, cause visual field defects. Approximately 30% of patients with
macroadenomas develop other pituitary hormone deficiencies, particularly GH deficiency. Alternatively, prolactin-­secreting adenomas might also stain for and secrete excess GH and/or TSH.
Prolactinomas should not be confused with the hyperprolactinemia
and pituitary hyperplasia that can occur in patients with primary
hypothyroidism, which is readily treated with thyroid hormone (see
Chapter 603). Moderate elevations (<200 ng/mL) of prolactin are
also associated with a variety of medications (antipsychotics, metoclopramide, phenothiazines, verapamil, opioids), with pituitary stalk
dysfunction such as can occur with craniopharyngioma, with chronic
renal failure, with chronic stress (rarely >40 ng/mL), and with nipple
stimulation; hyperprolactinemia may also remain idiopathic in some
cases (Table 598.1).
Drug-­induced hyperprolactinemia is especially common,
and in most cases the level is less than 100 ng/mL, though risperidone can cause elevations up to 300 ng/mL. No further investigation is needed if elevations in these ranges are seen in patients on
antipsychotic medications who do not have any other suspicious
features.
In extremely rare cases, prolactin may be produced by tumors outside the pituitary; in these cases there will be hyperprolactinemia with
no sign of a pituitary tumor on imaging and no response to cabergoline
treatment.
In some cases, extreme hyperprolactinemia is associated with a hook
effect that leads to factitiously low values on blood tests. In cases where
clinical features are compatible with hyperprolactinemia, serial dilution of the laboratory specimen should be done to rule out this kind of
measurement error. On the other hand, patients may have factitiously
elevated prolactin levels on immunoassay as a result of the presence
of prolactin polymers and dimers (macroprolactinemia) that are not
physiologically active. In cases where an elevated prolactin is detected
in an asymptomatic patient, unnecessary diagnostic workup and treatment can be avoided by performing polyethylene glycol precipitation
to exclude the presence of macroprolactinemia, which is clinically
benign.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 598 u Hyperpituitarism 3381
Table 598.1  Causes of Hyperprolactinemia
PHYSIOLOGIC
Pregnancy and lactation/nipple stimulation
Stress
Exercise
Sexual intercourse
PHARMACOLOGIC
Antipsychotics
Typical
Phenothiazines
Haloperidol
Atypical
Risperidone
Clozapine
Olanzapine
Antidepressants
Tricyclics
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
Antihypertensives
Verapamil
Reserpine
α-­Methyldopa
Antiemetics
Metoclopramide
Domperidone
H2 blockers
Cimetidine
Ranitidine

in such cases and is not associated with any other clinical finding.
No further treatment or investigation is indicated in these cases,
and minimal galactorrhea can be left untreated. If the amount of
milk discharge is bothersome, then low-­dose cabergoline (0.25 mg
once or twice weekly) may be effective even if elevated prolactin
levels are not present.
In most patients where the hyperprolactinemia is secondary to
an adenoma, it can be effectively treated with dopamine agonists.
Treatment leads to lowering of prolactin levels and tumor shrinkage
in the vast majority of patients and even large adenomas can usually
be treated without surgical intervention. Because of its greater efficacy and lower incidence of side effects, cabergoline is considered
the drug of choice for treatment of hyperprolactinemia. The usual
protocol is to begin with 0.25 mg twice weekly and then increase
as needed to 1 mg twice weekly. Even higher doses may be needed
in some patients but should be carefully monitored; high doses of
cabergoline used for long periods in older patients with parkinsonism are associated with cardiac valvular abnormalities, though this
has not been reported with the doses used in pediatric hyperprolactinemia; monitoring of cardiac valves with echocardiography may
be advisable if high doses are used for a prolonged period.
When dopamine agonist treatment has been unsuccessful in lowering the serum prolactin concentration or the size of the adenoma,
and when symptoms or signs attributable to hyperprolactinemia or
adenoma size persist during treatment, trans-­sphenoidal surgery
may be considered. Very rare cases of malignant prolactinomas may
require chemotherapy with temozolomide, but a cure is difficult in
such cases.

Corticotropinoma

Opiates
Morphine
Methadone
Others
Estrogens
Cocaine
Heroin
Alcohol
Anesthetics
Marijuana
PATHOLOGIC
Prolactinoma
Nonfunctioning pituitary adenoma causing stalk effect
Craniopharyngioma
Meningioma
Germinoma
Empty sella syndrome
Lymphocytic hypophysitis
Hypothalamic-­pituitary disease
Infiltrative diseases
Sarcoidosis
Histiocytosis X
Tuberculosis
Metastasis
OTHER DISEASE STATES
ROHHAD
Primary hypothyroidism
Chronic renal failure
Cirrhosis, severe hepatic insufficiency
Ectopic secretion of prolactin
Chest-­wall lesions (trauma, surgery, herpes zoster virus)
ROHHAD, rapid-onset obesity, hypothalamic dysfunction, hypoventilation, and autonomic
dysregulation.
From Wong A, Eloy JA, Couldwell WT, Liu JK. Update on prolactinomas. Part 1: clinical
manifestations and diagnostic challenges. J Clin Neurosci. 2015;22:1562–1567, Table 2.

It should be noted that there are occasional cases of galactorrhea
where the prolactin level is completely normal (even after serial
dilution to rule out the hook effect); the galactorrhea is usually mild

Corticotropinoma is very rare in children, but unlike other types
of pituitary adenomas, its incidence is higher in younger children
and decreases with age. Cushing disease refers specifically to an
ACTH-­producing pituitary adenoma that stimulates excess cortisol production and secretion (see Chapter 619). It is more common than primary adrenal causes of Cushing syndrome, except in
younger children (younger than 5 years of age), in whom adrenal
carcinomas and adrenal activating variants of MAS are rare but
dominant causes of the syndrome. Adenomas causing Cushing disease are almost always microadenomas with a diameter of <5 mm
and are significantly smaller than all other types of adenomas at
presentation. The most sensitive indicator of excess glucocorticoid
secretion in children is growth failure, which generally precedes
other manifestations. Patients develop weight gain that may be
centripetal rather than generalized. Pubertal arrest, hypertension,
large purplish striae, fatigue, and depression are also common.
In prepubertal children, males are more frequently affected than
females.
Midnight salivary cortisol measurements can be used as a screening test for cortisol excess, but confirmation requires at least one
additional test (either 24-­hour urinary free cortisol or an overnight
dexamethasone suppression test). Location of the microadenoma is
usually determined by MRI, and bilateral inferior petrosal sinus sampling may be needed in difficult cases. Trans-­sphenoidal surgery is the
treatment of choice for Cushing disease in children. Initial remission
rates of 70–98% of patients and long-­term success rates of 50–98% are
reported. Residual transient hypoadrenalism is often observed after
surgery, lasting as long as 30 months. Pituitary radiotherapy is used
if cortisol levels remain elevated and/or ACTH levels continue to be
detectable. Successful treatment may not correct the height deficit, and
GH deficiency may be present after treatment and should be treated as
required.
Thyrotropinomas are extremely rare, with only a few cases
reported in the pediatric age-­group. They present with symptoms of
hyperthyroidism as well as local symptoms such as headaches and
visual field defects. Laboratory testing reveals elevated thyroid hormone levels with inappropriately unsuppressed TSH levels. Treatment consists of trans-­sphenoidal surgery in most cases, though
radiation may be needed if surgery is unsuccessful.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3382 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System

598.1 Overgrowth Syndromes
Jennifer M. Kalish

OVERGROWTH IN THE FETUS AND NEONATE

Maternal diabetes is the most common cause of infants being large
for gestational age. Even in the absence of clinical symptoms or a
family history, the birth of a large-­for-­gestational-­age infant should
lead to evaluation for maternal (or gestational) diabetes.
Overgrowth syndromes: A group of disorders associated with
excessive somatic growth and growth of specific organs has been
described and is collectively referred to as overgrowth syndromes.
These disorders are caused in many cases by excess production and
availability of IGF2 encoded by the gene IGF2. The best described of
these syndromes is Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome (BWS), which is
an overgrowth malformation syndrome that occurs with an incidence
of 1:10,340 births, equal in males and females. It is caused by genetic
or epigenetic abnormalities in the 11p15 chromosomal region, with
most cases being the result of epigenetic abnormalities (loss or gain
of DNA methylation) of two imprinting control regions, IC1 and IC2.
Other causes include pathogenic variants, duplications, deletions, and
loss of heterozygosity in this region. The imprinted genes involved in
BWS and associated childhood tumors include, in addition to IGF2,
the noncoding RNA H19, which is involved in IGF2 suppression,
cyclin-­dependent kinase inhibitor 1C (CDKN1C), potassium channel
voltage-­gated KQT-­like subfamily member 1 (KCNQ1), and KCNQ1-­
overlapping transcript 1 (KCNQ1OT1, or long QT intronic transcript
1, LIT1). Approximately 10% of cases are familial, whereas the rest
appear to be sporadic. Cardinal clinical features of BWS include macroglossia, omphalocele, lateralized overgrowth (hemihypertrophy),
bilateral Wilms tumor, hyperinsulinism, and pathologic findings (adrenal cytomegaly, pancreatic adenomatosis, and mesenchymal dysplasia). Suggestive features include macrosomia, mid-­glabellar capillary
malformation (nevus flammeus), earlobe creases and pits, umbilical hernia or diastasis recti, hepatomegaly, nephromegaly, transient
hypoglycemia, and embryonal tumors (hepatoblastoma and unilateral
Wilms tumor) (Fig. 598.2). The hyperinsulinemia is a result of pancreatic β-­cell hyperplasia. These children are predisposed to embryonal
tumors, including Wilms tumor, hepatoblastoma, neuroblastoma, and
adrenocortical carcinoma. Management focuses on the omphalocele,
airway issues (a result of macroglossia), neonatal hyperinsulinism/
hypoglycemia, leg length differences, and tumor screening. Because of
the cancer risk, screening is recommended until the seventh birthday.
Screening includes complete abdominal ultrasound and measurement
of α-­fetoprotein every 3 months through the fourth birthday and renal

Fig. 598.2 Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome in newborn infants. (Cour-

tesy Dr. Michael Cohen, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia. From
Jones KL, Jones MC, Del Campo M. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of
Human Malformation, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022, Fig. 1, p. 221.)

ultrasounds every 3 months until the seventh birthday. Thereafter,
renal ultrasound is recommended in cases of renal malformation such
as medullary sponge kidney and nephrocalcinosis.
Pathogenic variants in GPC3 and GPC4, glypican genes (which
code for an IGF2–neutralizing membrane receptor), cause Simpson-­
Golabi-­Behmel syndrome (Fig. 598.3). Other syndromic causes of
fetal overgrowth include Costello syndrome, Weaver syndrome,
Sotos syndrome (Fig. 598.4), and Perlman syndrome (Tables 598.2
and 598.3 and Fig. 598.5).

Overgrowth in Childhood or Adolescence

Normal-­variant, familial, or constitutional tall stature is by far the most
common cause of tall stature. Almost invariably, a family history of tall
stature can be obtained, and no organic pathology is present. The child
is often taller than the child’s peers throughout childhood and has typical health. There are no abnormalities in the physical examination, and
laboratory studies, if obtained, are negative.
Exogenous obesity is associated with rapid linear growth and relatively early onset of puberty (more so in girls). Bone age is accelerated,
leading to relative tall stature in childhood but adult height is typically
normal.
Klinefelter syndrome (XXY syndrome) is a relatively common
(1 in 500-­1,000 live male births) chromosomal abnormality associated with tall stature, learning disabilities (including requirement
for speech therapy), gynecomastia, and decreased upper body:lower
body segment ratio. Affected boys can have hypotonia, clinodactyly,
and hypertelorism. The testes are invariably small, although androgen production by Leydig cells is often in the low-­normal range.
Spermatogenesis and Sertoli cell function are defective and lead to
infertility. Other genital abnormalities include relatively small phallus and an increased incidence of hypospadias and cryptorchidism.

Fig. 598.3 Simpson-­Golabi-­Behmel syndrome. Affected 16-­yr-­old
male. Note the ocular hypertelorism, broad flat nose, 2-­3 syndactyly, and
nail hypoplasia. (From Jones KL, Jones MC, Del Campo M. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2022. Fig. 1, p. 225.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 598 u Hyperpituitarism 3383
Table 598.2  Differential Diagnosis of Tall Stature and
Overgrowth Syndromes
FETAL OVERGROWTH
Maternal diabetes mellitus
Sotos syndrome (NSD1)
Weaver syndrome (EZH2)
Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome (11p15 alterations)
Marshall-­Smith syndrome (NFIX)
POSTNATAL OVERGROWTH LEADING TO CHILDHOOD OR
ADULT TALL STATURE
Nonendocrine Causes
Familial (constitutional) tall stature
Exogenous obesity
Sotos syndrome (NSD1)
Weaver syndrome (EZH2)
Perlman syndrome (DIS3L2)
Simpson-­Golabi-­Behmel syndrome (GPC3, GPC4)
Marfan syndrome (FBN1)
Homocystinuria
Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome (11p15 alterations)
Klinefelter syndrome (XXY)
Other syndromes with extra X or Y chromosomes
Overgrowth syndromes with intellectual disability (DNMT3A, CHD8,
HIST1H1E, EED)
Endocrine Causes
Excess GH secretion caused by adenomas (pituitary gigantism)
X-­linked acrogigantism (Xq26.3 duplication)
McCune-­Albright syndrome or MEN associated with excess GH
secretion
Aromatase deficiency and estrogen receptor defects
Precocious puberty (initial acceleration, ultimate short stature)
Hyperthyroidism (acceleration, but not adult tall stature)
GH, Growth hormone; MEN, multiple endocrine neoplasia.

Fig. 598.4 Cerebral gigantism (Sotos syndrome) in an 8-­yr-­old male.

The height age was 12 yr, and the bone age was 12 yr. IQ was 60. The
electroencephalogram had abnormal findings. Note the prominence of
the forehead and jaw and the large hands and feet. Sexual development was consistent with chronologic age. Hormone study results were
normal. The adult height was 208 cm (6 ft 10 in); his sexual development was normal. He wears size 18 shoes.

XYY syndrome is associated with tall stature, severe acne in adolescence, increased incidence of learning disabilities, and behavioral
problems, particularly impulsivity. Intelligence is usually in the
normal range but may be 10-­15 IQ points lower than their siblings.
Other rare chromosomal abnormalities in which an excess number
of X or Y chromosomes are present (e.g., XXX, XXXY, XYYY) are
also associated with increased height.
Marfan syndrome is an autosomal dominant connective tissue
disorder consisting of tall stature, arachnodactyly, thin extremities,
increased arm span, and decreased upper body:lower body segment
ratio (see Chapter 743). Additional abnormalities include ocular
abnormalities (e.g., lens subluxation), hypotonia, kyphoscoliosis, cardiac valvular deformities, and aortic root dilation.
Homocystinuria is an autosomal recessive inborn error of amino
acid metabolism caused by a deficiency of the enzyme cystathionine synthetase. It is characterized by intellectual disability when
untreated, and many of its clinical features resemble Marfan syndrome, particularly ocular manifestations (see Chapter 105).

SOTOS SYNDROME

Children with Sotos syndrome (see Fig. 598.4) are typically above
the 90th percentile for both length and weight at birth and may also
have an increased head size. In other cases, macrocephaly becomes
more apparent postnatally. Most cases of Sotos syndrome are caused

by pathogenic variants in NSD1, but in the Japanese population
most cases are attributable to microdeletions of the 5q35 region
that includes this gene. Inheritance is autosomal dominant, but 95%
of cases are a result of de novo (new) mutations. Incidence is estimated to be approximately 1 in 14,000 live births. The NSD1 gene is
thought to play a role in epigenetic regulation, but the exact mechanisms by which mutations lead to the features of Sotos syndrome
are not yet understood.
Although it is characterized by rapid growth, there is no evidence
that Sotos syndrome is caused by endocrine dysregulation. Growth is
markedly rapid; by 1 year of age, affected infants are often taller than
the 97th percentile in height. Accelerated growth continues for the first
4-­5 years and then returns to a normal rate. Puberty usually occurs at
the expected time but may occur slightly early. Adult height is usually
in the upper-­normal range.
Clinically the syndrome is characterized by a large (macrocephaly) dolichocephalic head, prominent forehead and jaw, hypertelorism, downslant of the palpebral fissures, high-­arched palate,
and large hands and feet with thickened subcutaneous tissue. Clumsiness and awkward gait are also noted, and affected children may
have difficulty in sports, in learning to ride a bicycle, and in other
tasks requiring coordination. Some degree of developmental disability affects most patients; in some affected children, perceptual
deficiencies may predominate. Many different types of nonfebrile
seizures have been reported, and up to 25% of patients with Sotos
syndrome have seizures at some point in their life. Hyperinsulinism can also occur. Affected patients may be at somewhat increased
risk for neoplasms, including neuroblastoma, hepatoblastoma,
and leukemia, with a lifetime risk of between 2% and 4%. Osseous
maturation is usually compatible with the patient’s height, although

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3384 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 598.3  Overgrowth Syndromes
SYNDROME

CLINICAL FEATURES

GENETIC ETIOLOGY

TUMOR SURVEILLANCE

Beckwith-­Wiedemann
syndrome (BWS)

Hypoglycemia, macroglossia, ear pits,
omphalocele or umbilical hernia,
lateralized overgrowth, organomegaly, high
risk of embryonal tumors until age 7

Various genetic and epigenetic
abnormalities in 11p15, most
commonly in the IC2 region

Tumor surveillance until at
least age 7 yr

Perlman syndrome

Macrosomia, unusual facies, nephroblastosis,
severe hypotonia, very high risk of Wilms
tumor

DIS3L2 (DIS3 Like 3′-­5′ exoribonuclease 2) (autosomal recessive)

Routine tumor surveillance
recommended

Simpson-­Golabi-­Behmel
syndrome

Coarse facial features, macroglossia, central
groove lower lip, supernumerary nipples,
cardiac and skeletal defects

GPC3 (glypican 3)
(X-­linked recessive)

Tumor surveillance
justified (per BWS
protocol)

Sotos syndrome

Excessive growth in first 4 yr, dolichoce­phaly,
macrocrania, typical facies, long limbs,
seizures, hypotonia

NSD1 deletion or variant (autosomal
dominant)
Rare familial cases
NFIX (Nuclear Factor I X) may cause
related Malan syndrome

Routine tumor screening
not recommended

Tatton-­Brown syndrome

Round face, heavy/horizontal eyebrows,
narrow palpebral fissures, intellectual
disability, and increased height

DNMT3A (DNA Methyltransferase
3 Alpha)

Routine tumor screening
not recommended

Weaver syndrome

Broad forehead, hypertelorism, small chin,
long philtrum, camptodactyly, redundant
nuchal skin, heart and brain defects

EZH2 (Enhancer of zeste homolog 2)
gene in some cases

Routine tumor screening
not recommended

PTEN-­hamartoma
syndromes (including
Bannayan-­Ruvalcaba-­Riley)

Macrocephaly, hypotonia, pigmented skin,
penile macules, lipomas, seizures

PTEN (phosphatase and TENsin
homolog)(sporadic or autosomal
dominant)

Tumor surveillance
recommended

PIK3CA-related overgrowth
spectrum

Brain overgrowth (megalencephaly),
microgyria, cutaneous vascular
malformations, syndactyly, seizures,
developmental delay

Pathogenic variants in various PIK3
­related genes, including P|I3R2,
AKT3, CCND2, PIK3CA, etc.

Tumor surveillance is
debated

Marfan syndrome

Facial gestalt, lens dislocation, arachno­
dactyly, scoliosis, pectus carinatum or
excavatum, aortic root dilation

FBN1 (Fibrillin 1)
(autosomal dominant)

None

Loeys-­Dietz syndrome

Marfan-­like habitus, aortic root dilation,
aortic dissection, vasculopathy (more
aggressive than Marfan syndrome)

TGF-­β pathway genes including
TGFBR1, TGFBR2, SMAD3, and
TGFB2 (autosomal dominant)

None

Homocystinuria

Marfan-­like habitus, developmental delay,
lens dislocation

CBS gene (Cystathionine β-­
synthase) (autosomal recessive)

None

Lujan syndrome

Marfan-like habitus, intellectual
disability, no eye or cardiovascular
anomalies

MED12 (Mediator Complex Subunit
12) gene (X-linked recessive)

None

advanced bone age has been reported. Scoliosis develops in up to
30% of cases, usually starting in school-­age children. GH, IGF1,
and other endocrine studies are usually normal; there is no distinctive laboratory or radiologic marker for the syndrome. Abnormal
electroencephalograms are common; imaging studies often reveal
an enlarged ventricular system, but intracranial pressure is normal.
Genetic testing for NSD1 pathogenic variants (or fluorescence in
situ hybridization for 5q35 microdeletions in Japanese patients) is
available and should be routinely used. Management is symptomatic and includes paying special attention to developmental and
behavioral problems (which tend to improve with age), scoliosis,
and seizure disorder. No specific treatment is needed for the overgrowth itself. There is no consensus on the need for cancer surveillance at this time.

Tatton-­Brown Syndrome

Tatton-­Brown syndrome is characterized by distinctive facial appearance (round face, heavy/horizontal eyebrows, and narrow palpebral
fissures), intellectual disability, and increased height. It is caused by
pathogenic variants in DNMT3A, a methyltransferase. Pathogenic
variants in DNMT3A are also seen in hematologic malignances, which
like NSD1 and EZH2, show dual-­gene functionality in overgrowth syndromes and myeloid neoplasms.
Hyperthyroidism in adolescents is associated with rapid growth but
normal final adult height. It is almost always caused by Graves disease
and is much more common in girls (see Chapter 606).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 599 u Physiology of Puberty

3385

Height < +2SDS
but
typical dysmorphic features

Height SDS > +2SDS
or
Height-TH > +2SDS

Dysmorphic?

No

Yes

(Recent) growth acceleration?

Disproportionate?

No

Yes

Height-TH > +2SDS?

Puberty signs?

No

Yes

No

Pituitary gigantism
Hyperthyroidism
Familial tall stature

Obesity
Estrogen deficiency/insensitivity

Yes

Precocious puberty
Pseudoprecocious
puberty
Constitutional
advance in puberty

No

Yes

Overgrowth syndromes
Klinefelter syndrome
Marfan syndrome
Marfan type II syndrome
CCA/ Beals syndrome
Homocystinuria
Lujan-Fryns syndrome
Sotos syndrome
Weaver syndrome

Overgrowth syndromes
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome
PIK3CA-related overgrowth spectrum
PTEN-hamartoma syndrome
Simpson-Golabi-Behmel syndrome

Other
Estrogen deficiency or
insensitivity

Fig. 598.5 Diagnostic algorithm for the differential diagnosis of tall stature and overgrowth syndromes. CCA, congenital contractural arachnodac-

tyly; Height-­TH, current height percentile >2 SDS from target height percentile, the latter based on midparental height calculation; SDS, standard
deviation score. (Adapted from Neylon OM, Werther GA, Sabin MA. Overgrowth syndromes. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2012;24:505–511, Fig. 1.)

Chapter 599

Physiology of Puberty
Luigi R. Garibaldi and Wassim Chemaitilly
Between early childhood and approximately 8-­9 years of age (prepubertal stage), the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­gonadal axis is dormant, as
reflected by undetectable serum concentrations of luteinizing hormone
(LH) and sex hormones (estradiol in females, testosterone in males).
One to 3 years before the onset of clinically evident puberty, low serum
levels of LH during sleep become demonstrable. This sleep-­entrained
LH secretion occurs in a pulsatile fashion and reflects endogenous
episodic discharge of hypothalamic gonadotropin-­releasing hormone
(GnRH). Nocturnal pulses of LH continue to increase in amplitude
and, to a lesser extent, in frequency as clinical puberty approaches.
This pulsatile secretion of gonadotropins is responsible for enlargement and maturation of the gonads and the secretion of sex hormones.
The appearance of the secondary sex characteristics in early puberty is
the visible culmination of the sustained, active interaction occurring
among the hypothalamus, pituitary, and gonads in the peripubertal
period. By mid-­puberty, LH pulses become evident even during the
daytime and occur at about 90-­to 120-­minute intervals. A second
critical event occurs in middle or late adolescence in females in whom

cyclicity and ovulation occur. A positive feedback mechanism develops whereby increasing levels of estrogen in midcycle cause a distinct
increase of LH.
The increasing secretion of hypothalamic GnRH in a pulsatile fashion thus underlies the onset of pubertal development. The GnRH pulse
generator is regulated by multiple neuropeptides, including glutamic
acid, kisspeptin, neurokinin-­
B (stimulatory); γ-­aminobutyric acid,
preproenkephalin, and dynorphin (inhibitory). Pathogenic variants of
KISS1R (previously known as GPR54, a G protein–coupled receptor
gene whose ligand is kisspeptin) are a rare cause of autosomal recessive
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (loss-­of-­function pathogenic variants) or precocious puberty (gain-­of-­function pathogenic variants).
The imprinted paternally expressed gene makorin RING finger protein 3 (MKRN3) has been described as a brake for the onset of puberty.
Loss-­of-­function pathogenic variants of this gene are responsible for
paternally transmitted familial precocious puberty in both sexes.
The interpretation of the hormonal changes of puberty is complex.
Challenges with interpreting LH and follicle-­stimulating hormone (FSH)
measurements include the presence of multiple gonadotropin isoforms,
immunoassay-­related variability, and problems inherent to their pulsatile
secretion, which mandate serial sampling in plasma. In addition, important sex differences exist in the maturation of the hypothalamus and pituitary gland because serum LH concentrations tend to increase earlier in
the course of the pubertal process in males than in females. Adrenocortical androgens also have a role in sexual maturation. Serum levels of dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) and its sulfate (DHEAS) begin to increase at
approximately 6-­8 years of age, before any increase in LH or sex hormones

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 599 u Physiology of Puberty

3385

Height < +2SDS
but
typical dysmorphic features

Height SDS > +2SDS
or
Height-TH > +2SDS

Dysmorphic?

No

Yes

(Recent) growth acceleration?

Disproportionate?

No

Yes

Height-TH > +2SDS?

Puberty signs?

No

Yes

No

Pituitary gigantism
Hyperthyroidism
Familial tall stature

Obesity
Estrogen deficiency/insensitivity

Yes

Precocious puberty
Pseudoprecocious
puberty
Constitutional
advance in puberty

No

Yes

Overgrowth syndromes
Klinefelter syndrome
Marfan syndrome
Marfan type II syndrome
CCA/ Beals syndrome
Homocystinuria
Lujan-Fryns syndrome
Sotos syndrome
Weaver syndrome

Overgrowth syndromes
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome
PIK3CA-related overgrowth spectrum
PTEN-hamartoma syndrome
Simpson-Golabi-Behmel syndrome

Other
Estrogen deficiency or
insensitivity

Fig. 598.5 Diagnostic algorithm for the differential diagnosis of tall stature and overgrowth syndromes. CCA, congenital contractural arachnodac-

tyly; Height-­TH, current height percentile >2 SDS from target height percentile, the latter based on midparental height calculation; SDS, standard
deviation score. (Adapted from Neylon OM, Werther GA, Sabin MA. Overgrowth syndromes. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2012;24:505–511, Fig. 1.)

Chapter 599

Physiology of Puberty
Luigi R. Garibaldi and Wassim Chemaitilly
Between early childhood and approximately 8-­9 years of age (prepubertal stage), the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­gonadal axis is dormant, as
reflected by undetectable serum concentrations of luteinizing hormone
(LH) and sex hormones (estradiol in females, testosterone in males).
One to 3 years before the onset of clinically evident puberty, low serum
levels of LH during sleep become demonstrable. This sleep-­entrained
LH secretion occurs in a pulsatile fashion and reflects endogenous
episodic discharge of hypothalamic gonadotropin-­releasing hormone
(GnRH). Nocturnal pulses of LH continue to increase in amplitude
and, to a lesser extent, in frequency as clinical puberty approaches.
This pulsatile secretion of gonadotropins is responsible for enlargement and maturation of the gonads and the secretion of sex hormones.
The appearance of the secondary sex characteristics in early puberty is
the visible culmination of the sustained, active interaction occurring
among the hypothalamus, pituitary, and gonads in the peripubertal
period. By mid-­puberty, LH pulses become evident even during the
daytime and occur at about 90-­to 120-­minute intervals. A second
critical event occurs in middle or late adolescence in females in whom

cyclicity and ovulation occur. A positive feedback mechanism develops whereby increasing levels of estrogen in midcycle cause a distinct
increase of LH.
The increasing secretion of hypothalamic GnRH in a pulsatile fashion thus underlies the onset of pubertal development. The GnRH pulse
generator is regulated by multiple neuropeptides, including glutamic
acid, kisspeptin, neurokinin-­
B (stimulatory); γ-­aminobutyric acid,
preproenkephalin, and dynorphin (inhibitory). Pathogenic variants of
KISS1R (previously known as GPR54, a G protein–coupled receptor
gene whose ligand is kisspeptin) are a rare cause of autosomal recessive
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (loss-­of-­function pathogenic variants) or precocious puberty (gain-­of-­function pathogenic variants).
The imprinted paternally expressed gene makorin RING finger protein 3 (MKRN3) has been described as a brake for the onset of puberty.
Loss-­of-­function pathogenic variants of this gene are responsible for
paternally transmitted familial precocious puberty in both sexes.
The interpretation of the hormonal changes of puberty is complex.
Challenges with interpreting LH and follicle-­stimulating hormone (FSH)
measurements include the presence of multiple gonadotropin isoforms,
immunoassay-­related variability, and problems inherent to their pulsatile
secretion, which mandate serial sampling in plasma. In addition, important sex differences exist in the maturation of the hypothalamus and pituitary gland because serum LH concentrations tend to increase earlier in
the course of the pubertal process in males than in females. Adrenocortical androgens also have a role in sexual maturation. Serum levels of dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) and its sulfate (DHEAS) begin to increase at
approximately 6-­8 years of age, before any increase in LH or sex hormones

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3386 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
and before the earliest physical changes of puberty are apparent; this process has been called adrenarche. DHEAS is the most abundant adrenal
C-­19 steroid in the blood, and its serum concentration remains fairly stable
over 24 hours. A single measurement of this hormone is commonly used
as a marker of adrenal androgen secretion. Although adrenarche typically
precedes the onset of gonadal activity (gonadarche) by a few years, the two
processes do not seem to be causally related, as evidenced by adrenarche
and gonadarche being dissociated in conditions such as central precocious
puberty and adrenocortical failure.
The effects of gonadal steroids (testosterone in males, estradiol in
females) on bone growth and osseous maturation are critical. Both
aromatase deficiency and estrogen receptor defects result in delayed
epiphyseal fusion and tall stature in affected males. These observations
suggest that estrogens, rather than androgens, are responsible for the
process of bone maturation that ultimately leads to epiphyseal fusion
and cessation of growth. Estrogens also mediate the increased production of growth hormone, which along with a direct effect of sex steroids
on bone growth, is responsible for the pubertal growth spurt.
The age of onset of puberty varies and is more closely correlated with
osseous maturation than with chronologic age (see Chapter 150). In
females, the breast bud (thelarche) is usually the first sign of puberty
(10-­11 years), followed by the appearance of pubic hair (pubarche) 6-­12
months later. The interval to the onset of menstrual activity (menarche)
is usually 2-­2.5 years but may be as long as 6 years. In the United States, at
least one sign of puberty is present in approximately 95% of females by 12
years of age and in 99% of females by 13 years of age. Peak height velocity
occurs early (at breast stage II-­III, typically between 11 and 12 years of age)
in females and always precedes menarche. The mean age of menarche is
about 12.75 years. However, there are wide variations in the sequence of
changes involving growth spurt, breast bud, pubic hair, and maturation of
the internal and external genitalia.
In males, growth of the testes (≥4 mL in volume or 2.5 cm in longest
diameter) and thinning of the scrotum are the first signs of puberty (11-­12
years). These are followed by pigmentation of the scrotum and growth of
the penis and by pubarche. Appearance of axillary hair usually occurs in
mid-­puberty. In males, unlike in females, acceleration of growth begins
after puberty is well underway and is maximal at genital stage IV-­V (typically between 13 and 14 years of age). In males, the growth spurt occurs
approximately 2 years later than in females, and growth may continue
beyond 18 years of age.
Genetic and environmental factors affect the timing for the onset of
puberty. Population-­based studies in the United States and Europe have
suggested secular trends for earlier onset of puberty over the past few
decades in females and, to a lesser degree, in males. African American,
and to a lesser extent Hispanic, females appear to be more advanced in the
development of secondary sex characteristics for age than White females.
However, the timing of menarche has advanced only marginally (2.5-­4
months) in White females and slightly more so (up to 6 months) in African
American females. The Copenhagen Puberty Study showed that the earlier
onset of breast development observed in females examined in 2006–2008
than those seen in 1991–1993 (means 10.9 years vs 9.9 years) was not associated with different levels of gonadotropins or estradiol when females of
similar chronologic ages were compared between the two groups. Hence
earlier breast development may not simply reflect earlier activation or
maturation of the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­gonadal axis but could also stem
from other factors such as increased adiposity or increased exposure to
certain environmental agents. Positive correlations between the degree of
adiposity and earlier pubertal development in females have been reported.
Conversely, female athletes in whom leanness and strenuous physical
activity have coexisted from early childhood frequently exhibit a marked
delay in puberty or menarche, and they frequently have oligomenorrhea or
amenorrhea as adults (see Chapter 732). Pubertal delay is also prevalent in
males who are physically very active. Thus energy balance is closely related
to the activity of the GnRH pulse generator and the mechanisms initiating
and sustaining puberty, possibly via hormonal signals such as leptin; other
adipokines; or by way of the central melanocortin-­4 receptor (MC4R),
which controls appetite, food intake, and energy expenditure.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 600

Disorders of Pubertal
Development
Luigi R. Garibaldi and Wassim Chemaitilly
INTRODUCTION

Precocious puberty is defined by the onset of secondary sexual characteristics before the age of 8 years in females and 9 years in males. The
variation in the age of the onset of puberty in normal children, particularly of different ethnicities, makes this definition somewhat arbitrary.
It remains in use by most clinicians.
Depending on the primary source of the hormonal production, precocious puberty may be classified as central (also known as gonadotropin
dependent, or true) or peripheral (also known as gonadotropin independent) (Table 600.1). Central precocious puberty (CPP) is always
isosexual and stems from hypothalamic-­pituitary-­gonadal activation
with ensuing sex hormone secretion and progressive sexual maturation.
In peripheral precocious puberty, some of the secondary sex character­
istics appear, but there is no activation of the normal hypothalamic-­
pituitary-­gonadal interplay. In this latter group, the sex characteristics
may be isosexual or heterosexual (see Chapters 622-­628).
Peripheral precocious puberty can also induce maturation of the
hypothalamic-­pituitary-­gonadal axis and trigger the onset of central
puberty at a later time. This mixed type of precocious puberty occurs
in congenital adrenal hyperplasia, particularly after adrenal androgens
are suppressed by treatment; McCune-­Albright syndrome; and familial male-­limited precocious puberty, when the bone age reaches the
pubertal range (10.5-­12.5 years).

600.1 Central Precocious Puberty
Luigi R. Garibaldi and Wassim Chemaitilly
CPP is defined by the onset of pubertal development due to the early
activation of the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­gonadal axis before the ages
of 8 and 9 years in females and males, respectively. It occurs 5-­to 10-­
fold more frequently in females than in males and is usually sporadic.
Although at least 90% of females have an idiopathic form, a structural
central nervous system (CNS) abnormality may occur in 25–75% of
males with CPP. Genetic forms of CPP, such as the paternally transmitted types due to pathogenic variants of MKRN3 gene or, more rarely
DLK1, may account for 5–10% of all cases of CPP. A high prevalence of
CPP has been reported in females adopted from developing countries,
particularly if adopted several months or years after birth, possibly
related to undefined nutritional or environmental factors.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

In females, CPP should be suspected when breast development is
noted before the age of 8 years. In males who have not been exposed
to gonadotoxic agents, CPP usually manifests first via increased testicular size (volume ≥4 mL) and scrotal thinning before the age of
9 years. Sexual development in affected individuals generally follows the sequence observed in normal puberty. In females, early
menstrual cycles may be more irregular than they are with normal
puberty. The initial cycles are usually anovulatory, but pregnancy has
been reported as early as 5.5 years of age (Fig. 600.1). In males, testicular biopsies have shown stimulation of all elements of the testes,
and spermatogenesis has been observed as early as 5-­6 years of age.
In affected females and males, height, weight, and height velocity are
accelerated. The increased rate of bone maturation results in early
closure of the epiphyses and compromised adult height, particularly

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 600 u Disorders of Pubertal Development

3387

Table 600.1  Classification of Sexual Precocity
TRUE PRECOCIOUS PUBERTY OR COMPLETE ISOSEXUAL
PRECOCITY
(GNRH-­Dependent Sexual Precocity or Premature Activation of the
Hypothalamic GNRH Pulse Generator)
Idiopathic true precocious puberty
CNS tumors
Optic glioma associated with neurofibromatosis type 1
Hypothalamic astrocytoma
Other CNS disorders
Developmental abnormalities including hypothalamic hamartoma of
the tuber cinereum
Encephalitis
Static encephalopathy
Brain abscess
Sarcoid or tubercular granuloma
Head trauma
Hydrocephalus
Arachnoid cyst
Myelomeningocele
Vascular lesion
Cranial irradiation
True precocious puberty after late treatment of congenital virilizing
adrenal hyperplasia or other previous chronic exposure to sex
steroids
True precocious puberty caused by pathogenic variants in the following
genes:
KISS1R/GPR54
KISS1
MKRN3
DLK1
INCOMPLETE ISOSEXUAL PRECOCITY (HYPOTHALAMIC
GNRH-­INDEPENDENT)
Males
Gonadotropin-­secreting tumors
hCG-­secreting CNS tumors (e.g., chorioepitheliomas, germinoma,
teratoma)
hCG-­secreting tumors located outside the CNS (hepatoma, teratoma,
choriocarcinoma)
Increased androgen secretion by adrenal or testis
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CYP21 and CYP11B1 deficiencies)
Virilizing adrenal neoplasm
Leydig cell adenoma
Familial male-­limited precocious puberty (FMPP, “testotoxicosis”)
(autosomal dominant gonadotropin-­independent precocious
Leydig cell and germ cell maturation)
Cortisol resistance syndrome

Females
Ovarian cyst
Estrogen-­secreting ovarian or adrenal neoplasm
Peutz-­Jeghers syndrome with sex cord tumor with annular tubules
(SCTAT)
Both Sexes
McCune-­Albright syndrome
Hypothyroidism
Iatrogenic or exogenous sexual precocity (including inadvertent
exposure to estrogens in food, drugs, or cosmetics)
VARIATIONS OF PUBERTAL DEVELOPMENT
Premature thelarche
Premature isolated menarche
Premature adrenarche
Adolescent gynecomastia in males
Macroorchidism
HETEROSEXUAL PRECOCITY
Feminization in Males
Adrenal neoplasm
Chorioepithelioma
Testicular neoplasm (Peutz-­Jeghers syndrome)
Increased extraglandular conversion of circulating adrenal androgens
to estrogen
Iatrogenic (exposure to estrogens)
Virilization in Females
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
CYP21 deficiency
CYP11B1 deficiency
3β-­HSD deficiency
Virilizing adrenal neoplasm (with or without Cushing syndrome)
Virilizing ovarian neoplasm (e.g., arrhenoblastoma)
Iatrogenic (exposure to androgens)
Cortisol resistance syndrome
Aromatase deficiency

CNS, Central nervous system; CYP11B1, 11-­hydroxylase; CYP21, 21-­hydroxylase; GnRH, gonadotropin-­releasing hormone; hCG, human chorionic gonadotropin; 3β-­HSD, 3β-­
hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 4,5-­isomerase; KISS1R/GPR54, kisspeptin receptor/G protein–coupled receptor 54.
Modified from Styne DM, Grumbach MM. Physiology and disorders of puberty. In Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology,
13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Table 25.25, p. 1163.

if puberty begins at a very early age. Historically, approximately 30%
of females and an even larger percentage of males achieved a height
below the fifth percentile as adults without treatment. Mental development is usually compatible with chronological age. Emotional
behavior and mood swings are common, but serious psychologic
problems are rare.
Although the clinical course is variable, three main patterns of
pubertal progression can be identified. Most females (particularly
those younger than 6 years of age at the onset) and a large majority of
males have rapidly progressive puberty, characterized by rapid physical and osseous maturation, leading to a loss of height potential. An
increasing percentage of females (older than 6 years of age at the onset
with an idiopathic form) and, rarely, males have a slowly progressive
variant, characterized by parallel advancement of osseous maturation
and linear growth, with preserved height potential. Very rarely, central puberty may regress spontaneously (unsustained CPP). This variability in the natural course of sexual precocity underscores the need

for longitudinal observation at the onset of sexual development before
treatment is considered.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Sex hormone concentrations are usually appropriate for the stage of
puberty in both sexes (Table 600.2). Despite the availability of sensitive and
specific assays for sex hormones, random serum estradiol concentrations
are low or undetectable in the early phase of sexual precocity in females,
as they are in normal puberty. In males, serum testosterone levels are usually detectable or elevated by the time the parents seek medical attention,
provided that an early morning blood sample is obtained. With the use
of highly sensitive assays, serum LH concentrations are undetectable in
prepubertal children in random blood samples but become detectable in
50–75% of females and a higher percentage of males with CPP. Unfortunately, a number of hospitals use only moderately sensitive immunoenzymatic assays for LH and often insensitive assays for estradiol and
testosterone, which decreases the diagnostic yield of these measurements.
Measurement of LH in serial blood samples obtained during sleep has very

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3388 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
good diagnostic power and typically reveals a well-­defined pulsatile secretion of LH in early puberty; it is, however, difficult to implement in a clinical setting. Dynamic tests using gonadotropin-­releasing hormone (GnRH,
intravenously; unavailable in the United States) or a GnRH agonist (leuprolide, subcutaneously) are helpful diagnostic tools, particularly for males,
in whom a pubertal LH response (LH peak >5 IU/L) with predominance
of LH over follicle-­stimulating hormone (FSH) tends to occur early in the
course of precocious puberty. In females with sexual precocity, however,
the nocturnal LH secretion and the LH response to GnRH or GnRH agonist may be quite low at breast stages II to early III (LH peak, <5 IU/L), and
the LH to FSH ratio may remain low until mid-­advanced puberty. In such
females with low LH response, the central nature of sexual precocity can be
proven by detecting pubertal levels of estradiol (>50 pg/mL) 20-­24 hours
after stimulation with leuprolide.
Osseous maturation is variably advanced, often more than 2-­3 standard deviations (SD). Pelvic ultrasonography in females reveals progressive enlargement of the ovaries, enlargement of the fundus, and
then of the whole uterus to pubertal size. An MRI scan usually demonstrates physiologic enlargement of the pituitary gland, as seen in normal puberty; it may also reveal CNS pathology.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

A

B

C

Fig. 600.1 Natural course of untreated idiopathic central precocious

puberty. Patient (A) at 311⁄12, (B) at 58⁄12, and (C) at 81⁄2 yr of age. Breast
development and vaginal bleeding began at 21⁄2 yr of age. Bone age
was 71⁄2 yr at 311⁄12 and 14 yr at 8 yr of age. Intelligence and dental age
were normal for chronological age. Growth was completed at 10 yr;
ultimate height was 142 cm (56 in). No effective therapy was available
at the time this patient sought medical attention.

Organic CNS causes of central sexual precocity are more likely in males
and in females who have rapid breast development, estradiol greater
than 30 pg/mL, or are younger than 6 years of age. All children in these
categories, and children with neurologic symptoms or signs, should
undergo MRI scans of the brain and pituitary gland. Criteria for brain
imaging in females older than 6 years are controversial, although some
authorities recommend MRI scans for all children with CPP.
Gonadotropin-­independent causes of isosexual precocious
puberty must be considered in the differential diagnosis (see Tables
600.1 and 600.2). For females, these include tumors of the ovaries, autonomously functioning ovarian cysts, feminizing adrenal

Table 600.2  Differential Diagnosis of Sexual Precocity
DISORDER

PLASMA
GONADOTROPINS

GONADOTROPIN DEPENDENT
True (central)
Prominent LH
precocious
pulses (premature
puberty
reactivation of
GnRH pulse
generator), initially
during sleep
GONADOTROPIN INDEPENDENT
Males
Chorionic
High hCG,
gonadotropin-­
low LH
secreting tumor in
males

LH RESPONSE
TO GNRH

SERUM SEX STEROID
CONCENTRATION

Pubertal LH
response

GONADAL SIZE

MISCELLANEOUS

Pubertal values of
testosterone or
estradiol

Normal pubertal
testicular enlargement
or ovarian and uterine
enlargement

MRI of brain to rule out
CNS tumor or other
abnormality

Prepubertal LH
response

Pubertal value of
testosterone

Slight to moderate
uniform enlargement of
testes

Irregular, asymmetric
enlargement of a testis
Testes symmetric
and length >2.5 cm
but smaller than
expected for pubertal
development;
spermatogenesis occurs
Testes prepubertal

Hepatomegaly suggests
hepatoblastoma; MRI
of brain if chorionic
gonadotropin-­
secreting CNS tumor
suspected
Testicular US

Leydig cell tumor in
males
Familial, male-­
limited precocious
puberty (FMPP,
testotoxicosis)

Suppressed

No LH response

High testosterone

Suppressed

No LH response

Pubertal values of
testosterone

Virilizing congenital
adrenal
hyperplasia

Prepubertal

Prepubertal LH
response

Elevated 17-­OHP in
CYP21 deficiency
or elevated
11-­deoxycortisol in
CYP11B1 deficiency

Activating pathogenic
variant of the LHCG
receptor; autosomal
dominant transmission
Autosomal recessive,
variable severity/
age of onset; may
have salt loss in
CYP21 deficiency
or hypertension in
CYP11B1 deficiency
Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 600 u Disorders of Pubertal Development

3389

Table 600.2  Differential Diagnosis of Sexual Precocity—cont’d
DISORDER
Virilizing adrenal
tumor

Females
Granulosa cell tumor
(follicular cysts may
present similarly)
Follicular cyst

Feminizing adrenal
tumor
Nonclassical
congenital adrenal
hyperplasia
In Both Sexes
McCune-­Albright
syndrome

Primary
hypothyroidism

PLASMA
GONADOTROPINS

LH RESPONSE
TO GNRH

SERUM SEX STEROID
CONCENTRATION

GONADAL SIZE

MISCELLANEOUS

Prepubertal

Prepubertal LH
response

High DHEAS,
DHEA, and/or
androstenedione
values

Testes prepubertal

CT or MRI of abdomen

Suppressed

Prepubertal LH
response

Very high estradiol

Tumor often palpable on
physical examination

Suppressed

Prepubertal LH
response

Prepubertal to very
high estradiol

Ovarian enlargement on
physical examination,
CT, MRI, or US
Ovarian enlargement on
physical examination,
CT, MRI, or US

Suppressed

Prepubertal LH
response
Prepubertal LH
response

High estradiol, variable
DHEAS increase
Elevated 17-­OHP
in basal or in
corticotropin-­
stimulated state

Ovaries prepubertal
Ovaries prepubertal

Single or recurrent
episodes of menses
and/or breast
development; exclude
McCune-­Albright
syndrome
Unilateral adrenal mass
on CT or MRI
Autosomal recessive

Suppressed

Suppressed

Sex steroid pubertal;
estradiol may be
quite high in girls

LH prepubertal; FSH
may be slightly
elevated

Prepubertal;
flat FSH, LH
response

Estradiol often pubertal

Ovarian enlargement
(asymmetrical) on
US; slight (usually
symmetrical) testicular
enlargement
Testicular enlargement;
ovaries macrocystic

Skeletal survey/bone
scan for polyostotic
fibrous dysplasia and
skin examination for
café-­au-­lait macules
TSH very high, prolactin
mildly elevated; T4 low

Ovaries prepubertal

Onset usually before 3 yr
of age

Testes prepubertal

Onset usually after 6 yr of
age; more frequent in
CNS-­injured children

Ovaries prepubertal

Onset usually after 6 yr of
age; more frequent in
brain-­injured children

Prepubertal

INCOMPLETE PRECOCITY/VARIATIONS OF PUBERTY
Premature thelarche Prepubertal
Prepubertal LH
Premature
adrenarche (males)

Prepubertal

Prepubertal LH
response

Premature
adrenarche
(females)

Prepubertal

Prepubertal LH
response

Prepubertal or early
pubertal estradiol
response
Prepubertal
testosterone; DHEAS
value appropriate for
pubic hair stage
Prepubertal estradiol;
DHEAS value
appropriate for pubic
hair stage

CNS, Central nervous system; CT, computed tomography; CYP, P450 cytochrome isoenzyme; DHEAS, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate; FSH, follicle-­stimulating hormone; GnRH,
gonadotropin-­releasing hormone; hCG, human chorionic gonadotropin; LH, luteinizing hormone; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; 17-­OHP, 17-­hydroxyprogesterone; T4,
thyroxine; TSH, thyrotropin; US, ultrasonography.
Modified from Styne DM, Grumbach MM. Physiology and disorders of puberty. In: Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology,
13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Table 25.41, pp. 1196–1197.

tumors, McCune-­Albright syndrome, and exogenous sources of
estrogens. In males, congenital adrenal hyperplasia, adrenal tumors,
Leydig cell tumors, human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG)–producing tumors, exposure to exogenous androgens, and familial male
precocious puberty should be considered.

TREATMENT

Virtually all males and the large subgroup of females with rapidly
progressive precocious puberty, including CPP beginning before age 6
years, are candidates for treatment. Females with slowly progressive
idiopathic CPP do not seem to benefit in terms of height prognosis
from GnRH agonist therapy. Former small-­for-­gestational-­age infants
may be at greater risk of short stature as adults and may require more
aggressive treatment of precocious puberty, possibly in conjunction
with human growth hormone (hGH) therapy. Certain patients require
treatment predominantly for psychologic or social reasons, including
children with special needs.

The observation that the pituitary gonadotropic cells require pulsatile, rather than continuous, stimulation by GnRH to maintain the
ongoing release of gonadotropins provides the rationale for using
GnRH agonists for treatment of CPP. By virtue of being more potent
and having a longer duration of action than native GnRH, these GnRH
agonists (after a brief period of stimulation) desensitize the gonadotropic cells of the pituitary to the stimulatory effect of endogenous
GnRH and effectively halt the progression of central sexual precocity.
Long-­acting formulations of GnRH agonists, which maintain fairly
constant serum concentration of the drug for weeks or months, constitute the preparations of choice for treatment of CPP. In the United States,
the available preparations include (1) leuprolide acetate (Lupron Depot
Ped), in a dose of 0.2-­0.3 mg/kg (7.5-­15 mg) intramuscularly (IM) every
28 days; (2) longer-­acting preparations of depot-­leuprolide, including
Lupron-­Depot Ped 90-­day, 11.25 or 30 mg IM every 3 months, or Fensolvi
45 mg subcutaneously every 24 weeks; (3) histrelin (Supprelin LA), a subcutaneous 50-­mg implant with effects lasting at least 12 months; and (4)
triptorelin (Triptodur), 22.5 mg IM every 24 weeks. Other preparations

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3390 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
are approved for treatment of precocious puberty in other countries.
Recurrent sterile fluid collections at the sites of injections are an uncommon local side effect and occur in less than 1–3% of patients treated with
IM depot-­leuprolide. Breakage or malfunction of the histrelin implant is
rare. Other available treatment options for children who cannot tolerate
the products listed previously include subcutaneous injections of aqueous
leuprolide, given once or twice daily (total dose 60 mcg/kg/24 hr), or intranasal administration of the GnRH agonist nafarelin (Synarel), 800 mcg
bid. The potential for irregular compliance with daily administration, as
well as the variable absorption of the intranasal route for nafarelin, may
limit the efficacy and long-­term benefit of the latter preparations. GnRH
antagonists, including novel oral compounds, have not been investigated
sufficiently in children and are not FDA approved.
Treatment results in decrease of the growth rate, generally to age-­
appropriate values, and an even greater decrease of the rate of osseous maturation. Some children, particularly those with greatly advanced (pubertal)
bone age, may show marked deceleration of their growth rate and an arrest
in the rate of osseous maturation. Treatment results in enhancement of the
predicted height, more so in younger patients at diagnosis, male patients,
and those children with more rapidly progressive CPP. In females, breast
size may regress in those with Tanner stage II-­III development but tends
to remain unchanged in females with late stage III-­V development or may
even increase slightly because of progressive adipose tissue deposition. The
amount of glandular tissue decreases. Pubic hair usually remains stable in
females or may progress slowly during treatment, reflecting the gradual
increase in adrenal androgens. Menses, if present, cease. Pelvic sonography
demonstrates a decrease of the ovarian and uterine size. In males, there is
a decrease of testicular size, variable regression of pubic hair, and decrease
in the frequency of erections. Except for a reversible decrease in bone density (of uncertain clinical significance) and a reversible increase in body
mass index (BMI) percentiles in some females, no serious adverse effects
of GnRH analogs have been reported in children during or after treatment
for sexual precocity. If treatment is effective, the serum sex hormone concentrations decrease to prepubertal levels (testosterone <10-­20 ng/dL in
males; estradiol <5-­10 pg/mL in females). The serum LH and FSH concentrations, as measured by sensitive immunometric assays, decrease to less
than 1 IU/L in most patients, although rarely does the LH return to truly
prepubertal levels (<0.1 IU/L). Moreover, the incremental FSH and LH
responses to GnRH stimulation decrease to less than 2-­3 IU/L. Serum LH,
FSH, and sex hormone levels are suppressed more completely and evenly
by the histrelin implant than by GnRH agonist injections. Therapy is typically discontinued at a pubertal chronological age, after which puberty
resumes promptly. In females, menarche generally appears at an average of
18 months (range 6-­24 months) after cessation of IM therapy and somewhat earlier after removal of the histrelin implant. The addition of hGH to
GnRH agonists has been used on an investigational basis in children with
precocious puberty, markedly advanced bone age, and prediction of short
stature. The available, albeit limited, data indicate that combined therapy
may increase the adult height.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

600.2 Precocious Puberty Resulting from
Organic Brain Lesions
Wassim Chemaitilly and Luigi R. Garibaldi
Hypothalamic hamartoma is the most common brain lesion causing
CPP (Fig. 600.2). This congenital malformation consists of ectopically
located neural tissue, within which glial cells can produce transforming growth factor-­α (TGF-­α), which has the potential to activate the
GnRH pulse generator. On MRI, it appears as a small pedunculated mass
attached to the tuber cinereum or the floor of the third ventricle or, less
often, as a sessile mass (Fig. 600.3) that remains static in size over years.
A wide variety of other CNS lesions or insults, usually involving the hypothalamus by scarring, invasion, or pressure, have been associated with CPP
(see Table 600.1). These include postencephalitic scars, tuberculous meningitis, tuberous sclerosis, severe head trauma, and hydrocephalus, either

A

B

Fig. 600.2 Natural course of untreated precocious puberty with cen-

tral nervous system lesion. Photographs at 11⁄2 (A) and 21⁄2 (B) yr of age.
Accelerated growth, muscular development, osseous maturation, and
testicular development were consistent with the degree of secondary
sexual maturation. In early infancy, the patient began having frequent
spells of rapid, purposeless motion; later in life, he had episodes of uncontrollable laughing with ocular movements. At 7 yr, he exhibited emotional lability, aggressive behavior, and destructive tendencies. Although
a hypothalamic hamartoma had been suspected, it was not established
until CT scanning became available when the patient was 23 yr of age.
Epiphyses fused at 9 yr of age; final height was 142 cm (56 in). At 24 yr of
age, he developed an embryonal cell carcinoma of the retroperitoneum.

isolated or associated with myelomeningocele. Gonadotropin-­dependent
precocious puberty occurs in 26–29% of children with tumors developing
within or near the hypothalamus or optic pathways. Low-­grade gliomas,
the most common types of such neoplasms, are highly prevalent (15–20%)
in children with neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF-­1) and constitute the main
etiologic factor for the central sexual precocity encountered in a small subset (approximately 3%) of children with NF-­1.
About 50% of the tumors in the pineal region are germ cell tumors or
astrocytomas; the remainder consists of a wide variety of histologically
distinct tumor types. Pineal or hypothalamic germ cell tumors can cause
CPP in males by secreting hCG, which stimulates the luteinizing hormone (LH) receptors in the Leydig cells of the testes (see Chapter 600.5).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Hypothalamic hamartomas remain static in size or grow slowly and can be
associated with gelastic or psychomotor seizures, but most often produce
no signs other than precocious puberty. This is often rapidly progressive
sexual precocity in very young children. For other lesions causing neurologic symptoms, the neuroendocrine manifestations may be present for 1-­2
years before the tumor can be detected radiologically. Hypothalamic signs
or symptoms such as diabetes insipidus, adipsia, hyperthermia, unnatural crying or laughing, obesity, and cachexia should suggest the possibility
of an intracranial lesion. Visual signs (proptosis, decreased visual acuity,
visual field defects) may be the first manifestation of an optic glioma.
The sexual precocity is always isosexual, and the endocrine patterns
are generally those found in children without demonstrable organic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 600 u Disorders of Pubertal Development

3391

puberty. The prevalence of this condition in children treated with
radiotherapy for tumors located outside of the hypothalamic pituitary or optic pathways region has been reported at 6.6%. Hydrocephalus, young age at exposure to radiation (<5 years), being female,
and increased BMI are additional risk factors. This condition is often
associated with GH deficiency and at times with other conditions (spinal irradiation, hypothyroidism) adversely affecting the adult height
prognosis. Unless careful attention is paid to early signs of pubertal
development in these children, the combination of GH deficiency
and the growth-­promoting effect of sex steroids often results in a normal growth rate at the expense of a rapidly advancing bone age and
impaired adult height potential. The pubertal staging of males treated
with gonadotoxic modalities such as high-­dose alkylating agents or
testicular radiotherapy should not rely on testicular volume measurements (see Chapter 600.2).

TREATMENT

GnRH analogs are effective in arresting pubertal progression, but
concomitant GH (and/or thyroid hormone) deficiency should be diagnosed and treated promptly to improve the adult height prognosis.
Paradoxically, hypopituitarism with gonadotropin deficiency may
subsequently develop as a late effect of high-­dose CNS irradiation in
patients with or without a history of precocious puberty, and it may
require substitution therapy with sex steroids.
Fig. 600.3 MRI of a central nervous system lesion in a child with

central precocious puberty. A 6-­yr-­old female was referred for stage IV
breast development and growth acceleration. Serum luteinizing hormone and estradiol concentrations were in the adult range. The midsagittal T1-­weighted image shows an isointense hypothalamic mass
(arrowheads), typical of a hamartoma. (From Sharafuddin M, Luisiri A,
Garibaldi LR, et al. MR imaging diagnosis of central precocious puberty:
importance of changes in the shape and size of the pituitary gland. Am
J Roentgenol. 1994;162:1167–1173.)

lesions. In conditions other than hypothalamic hamartoma, growth
hormone (GH) deficiency can occur and may be masked by the growth-­
promoting effect of the increased sex hormone levels. The pubertal
staging of males treated with gonadotoxic modalities such as high-­dose
alkylating agents or testicular radiotherapy should not rely on testicular
volume measurements because these are affected by treatment-­induced
germ cell and Sertoli depletion. Pubic hair development, scrotal thinning, and penile size may be better indicators, and providers should not
hesitate to measure serum LH and testosterone levels when in doubt.

TREATMENT

GnRH agonists (depot forms or implant) are the treatment of choice of
tumor-­induced CPP. Neurosurgical treatment has been shown to have
limited efficacy and to be associated with high complication rates in a subset of patients with hypothalamic hamartoma and associated intractable
gelastic or psychomotor seizures. Stereotactic radiation therapy (gamma
knife surgery) and, more recently, MRI-­guided laser therapy, have been
proposed as possible alternatives in these instances. For other neurologic
lesions, therapy depends on the nature and location of the pathologic process. Combined GH therapy should be considered for patients with associated GH deficiency. The final height outcome will also depend on other
factors such as the burden of disease from the primary tumor, side effects
of cancer treatments, and associated chronic health conditions
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

600.3 Precocious Puberty After Irradiation
of the Brain
Wassim Chemaitilly and Luigi R. Garibaldi
Children treated with cranial radiotherapy at a wide range of doses (18-­
50 Gy) are at an increased risk for gonadotropin-­dependent precocious

600.4 Syndrome of Precocious Puberty and
Hypothyroidism
Wassim Chemaitilly and Luigi R. Garibaldi
The onset of puberty is usually delayed in children with mild forms
of hypothyroidism. However, up to 50% of children with profound,
untreated hypothyroidism of long duration may paradoxically develop
precocious puberty (a condition known as VanWyk-­Grumbach syndrome). Hashimoto thyroiditis is frequently the cause of such forms
of hypothyroidism. Patients have the usual manifestations of hypothyroidism (see Chapter 603); the symptoms may be difficult to recognize in children with special needs. Children with precocious puberty
caused by hypothyroidism have, contrary to other children with sexual
precocity, decreased growth velocity and delayed bone age. Females
may present with breast development and menstrual bleeding; the latter may occur even in females with minimal breast enlargement. Pelvic
sonography may reveal large, multicystic ovaries. Males have testicular enlargement associated with modest or no penile enlargement. No
pubic hair development occurs in either females or males. Enlargement
of the sella, which is typical of long-­standing primary hypothyroidism,
may be demonstrated by skull film or MRI. Plasma levels of thyroid-­
stimulating hormone (TSH) are markedly elevated, often greater than
500 μU/mL, and those of prolactin and estradiol are mildly elevated.
Although serum FSH is low and LH is undetectable, when measured
by specific assays, the massively elevated concentrations of TSH appear
to interact with the FSH receptor (specificity spillover), thus inducing
FSH-­like effects in the absence of LH effects on the gonads. The FSH-­
like effect suffices to induce estradiol secretion by the ovaries, whereas
in males, testicular enlargement occurs without substantial testosterone secretion. Treatment of the hypothyroidism results in rapid return
to normal of the biochemical and clinical manifestations. Possible
progression to central puberty with rapid bone age advancement may
occur in the months after the initiation of thyroid hormone replacement, a complication that would justify delaying puberty with GnRH
analogs. Macroorchidism (testicular volume >30 mL) may persist in
adult males despite adequate levothyroxine therapy. Children with
a high risk of primary hypothyroidism, especially those with special
needs such as patients with trisomy 21, should be screened at least
annually via measurement of serum free T4 and TSH levels.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3392 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System

600.5 Chorionic Gonadotropin-­Secreting
Tumors: Paraneoplastic Precocious
Puberty
Wassim Chemaitilly and Luigi R. Garibaldi
hCG-­secreting tumors are a rare cause of precocious puberty in males.
Secretion of hCG activates luteinizing hormone/choriogonadotropin
(LHCG) receptors in the Leydig cells causing testosterone production and virilization with minimal testicular enlargement. Testicular
histology reveals interstitial cell hyperplasia with no spermatogenesis. Plasma levels of testosterone are elevated, whereas those of FSH
and LH, as measured by specific assays, are low. Females with hCG-­
secreting tumors do not present with precocious puberty because the
ovarian production of estradiol cannot occur in the absence of FSH
stimulation.

HEPATIC TUMORS

All reported cases of hepatoblastoma causing isosexual precocious puberty
have been in males, with the average age of onset of 2 years (range 4 months
to 8 years). An enlarged liver or mass in the right upper quadrant should
suggest the diagnosis. Plasma levels of hCG and α-­fetoprotein (AFP) are
usually markedly elevated and serve as useful markers for following the
effects of therapy. As with other carcinomas of the liver, the prognosis for
survival beyond 1-­2 years from the time of diagnosis is poor.

INTRACRANIAL TUMORS

Nongerminomatous or mixed germ cell tumors, choriocarcinomas,
teratomas, teratocarcinomas, and others account for <5% of intracranial tumors; are usually located in the neurohypophyseal area or the
pineal area; and may cause precocious puberty in males if they secrete
hCG—the mass effect can infrequently cause precocious puberty in
females. Marked elevations of hCG and AFP often occur in the cerebrospinal fluid, although elevations in the blood may be modest. Treatment includes radiation, chemotherapy, and debulking surgery.

TUMORS IN OTHER LOCATIONS

Very rare locations include mediastinum, gonads, or even adrenal
glands. Mediastinal germ cell tumors have been reported to cause precocious puberty in males with Klinefelter syndrome.

testing from leukocyte DNA or unaffected tissues. The diagnostic
sensitivity may improve with new techniques, however. Precocious
puberty has been described predominantly in females (Fig. 600.4) and
is characterized by recurrent ovarian cysts, bouts of estrogen secretion,
and vaginal bleeding in the context of modest breast development.
The age at onset in females is usually 3-­6 years but has been reported
as early as 4-­6 months of age. Serum levels of LH and FSH are suppressed, with no response to GnRH stimulation. Estradiol levels fluctuate from low to markedly elevated (>300 pg/mL), are often cyclic, and
may correlate with the size of the cysts. Precocious puberty is less commonly reported in males with McCune-­Albright syndrome. Testicular
enlargement is often symmetric and is followed by the appearance of
phallic enlargement and pubic hair development, as in normal puberty.
Testicular histology has shown foci or nodules (often sonographically
detectable) of Leydig cell hyperplasia. In females and males, when the
bone age reaches the usual pubertal age range, gonadotropin secretion
begins and CPP ensues and overrides the antecedent (gonadotropin-­
independent) puberty. In females, menses become more regular, but
often not completely so, and fertility has been documented.
Pubertal progression is variable in these patients. Functioning ovarian cysts often disappear spontaneously; aspiration or surgical excision of cysts is rarely indicated. For those females with persistent or
recurrent estradiol secretion, aromatase inhibitors (which inhibit the
final step of estrogen biosynthesis) such as letrozole (1.25-­2.5 mg/day
PO) have proven safe and effective in limiting the estrogen effects on
pubertal and osseous maturation. The same compounds have also been
used in males in combination with antiandrogens. These medications
are not approved by the FDA for this indication. Associated therapy
with long-­acting analogs of GnRH is indicated only for young children whose puberty has shifted from a gonadotropin-­independent to a
predominantly gonadotropin-­dependent mechanism. Ovarian torsion
is a severe complication of large ovarian cysts.

EXTRAGONADAL MANIFESTATIONS

The hyperthyroidism that occurs in this condition is usually clinically
mild or subclinical, unlike that observed in Graves disease. Mildly
elevated triiodothyronine levels, suppressed TSH levels, and nodular
abnormalities on ultrasound have been reported. Thyroidectomy is
rarely necessary.

PERIPHERAL PRECOCIOUS PUBERTY

The adrenal causes of peripheral precocious puberty are discussed in
Chapter 616, and the gonadal causes are discussed in Chapters 624
and 627.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

600.6 McCune-­Albright Syndrome
Luigi R. Garibaldi and Wassim Chemaitilly
McCune-­Albright syndrome, or precocious puberty with polyostotic
fibrous dysplasia and abnormal pigmentation, is a syndrome of endocrine dysfunction associated with patchy cutaneous pigmentation and
fibrous dysplasia of the skeletal system. It is a rare condition with a
prevalence between 1/100,000 and 1/1,000,000, characterized by
autonomous hyperfunction of one or more glands (which may include
pituitary, thyroid, and adrenal glands). An activating missense pathogenic variant in the GNAS1 gene encoding the α-­subunit of GS, the
G protein that stimulates cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)
formation, results in activation of receptors (adrenocorticotropic
hormone [ACTH], TSH, FSH, and LH receptors) that operate via a
cAMP-­dependent mechanism, as well as cell proliferation. Because
the pathogenic variant is postzygotic rather than genomic, it is present
variably in different tissues (somatic mosaicism) and hence results in
variable clinical expression and limited diagnostic sensitivity of genetic

A

B

Fig. 600.4 Precocious puberty with McCune-­
Albright syndrome
(MAS). A, A girl presented at 5 yr of age with early stage III breast development and vaginal bleeding. Note the extensive café-­au-­lait skin
patches, some of which did not cross the midline. B, A girl presented
with recurring episodes of mild breast enlargement and vaginal bleeding associated with ovarian cysts, starting at age 7 mo. She had no skin
lesions and a negative skeletal survey and bone scan at age 4 yr. The
diagnosis of MAS was established at 5 yr of age, when prominence of
her left forehead and supraorbital ridge prompted a CT scan, which revealed unilateral thickening of the skull bones (B). Skull lesions are often
hyperostotic, whereas long bone lesions usually have a lytic, “ground-­
glass” appearance.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 600 u Disorders of Pubertal Development

A

B

Fig. 600.5 Polyostotic fibrous dysplasia in a 22-­yr-­old female. A, The

femur is expanded and bowed with a “shepherd’s crook” deformity.
The femoral trabeculae are replaced by a “ground-­glass” matrix. B, Diffuse sclerosis is seen in the hand and wrist with mild expansion and
indistinct transition from the cortex to medullary space. (From Thapa
MM, Kaste SC, Meyer JS. Soft tissue bone tumors. In: Coley BD, ed.
Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2019: Fig. 138.31.)

Cushing syndrome caused by bilateral nodular adrenocortical
hyperplasia has occurred only in neonates or young infants. ACTH
levels are low, and cortisol is elevated and not suppressible by dexamethasone. The condition may resolve spontaneously; if not, treatment
is bilateral adrenalectomy.
Increased secretion of GH occurs uncommonly and is manifested
clinically by gigantism or acromegaly. The growth rate is increased
(even in the absence of precocious puberty); serum levels of GH are
elevated, increase during sleep, and are poorly suppressed by oral glucose. Serum levels of prolactin are increased in most patients. Less than
50% of the patients have a demonstrable pituitary tumor. Treatment
includes octreotide or lanreotide—long-­acting somatostatin analogs—
to lower the elevated GH levels or pegvisomant to antagonize the effect
of GH at the receptor level.
Fibrous dysplasia of (usually) multiple bones (polyostotic) represents a major cause of morbidity in this syndrome (Fig. 600.5). The base
of the skull and the proximal femurs are most commonly involved, but
any bone can be affected. Even in the absence of deformities, a CT scan
of the cranium is recommended by several investigators. The prognosis is favorable for longevity, but deformities, repeated fractures, pain,
and occasional cranial nerve compression may result from the bony
lesions. Bone pain often responds to IV pamidronate or other bisphosphonates. Extensive bony lesions may be associated with phosphaturia
because of oversecretion of FGF23, leading to rickets or osteomalacia.
Extraglandular manifestations of this syndrome are rare, but cardiovascular and hepatic involvement (severe neonatal cholestasis) may be
life threatening.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

600.7 Familial Male-­Limited Gonadotropin-­
Independent Precocious Puberty
Wassim Chemaitilly and Luigi R. Garibaldi
This rare, autosomal dominant form of peripheral precocious puberty
is transmitted from affected males and unaffected female carriers of the
pathogenic variant to their male offspring. Signs of puberty appear by

3393

2-­3 years of age. The testes are only slightly enlarged. Testicular biopsies
show Leydig cell maturation and, sometimes, marked hyperplasia. Maturation of seminiferous tubules may be present. Testosterone levels are
variably elevated, often markedly so, even above the adult male range;
however, baseline levels of LH are prepubertal, pulsatile secretion of
LH is absent, and LH does not respond to stimulation with GnRH or a
GnRH agonist. The cause for activation of Leydig cells independently of
gonadotropin stimulation is a missense pathogenic variant of LHCGR,
which encodes the LHCG receptor leading to constitutive activation
of cAMP production. Osseous maturation may be markedly advanced;
when it reaches the pubertal age range, hypothalamic maturation shifts
the mechanism of pubertal development to a gonadotropin-­dependent
one. This sequence of events is similar to that occurring in children
with McCune-­Albright syndrome (see Chapter 600.6) or in those with
congenital adrenal hyperplasia (see Chapter 616).
Gonadotropin-­independent precocious puberty has been diagnosed
in a few unrelated males with type IA pseudohypoparathyroidism
with a specific pathogenic variant of GNAS that encodes the Gsα protein. This pathogenic variant is inactivating at normal body temperature
and causes pseudohypoparathyroidism, but in the cooler temperature
of the testes, it is constitutionally activating, resulting in adenyl cyclase
stimulation and production of testosterone. Although this pathogenic
variant differs from the constitutive LH receptor pathogenic variant,
which usually causes familial male gonadotropin-­independent precocious puberty, the end result is the same.

TREATMENT

Young males have been treated with ketoconazole (10-­15 mg/kg/day in
8-­hour divided doses), an antifungal drug that inhibits C-­17,20-­lyase
and testosterone synthesis. Complications of ketoconazole include
liver toxicity and tachyphylaxis. A combination of antiandrogens (such
as spironolactone 50-­100 mg bid, flutamide 125-­250 mg daily or bid,
or bicalutamide 25-­50 mg daily) and aromatase inhibitors (letrozole
2.5 mg/day or anastrozole 1 mg/day) has been used—the latter compounds to suppress estrogens derived from androgens, which potently
stimulate bone maturation. These medications are unable to revert the
serum testosterone to normal (prepubertal) concentrations or completely offset the unfavorable effects of the elevated sex hormones. They
slow down, but do not halt, the progression of puberty and may not
improve the height prognosis. Males whose GnRH pulse generator has
matured require combined therapy with GnRH agonists.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

600.8 Incomplete (Partial) Precocious
Development
Wassim Chemaitilly and Luigi R. Garibaldi
Isolated development of the breasts in females and growth of sexual
hair in both sexes without other signs of puberty are the two most common forms of incomplete precocity and are not unusual in a pediatric
practice.

PREMATURE THELARCHE

This term applies to a sporadic, transient condition of isolated breast
development that most often appears in the first 2 years of life. In some
females, breast development is present at birth and persists. It may be
unilateral or asymmetric and often fluctuates in degree. Growth and
osseous maturation are normal or slightly advanced. The genitalia
show no evidence of estrogenic stimulation. Breast development may
regress after 2 years, often persists for 3-­5 years, and is rarely progressive. Menarche generally occurs at a normal age, and reproduction is
also normal. Basal serum levels of FSH and the FSH response to GnRH
stimulation may be greater than that seen in normal controls. Plasma
levels of LH and estradiol are typically undetectable. Pelvic ultrasound
reveals normal-­sized ovaries, but a few small (<9 mm) cysts are not
uncommon.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3394 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
In some females, breast development may be associated with definite
evidence of systemic estrogen effects, such as growth acceleration or bone
age advancement. Pelvic sonography may reveal enlarged ovaries and/
or uterus. This condition, referred to as exaggerated or atypical thelarche, differs from CPP because it spontaneously regresses. Leuprolide or
GnRH stimulation elicits a robust FSH response, a low LH response, and
(after leuprolide only) a moderate estradiol increment at 24 hours (average 60-­90 pg/mL). The pathogenesis of typical and exaggerated forms of
thelarche is unclear. Delayed inactivation of the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­
ovarian axis, which is active during the prenatal and early postnatal period,
increased peripheral sensitivity to estrogens, and other possibilities are
unproven hypotheses. In addition to a detailed history, a bone age should
be obtained if there are any unusual features. Random serum concentrations of FSH, LH, and estradiol are generally low and not diagnostic. Pelvic
ultrasound examination or leuprolide stimulation testing is occasionally
indicated. Continued observation is important because the condition cannot be readily distinguished from true precocious puberty. Regression and
recurrence suggest functioning follicular cysts. Occurrence of thelarche in
children older than 3 years of age most often is caused by a condition other
than benign premature thelarche.

PREMATURE MENARCHE

PREMATURE PUBARCHE (ADRENARCHE)

Various medicaments can induce the appearance of secondary sexual
characteristics (i.e., peripheral precocious puberty). Examples include
the accidental ingestion of estrogens (including contraceptive pills) and
the administration of anabolic steroids. Exogenous estrogens may produce a darkening of the areola that is not usually seen in central sexual
precocity. The most common cause of medicational precocity is currently
related to the widespread use of testosterone gels or creams, which
are applied to the skin for treatment of male hypogonadism. Systemic
absorption from the skin area of a male relative where the gel/cream was
applied may result in elevated serum testosterone levels (50-­100 mg/dL
or higher), with ensuing virilization of exposed children and women.
Intense application of diaper rash creams or ointments has recently been
reported to cause mild pubarche, with an unclear mechanism.
Less commonly, estrogens in cosmetics, hair creams, and breast augmentation creams cause breast development in females and gynecomastia
in males via percutaneous absorption. Lavender and tea tree oils have been
associated with prepubertal gynecomastia in several reports. Genistein, a
compound from soy, has estrogenic activity in mice, but data in humans
are conflicting. The physical changes disappear after cessation of exposure
to the hormones. A careful history focused on exploring the possibility of
accidental exposure to, or ingestion of, sex hormones is important.

This term has traditionally applied to the appearance of sexual hair
before the age of 8 years in females or 9 years in males without other evidence of maturation. It is much more frequent in females than in males.
The higher prevalence of this condition in African American and, to a
smaller extent, Latino females in comparison to White females may suggest that the cutoff age for the definition of premature should be adjusted
for different ethnic groups on epidemiologic data. Hair appears on the
mons and labia majora in females and perineal and scrotal area in males;
axillary hair generally appears later. Adult-­type axillary odor is common. Affected children are often slightly advanced in height and osseous maturation. Premature adrenarche is an early maturational event
of adrenal androgen production. It coincides with precocious maturation of the zona reticularis, traditionally believed to be associated with
a decrease in 3β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase activity and an increase
in C-­17,20-­lyase activity. These enzymatic changes result in increased
basal and ACTH-­stimulated serum concentrations of the Δ5-­steroids
(17-­hydroxypregnenolone and dehydroepiandrosterone [DHEA]) and,
to a lesser extent, of the Δ4-­steroids (particularly androstenedione) compared with age-­matched control subjects. One class of androgens, the
11-­oxygenated steroids, have been reported to play an important role
in adrenal physiology and pathology, including adrenarche. Idiopathic
premature adrenarche is a slowly progressive condition that requires no
therapy. However, a subset of patients presents with atypical premature
adrenarche characterized by one or more features of systemic androgen
effects, such as marked growth acceleration, clitoral (females) or phallic
(males) enlargement, cystic acne, and advanced bone age (2 SD greater
than the mean for age). In this subgroup, an ACTH stimulation test with
measurement of serum 17-­hydroxyprogesterone concentration is indicated to rule out nonclassical congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to
21-­hydroxylase deficiency. The prevalence of nonclassical 21-­hydroxylase
deficiency is approximately 3–6% of unselected children with precocious
pubarche; other enzyme defects (i.e., 3β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase
or 11β-­hydroxylase deficiencies) are extremely rare. Although idiopathic
premature adrenarche has been considered a benign condition, longitudinal observations suggest that approximately 50% of females with
premature adrenarche are at high risk for hyperandrogenism and polycystic ovary syndrome, alone or more often in combination with other
components of so-­called metabolic syndrome (insulin resistance possibly progressing to type 2 diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, hypertension,
increased visceral fat) as adults. Whether the unfavorable progression
to pubertal hyperandrogenism can be prevented by insulin-­sensitizing
agents (metformin 850-­2000 mg/day) or lifestyle interventions (diet,
exercise) remains to be proven in large studies. An increased risk of premature adrenarche and metabolic syndrome has been documented in
children born small for their gestational age. This appears to be associated with insulin resistance and decreased β-­cell reserve, perhaps as a
consequence of fetal undernutrition.

This is a rare entity, much less frequent than premature thelarche or
premature adrenarche, and is a diagnosis of exclusion. In females with
isolated vaginal bleeding in the absence of other secondary sexual characteristics, more common causes, such as vulvovaginitis, a foreign body
(typically associated with malodorous discharge), or sexual abuse, and
uncommon causes, such as urethral prolapse and sarcoma botryoides,
must be carefully excluded. Most females with idiopathic premature
menarche have only one to three episodes of bleeding; puberty occurs
at the usual time, and menstrual cycles are normal. Plasma levels of
gonadotropins are low, but estradiol levels may be occasionally elevated,
probably owing to episodic ovarian estrogen secretion associated with
ovarian follicular cysts that can be sometimes detected on ultrasound.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

600.9 Medicational Precocity
Luigi R. Garibaldi and Wassim Chemaitilly

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

600.10 Delayed or Absent Puberty
Peter M. Wolfgram
For hypofunction of testis, see Chapter 623. For hypofunction of ovaries, see Chapter 626.
Delayed puberty is the failure of development of any pubertal feature
by 13 years of age in females or by 14 years of age in males. A lower
cutoff may be appropriate in a child with a strong familial pattern of
early puberty.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Delay or absence of puberty is caused by:
• Constitutional delay: A variant of normal.
• Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism: Low gonadotropin levels as a result of a defect of the hypothalamus and/or pituitary gland (Tables
600.3, 600.4, and 600.5).
• Hypergonadotropic hypogonadism: High gonadotropin levels as a
result of a lack of negative feedback because of a gonadal problem
(see Tables 600.3, 600.4, and 600.5). Females may have evidence of
adrenarche with absence of normal breast development.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 600 u Disorders of Pubertal Development
Table 600.3  Classification of Delayed Puberty and Sexual Infantilism
IDIOPATHIC (CONSTITUTIONAL) DELAY IN GROWTH AND
PUBERTY (DELAYED ACTIVATION OF HYPOTHALAMIC GNRH
PULSE GENERATOR)
HYPOGONADOTROPIC HYPOGONADISM: SEXUAL INFANTILISM
RELATED TO GONADOTROPIN DEFICIENCY
CNS Disorders
Tumors
Craniopharyngiomas
Germinomas
Other germ cell tumors
Hypothalamic and optic gliomas
Astrocytomas
Pituitary tumors (including MEN-­1, prolactinoma)
Other Causes
Langerhans histiocytosis
Postinfectious lesions of the CNS
Vascular abnormalities of the CNS
Radiation therapy
Congenital malformations especially associated with craniofacial
anomalies
Head trauma
Lymphocytic hypophysitis
Isolated Gonadotropin Deficiency
Kallmann syndrome (with hyposmia or anosmia; without anosmia)
GnRH receptor pathogenic variant
Congenital adrenal hypoplasia (DAX1 pathogenic variant)
Isolated LH deficiency
Isolated FSH deficiency
Prohormone convertase 1 deficiency (PCI)
Idiopathic and Genetic Forms of Multiple Pituitary Hormone
Deficiencies Including PROP1 Pathogenic Variant
Miscellaneous Disorders
See Table 600.4 for syndromic etiologies
Functional gonadotropin deficiency
Chronic systemic disease and malnutrition
Sickle cell disease
Cystic fibrosis
Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)
Chronic gastroenteric disease
Chronic renal disease
Malnutrition

3395

Miscellaneous Disorders (continued)
Anorexia nervosa
Bulimia
Psychogenic amenorrhea
Impaired puberty and delayed menarche in female athletes and
ballet dancers (exercise amenorrhea)
Hypothyroidism
Diabetes mellitus
Cushing disease
Hyperprolactinemia
Marijuana use
Gaucher disease
HYPERGONADOTROPIC HYPOGONADISM
Males
The syndrome of seminiferous tubular dysgenesis and its variants
(Klinefelter syndrome)
Other forms of primary testicular failure
Chemotherapy
Radiation therapy
Testicular steroid biosynthetic defects
Sertoli-­only syndrome
LH receptor mutation
Anorchia and cryptorchidism
Trauma/surgery
Females
The syndrome of gonadal dysgenesis (Turner syndrome) and its variants
XX and XY gonadal dysgenesis
Familial and sporadic XX gonadal dysgenesis and its variants
Familial and sporadic XY gonadal dysgenesis and its variants
Aromatase deficiency
Other forms of primary ovarian failure
Premature menopause
Radiation therapy
Chemotherapy
Autoimmune oophoritis
Galactosemia
Glycoprotein syndrome type 1
Resistant ovary
FSH receptor pathogenic variant
LH/hCG resistance
Polycystic ovarian disease
Trauma/surgery
Noonan or pseudo-­Turner syndrome
Ovarian steroid biosynthetic defects

CNS, Central nervous system; FSH, follicle-­stimulating hormone; hCG, human chorionic gonadotropin.
From Styne DM, Grumbach MM. Physiology and disorders of puberty. In Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology, 13th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Table 25.15, p. 1129.

Table 600.4  Syndromes Associated with Pubertal Delay
PHENOTYPE

GENETIC DEFECT

Prader-­Willi syndrome

Cognitive impairment, morbid obesity, hypotonia

Deletions within paternally
imprinted 15q 11.2-­12 region

Bardet-­Biedl syndrome

Cognitive impairment, obesity, retinitis pigmentosa, postaxial polydactyly

BBS 1-­11 (multiple loci) 20p12,
16q21, 15q22.3-­23, 14q32.1

Biemond syndrome

Iris coloboma, polydactyly, short stature

CHARGE anomaly

Coloboma, heart malformations, choanal atresia, growth retardation, genital
anomalies and ear anomalies, HH, olfactory bulb aplasia, hypoplasia

CHD7

Adrenohypoplasia congenita

Primary adrenal deficiency

NR0B1

Septo-­optic dysplasia

Small, dysplastic pale optic discs, pendular nystagmus, midline hypothalamic
defect with diabetes insipidus, GH, ACTH, TSH, and LH/FSH deficiency,
absent septum pellucidum

HESX1

Solitary median maxillary
incisor syndrome

Prominent midpalatal ridge

SHH 7q3

Börjeson-­Forssman-­Lehmann
syndrome

Cognitive impairment, gynecomastia, moderate short stature, truncal obesity

PHF6

Gordon Holmes syndrome

Cerebellar ataxia, dementia, chorioretinopathy, anterior hypopituitarism

RNF216/OTUD4
PNPLA6

Modified from Howard SR, Dunkel L. Delayed puberty – phenotype diversity, molecular genetic mechanisms, and recent discoveries. Endocrine Rev. 2019;40:1285–1317, Table 3, p. 1301.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3396 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 600.5  Molecular Basis for Developmental Disorders Associated with Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism
GENE

PHENOTYPE

COMPLEX PHENOTYPE

ISOLATED HYPOGONADOTROPIC HYPOGONADISM
Kallmann Syndrome or Normosmic IHH (With the Same Pathogenic Gene Variant)
KAL1 (Xp22.3)
X-­linked Kallmann syndrome
FGFR1 (KAL2) (8p11.2)
Autosomal dominant Kallmann syndrome (±
recessive)
FGF8 (ligand for FGFR1) (10q25)
NELF (9p34.3)
Autosomal dominant (?) Kallmann syndrome
PROK2 (3p21.1)
Autosomal recessive Kallmann syndrome
PROKR2* (20p12.3)
CHD7 (8p12.1)
Autosomal dominant (some)
Normosmic Isolated Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism
GNRH1 (8p21-­11.2)
Autosomal recessive
GNRHR* (4q13.2-­3)
Autosomal recessive (± dominant)
GPR54* (19p13.3)
Autosomal recessive
SNRPN
Lack of function of paternal 15q11-­q13
region or maternal uniparental disomy
LEP (7q31.3)
Autosomal recessive
LEPR (1p31)
Autosomal recessive
NR0B1 (DAX1) (X21.3-­21.2)
X-­linked recessive
TAC3 (12q13-­12)
Autosomal recessive
TACR3 (4q25)
Autosomal recessive
Multiple Pituitary Hormone Deficiencies
PROP1 (POU1F1)
HESX1 (RPX)

LHX3
PHF6

Autosomal recessive GH, PRL, TSH, and LH/FSH
(less commonly, later-­onset ACTH deficiency)
Autosomal recessive; and heterozygous mutations
Multiple pituitary deficiencies including diabetes
insipidus, but LH/FSH uncommon
Autosomal recessive GH, PRL, TSH, FSH/LH
X-­linked; GH, TSH, ACTH, LH/FSH

Anosmia/hyposmia, renal agenesis, dyskinesia
Anosmia/hyposmia, cleft lip/palate

CHARGE syndrome includes hyposmia

Prader-­Willi syndrome
Obesity
Obesity
Obesity
Adrenal hypoplasia

Septo-­optic dysplasia

Rigid cervical spine
Börjeson-­Lehmann syndrome: mental
retardation; facies

*A G-­protein–coupled receptor.
ACTH, Adrenocorticotropic hormone; CHD7, chromatin-­remodeling factor; DAX1, dosage-­sensitive sex reversal-­adrenal hyperplasia congenita critical region on the X chromosome,
gene 1; FGF, fibroblast growth factor; FSH, follicle-­stimulating hormone; GH, growth hormone; GNRH, gonadotropin-­releasing hormone; GPR54, kisspeptin G protein–coupled
receptor 54; HESX1, homeobox gene expressed in ES cells; IHH, idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism; LEP, leptin; LH, luteinizing hormone; LHX3, lim homeobox gene 3;
NELF, nasal embryonic luteinizing hormone–releasing factor; NR0B1, nuclear receptor family 0, group B, member 1; PHF6, plant homeodomain–like finger gene; PRL, prolactin;
PROK2, prokineticin 2; PROP1, prophet of Pit-­1; R, receptor; SNRPN, small nuclear ribonucleoprotein polypeptide SmN; TAC3, neurokinin 3; TSH, thyroid-­stimulating hormone.
From Styne DM, Grumbach MM. Physiology and disorders of puberty. In: Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology, 13th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Table 25.19, p. 1138.

Constitutional Delay of Growth and Puberty

This is the most common cause of delayed puberty and a normal variant of pubertal timing. It is predominately diagnosed in males, likely
as a result of ascertainment bias from referral patterns. The cause is
unknown, but approximately 50% of affected patients have a first-­
degree relative with delayed puberty and/or late growth. This tendency
can occur in a child of the same gender as the affected parent or in
a child of the opposite gender. An affected child typically presents in
early adolescence, when peers are beginning to develop and having
growth spurts but the patient is not. The patient’s height is usually at
or below the third percentile. In a classic patient, the affected child had
a normal length at birth, followed by a slowdown in height velocity
between 6 months and 2 years of age that resulted in a decreased height
percentile, and then normal or near-­normal height velocity thereafter
along this decreased height percentile. The physical examination findings are unremarkable, except at the typical age of puberty the child
will have delayed pubertal development and growth. The cardinal
diagnostic finding is a bone age that is moderately delayed (or younger
appearing) than the typical bone age for the patient’s actual chronological age. There may also be a history of delayed dentition. Without intervention, final adult heights usually reach or approximate the genetic
target height range. However, rarely, children with constitutional delay

may have a blunted pubertal growth spurt in relation to their peers and
therefore may not reach their target height range.

Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism

A variety of CNS anomalies or injuries may disrupt production of
gonadotropins. The GnRH pulse generator may be disrupted by an
interfering substance, such as excess prolactin, chronic illness, malnutrition, or excessive physical activity. The hypothalamic arcuate nucleus
may be damaged by trauma, radiation, infection, infiltration, increased
intracranial pressure, or surgery. The most common mass lesions are
craniopharyngiomas, gliomas, and cysts. Of note, congenital conditions or malformations may have allowed enough GnRH, LH, and FSH
for infantile development but may not be enough later to begin and
sustain puberty.

Kallmann Syndrome

This is the combination of a deficiency of gonadotropins with an
impaired or absent sense of smell. Other features may include color
blindness, atrial septal defects, and renal structural anomalies (unilateral renal agenesis). The X-­linked form is caused by a pathogenic
variant of KAL; there are autosomal recessive and autosomal dominant
forms.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 600 u Disorders of Pubertal Development
LH and FSH deficiencies may be isolated or accompanied by
multiple pituitary hormone deficiencies. The deficiency may be a
result of pituitary damage from trauma, radiation, infection, sickle
cell disease, compression by infiltrate or tumor, or autoimmune
processes. In differentiating primary pituitary deficiency from that
secondary to hypothalamic deficiency, the clinician should remember that all pituitary hormones, except prolactin, are stimulated by
hypothalamic-­releasing hormones; however, prolactin is inhibited
by hypothalamic prolactin inhibitory factor (dopamine). Therefore if all pituitary hormones, including prolactin, are deficient, the
problem is in the pituitary gland. If prolactin levels are present or
even elevated but the other pituitary hormones are deficient, the
problem is above the pituitary gland, in the stalk or hypothalamus.
In the case of isolated LH and FSH deficiencies, the primary abnormality may lie within the pituitary-­hypothalamic neurons producing GnRH or farther upstream of the GnRH-­secreting neurons. In
particular, defects in molecules required for proper migration of
GnRH neurons (including the KAL gene) or lack of necessary signaling to GnRH-­producing neurons (defects in kisspeptin or neurokinin B and their receptors) can result in LH and FSH deficiency
through inappropriate GnRH secretion.

Hypergonadotropic Hypogonadism: Males

If the testes are small, they may have been damaged by torsion, sickle
cell disease, infection, autoimmune disease, chemotherapy, or radiation and may not be able to respond to LH and FSH stimulation. If the
male is of pubertal age (bone age is greater than 10 years) and the hypothalamus has matured, the serum LH and FSH will be high because of
lack of testicular response. Also, if there is a problem with testicular
LH receptors, the LH can be high but the testosterone will not appropriately increase.

Klinefelter Syndrome

This occurs in 1:500 males and is often associated with a 47,XXY
karyotype; common features include reduced intelligence, adolescent
gynecomastia (often severe), and small, firm testes. The testes rarely
exceed 5 mL in volume (approximately 25% of the average adult volume). Patients are often tall and thin with an eunuchoid habitus and
may have delayed puberty with high FSH and LH. Virilization may be
incomplete, the phallus is often smaller than average, and infertility
approaches 100%.

Hypergonadotropic Hypogonadism: Females

In this condition, the ovary may be unable to synthesize estrogen
(an inherited metabolic defect), the ovary may not be formed normally (dysgenesis), or the ovary may have been damaged by any of
the factors listed for testicular damage and by galactosemia.
The ovary may be intact but may not be stimulated by gonadotropins—for example, FSH is present but there is an FSH receptor problem, so estradiol is not made appropriately.

Turner Syndrome

The two most common features of Turner syndrome are short stature (involving the limbs to a greater degree than the trunk) and
ovarian insufficiency with high FSH. Lymphedema and a webbed
neck are diagnostic features present in a neonate. Additional features include shield chest, increased carrying angle (cubitus valgus), short fourth metacarpal, hypoplastic nails, renal anomalies,
and left-­sided heart defects (coarctation of the aorta, bicuspid aortic valve). Approximately 50% of affected females have no stigmata
except short stature and thus are typically identified later. About
20% may have spontaneous puberty with functioning ovaries for at
least a short period, which is in large part dependent on the child’s
karyotype; the infertility rate is greater than 99%.

3397

Females with Delayed or Absent Adrenarche

If a female has advanced breast development but no androgen signs,
she may have a disorder of androgen activity as occurs in androgen insensitivity syndrome (testicular feminization). In females,
the androgens come predominantly from the adrenal glands (adrenarche). If the bone age is less than 8 years, adrenarche may simply
be delayed (delayed adrenarche). However, if the bone age is older,
there may be an inherited problem in androgen synthesis from an
enzyme deficiency, or the adrenal may be damaged secondary to
autoimmune, infectious, or hypoxic injury. In these latter conditions of adrenal damage, other signs of adrenal insufficiency would
be evident.

DIAGNOSTIC APPROACH TO DELAYED PUBERTY

A normal growth rate with delayed, but not absent, puberty and a family history of late puberty suggest the diagnosis of constitutional delay
of growth and puberty, which is the most commonly encountered
cause. A bone age that correlates with the patient’s current pubertal
status but is delayed for their chronological age confirms the clinical
impression; no other testing is necessary.
Initial evaluation should include:
• Medical history: trauma, illness, medications (e.g., stimulants,
chemotherapy), radiation, infection, malnutrition, autoimmune
problems, sickle cell disease status, stresses, growth records, galactosemia
• Review of symptoms: vision problems, headache, vomiting, inability to detect odors (hyposmia or anosmia), age at onset of androgen
signs, age at onset of estrogen signs, small genitalia at birth, signs of
primary adrenal insufficiency such as hyperpigmentation, need for
deodorant, need to wash hair more frequently
• Family history: timing of maternal and paternal growth and pubertal development; siblings and cousins with delayed development
• Physical examination: signs of chronic disease, temperature,
blood pressure, height, weight, head circumference, dental age,
hyperpigmentation, pubic and axillary hair, adult body odor,
evidence of skin and hair oils, visual fields, optic discs, ability
to detect odors, breast development, vaginal cornification/discharge, penis size, scrotal development, testicular volume, pubic
hair stages, neurologic status, affect or mood, intellectual ability,
dysmorphic features
Initial laboratory evaluation screens for chronic disease (complete blood cell count, chemistry profile, sedimentation rate),
hypothyroidism (free thyroxine and TSH), and hyperprolactinemia
(prolactin level) should be obtained. If growth is slow, the clinician should measure insulin-­like growth factor-­1 level (marker of
basal GH activity) and consider GH testing. The clinician should
measure testosterone levels in males and estradiol levels in females.
Measurements of random FSH and LH and results of a GnRH
stimulation test may differentiate between hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and primary gonadal failure (Figs. 600.6 and 600.7). Elevated gonadotropin levels support a diagnosis of primary gonadal
failure. A random LH or an LH after GnRH is not typically helpful
in distinguishing between constitutional delay and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism because with both diagnoses the LH will be
low. However, the child with constitutional delay eventually develops an appropriate pubertal development and LH values. If there
are elevated gonadotropins, chromosomal karyotyping can be performed (Klinefelter syndrome in males and Turner syndrome in
females).
If Kallmann syndrome is being considered, an MRI scan may show
abnormalities in the olfactory region. If a 46,XX female has unexplained
ovarian failure, antiovarian antibodies and müllerian-­inhibiting substance can assess ovarian follicle reserve and potential fertility. In
males, an hCG stimulation test to evaluate ability to produce testosterone and a serum level of müllerian-­inhibiting substance (secreted by

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3398 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Delay in onset of secondary sexual
development after 13.5 years in males

Serum gonadotropins

Elevated

Low

Growth pattern

Karyotype

47,XXY

Normal
46,XY

Consistently short
for chronological
age but appropriate
for bone age

Late-onset growth
failure especially
with concurrent
diabetes insipidus

Normal without
growth spurt

Sense of smell

Bone age delayed

Anosmia or
hyposmia

MRI

Klinefelter
syndrome
(onset of puberty
often normal but
poor progression
follows)

Primary
testicular
failure

Constitutional delay
in growth and
puberty

Normal

Mass

Absence of
olfactory bulb
and/or sulcus

CNS
tumor

Kallmann
syndrome
(cryptorchidism
and/or
microphallus
make this
more likely)

Normal

Isolated
gonadotropin
deficiency
(cryptorchidism
and/or
microphallus
make this
more likely)

Fig. 600.6 Diagnostic algorithm for the evaluation of delayed puberty in males. CNS, Central nervous system; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging.

(From Styne DM, Grumbach MM. Physiology and disorders of puberty. In Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Fig. 25.48.)

Sertoli cells) are useful for determining whether functional testicular
tissue is present.

TREATMENT OF DELAYED PUBERTY

If delayed puberty is a normal physiologic variant (constitutional
delay of growth and puberty), sex steroid replacement is not medically necessary. Watchful waiting is usually the appropriate course
of action. However, adolescent males with constitutional delay of
growth and puberty who are short, underdeveloped, and psychologically compromised may benefit from a short course of testosterone therapy. This is usually given as long-­acting intramuscular
testosterone, at a dosage of 50-­100 mg every 4 weeks for a course
ranging between 6 and 12 months. Treatment is generally begun at
about 14 years of age and, if possible, when the testes have enlarged
to about 6-­8 mL in volume. These doses stimulate height and weight
gain, allow adequate virilization (increased pubic and axillary hair
growth and penile enlargement), and do not typically suppress pituitary FSH and LH secretion, thereby allowing simultaneous endogenous pubertal progression (testicular enlargement). This narrows

the physical gap between the patient and peers without causing
undue advancement of bone age. Acne is the principal side effect,
and the adult height is not altered. It is the hope that at the conclusion of treatment, the male will continue to grow and develop
rapidly, with the testosterone treatment perceived as a jump starter
of endogenous puberty. Additionally, a short course of a low-­dose
anabolic steroid, such as oxandrolone, can also be used in prepubertal and pubertal males, and low-­dose estradiol has been used in
prepubertal and pubertal females with constitutional delay.
Treatment of hypogonadism aims to mimic normal physiology
with stepwise replacement of testosterone in males and estrogen
and progesterone in females. For males with hypogonadism, low-­
dose parenteral testosterone is initiated at 50 mg every 4 weeks,
with increases in 50-­mg increments made over a 2-­to 3-­year period.
Most adult males receive 200 mg every 2-­4 weeks, which is based
on the daily adult male testosterone production rate of 6 mg. Adult
men can receive testosterone by patch, which is often associated
with local irritation, or by gel, but, typically in growing adolescents,
intramuscular testosterone is prescribed to allow more reliable control of testosterone activity.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 600 u Disorders of Pubertal Development
Delay in onset of secondary sexual
development after 13 years in females

3399

Normal secondary sexual
development with primary amenorrhea

Serum gonadotropins

Elevated

Low

Karyotype

Normal
46,XX

Absence or abnormality
of one X chromosome or
mosaicism with 45,X
cell line

Karyotype

Growth pattern

Consistently short
for chronologic
age but appropriate
for bone age

Late-onset growth
failure especially
with concurrent
diabetes insipidus

Bone age delayed

Signs of increased
intracranial
pressure or visual
abnormalities

Normal without
growth spurt

Normal

46,XY

Sense of smell

Anosmia or
hyposmia

MRI

Primary ovarian
failure–autoimmune
or other etiology
Turner syndrome (may
or may not have somatic
stigmata of Turner
syndrome but short stature
is extremely common)

Constitutional
delay in growth
and puberty

Normal

Mass

Absence of
olfactory bulb
and/or sulcus

CNS
tumor

Kallmann
syndrome

Normal

Isolated
gonadotropin
deficiency
Anatomic
defect or
abnormality
in LH
pulsatility

Syndrome
of
androgen
resistance

Fig. 600.7 Diagnostic algorithm for the evaluation of delayed puberty in females. CNS, Central nervous system; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging. (From Styne DM, Grumbach MM. Physiology and disorders of puberty. In Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds. Williams
Textbook of Endocrinology, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Fig. 25.49, p. 1157.)

For females with hypogonadism, daily estrogen therapy typically is provided through a transdermal 17β-­estradiol patch 25
mcg/24 hr patch, which is more physiologic than oral preparations
of the estrogens (conjugated estrogens [Premarin] or ethinyl estradiol) because transdermal therapy avoids initial first-­pass hepatic
metabolism. The transdermal or oral dose of estrogen (Premarin
starts at 0.3 mg daily) is increased over the course of about 2 years.
Two years of estrogen therapy without progesterone does not place
the uterus at undue risk for hyperplasia and malignancy, but after
2 years (or sooner if spotting occurs prior), progesterone should
be added. Options to consider when adding progesterone include
continuing the 17β-­estradiol patches or estrogen-­only–containing
pills (conjugated estrogens or ethinyl estradiol) in conjunction with
oral medroxyprogesterone acetate (Provera), a progesterone eluting
intrauterine device (IUD), or switching the patient to conventional
oral contraceptives. If the patient is not put on a conventional oral
contraceptive or a progesterone-­eluting IUD, the estrogen (pill or
patch) is prescribed on days 1-­23 of the calendar month with the
addition of medroxyprogesterone acetate on days 10-­23. With this

approach, withdrawal bleeding generally occurs between day 23
and the end of the month, although there can be some variability in
the timing between patients.
Patients of either sex with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism are
potentially fertile, but sex-­steroid therapy alone is ordinarily not
sufficient to initiate gametogenesis, although there are rare cases in
males in which testosterone replacement alone has stimulated spermatogenesis. The general approach to fertility induction in either
sex involves the addition of either cyclical gonadotropin therapy
or pump-­driven GnRH therapy at the age of desired conception.
When hypogonadotropic hypogonadism is present as one component
of hypopituitarism, it is critical to adequately replace all deficient
hormones (see Chapter 595). In contrast, patients with primary
hypogonadism have intrinsic gonadal damage and are normally
infertile.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3400 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System

Section 2

Disorders of the
Thyroid Gland
Chapter 601

Thyroid Development and
Physiology
Ari J. Wassner and Jessica R. Smith

FETAL DEVELOPMENT

The fetal thyroid arises from an outpouching of the foregut at the
base of the tongue (foramen cecum) and migrates to its normal
location below the cricoid cartilage by 8-­10 weeks of gestation. The
thyroid’s bilobed shape is apparent by 7 weeks of gestation, and
thyroid follicular cells capable of forming colloid are present by 10
weeks. Thyroglobulin synthesis begins at 4 weeks, iodine trapping
occurs by 8-­10 weeks, and synthesis and secretion of thyroxine (T4)
and, to a lesser extent, triiodothyronine (T3) occur from 12 weeks of
gestation. Several transcription factors, including NKX2.1, FOXE1,
and PAX8, are important in thyroid gland morphogenesis and differentiation and possibly also in its caudal migration. Thyrotropin
(TSH) secretion is evident by 10-­12 weeks of gestation. Maturation
of the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­thyroid axis occurs during the second half of gestation, but normal hormonal feedback relationships
are not mature until 1-­3 months of postnatal life. Other transcription factors, including PROP1 and POU1F1, are important for the
differentiation and growth of pituitary thyrotrophs, along with
somatotrophs and lactotrophs.

THYROID PHYSIOLOGY

The primary function of the thyroid gland is to synthesize T4 and
T3, of which iodine is a critical component. The only known physiologic role of iodine is in the synthesis of these hormones, and iodine
deficiency results in hypothyroidism. The daily recommended
dietary allowance of iodine is 110-­130 μg for infants, 90-­120 μg for
children, and 150 μg for adolescents and adults (see Chapter 605.3).
Ingested iodine reaches the thyroid gland as its ionized form,
iodide [I−]. Thyroid tissue has a unique avidity for iodide and can
take up and concentrate it in the follicular lumen to synthesize thyroid hormone. Transport of iodide from the circulation into the
thyroid follicular cell is facilitated by the transmembrane sodium–
iodide symporter (NIS). Once taken up, iodide diffuses across the
cell and is transported across the apical membrane into the colloid
by pendrin (and likely another unidentified transporter).
To form thyroid hormone, trapped inorganic iodide is organified
onto tyrosine residues of thyroglobulin in the follicular lumen, a
reaction catalyzed by thyroperoxidase (TPO). This reaction requires
the H2O2 produced by the enzyme DUOX2, which is expressed in
conjunction with dual oxidase maturation factor 2 (DUOXA2).
Thyroglobulin is a large homodimeric glycoprotein that contains
138 tyrosine residues. Iodination of specific tyrosine residues forms
monoiodotyrosines (MITs) and diiodotyrosines (DITs), which are

further coupled by TPO to produce T4 or T3. Once formed, T4 and
T3 remain stored as part of thyroglobulin in the thyroid colloid until
they are secreted through a process of follicular cell endocytosis of
colloid followed by endolysosomal degradation of thyroglobulin to
release T4 and T3.
The thyroid secretes T4 and T3 in a ratio of about 12 to 1. Although T3
circulates at about one-­fiftieth the concentration of T4, T3 is the physiologically active thyroid hormone because it binds the thyroid hormone receptor with 10-­to 15-­fold greater affinity than T4. Only 20% of
circulating T3 is secreted directly by the thyroid, and the remainder is
produced by conversion from T4 in extrathyroidal tissues by iodotyrosine deiodinases (types 1 and 2).
Thyroid hormones increase oxygen consumption, stimulate
protein synthesis, influence growth and differentiation, and affect
carbohydrate, lipid, and vitamin metabolism. Entry of T4 and T3
into cells is facilitated by specific thyroid hormone transporters,
of which the most important is monocarboxylate transporter 8
(MCT8). Once inside the cell, T4 is converted to T3 by type 1 or 2
deiodinase. Intracellular T3 enters the nucleus and binds to thyroid
hormone receptors. Thyroid hormone receptors are members of the
steroid hormone receptor superfamily, and three thyroid hormone
receptor isoforms (α1, β1, and β2) are expressed in different tissues.
Binding of T3 to a thyroid hormone receptor causes recruitment
of co-­activator molecules, transcription of messenger RNA, and
protein synthesis. Deiodination, transmembrane transport, and
thyroid hormone receptor expression provide multiple levels of
tissue-­specific modulation of thyroid hormone action in the face of
a given level of circulating T4.
Approximately 70% of circulating T4 and 50% of T3 are bound to
thyroxine-­
binding globulin (TBG), and most of the remainder is
bound to albumin and prealbumin (also called transthyretin). Only
0.03% of serum T4 and 0.3% of T3 are unbound (free T4 and free T3,
respectively). Because the concentration or binding of TBG is altered
in many clinical circumstances, its status must be considered when
interpreting total T4 or T3 levels.

THYROID REGULATION

The thyroid is regulated by TSH, a glycoprotein hormone secreted
by the anterior pituitary thyrotrophs. Binding of TSH to its receptor
in the thyroid gland activates adenylate cyclase and stimulates all
steps of thyroid hormone biosynthesis (see Fig. 594.1). TSH is a
heterodimer composed of α and β subunits. The α subunit is common to luteinizing hormone, follicle-­stimulating hormone, and
chorionic gonadotropin, and the specificity of each hormone is conferred by its unique β subunit. TSH synthesis and release are stimulated by TRH, a tripeptide synthesized in the hypothalamus and
secreted into the pituitary. In states of decreased thyroid hormone,
TSH and TRH are increased, and increased thyroid hormone
inhibits TSH and TRH production. TSH levels can be measured
in serum, whereas circulating levels of TRH are not clinically
measurable.
Further control of the level of circulating thyroid hormones
occurs in the periphery. In many nonthyroidal illnesses, circulating
T3 levels fall because of decreased extrathyroidal production of T3
by type 1 deiodinase and increased inactivation of T4 (to reverse T3)
and T3 (to T2) by type 3 deiodinase. These changes may be induced
by factors such as fasting, chronic malnutrition, acute illness, and
certain drugs. Although levels of T3 may be significantly decreased,
levels of free T4 and TSH may remain normal. The decreased levels
of T3 may be a physiologic adaptation, resulting in decreased rates of
oxygen consumption, substrate use, and other catabolic processes.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 601 u Thyroid Development and Physiology 3401

601.1 Thyroid Hormone Studies
Ari J. Wassner and Jessica R. Smith

SERUM THYROID HORMONES

Methods are available to measure many thyroid hormones in serum,
including T4, free T4, T3, and free T3. The metabolically inert reverse
T3 (rT3) is present in serum, but measuring rT3 is rarely useful clinically. Direct assays for free T4 are widely available and are reliable in
healthy patients, but these assays may be less reliable during acute
illness or with severe abnormalities of thyroid hormone binding.
Therefore in such situations it may be preferable to measure total T4
as an index of TBG binding or to measure free T4 by the gold standard technique of equilibrium dialysis. The clinical utility of many
free T3 assays is limited by their poor standardization. Because
normal thyroid function changes over time, age-­specific reference
ranges should be used when interpreting thyroid hormone testing
in children, particularly in neonates and infants.
Measuring serum levels of TSH and free T4 can diagnose most
clinical thyroid disorders. Serum TSH is the most sensitive test for
primary thyroid dysfunction, and it is elevated in primary hypothyroidism and suppressed in primary thyrotoxicosis. In central
(secondary) hypothyroidism, serum TSH is low or inappropriately
in the normal range despite low serum T4 and free T4 levels. Biotin
supplements may cause a false elevation of T4 and T3 and a false
decrease of TSH.
Thyroglobulin is a glycoprotein secreted through the apical surface
of the thyroid follicular cell into the colloid. Thyroglobulin is measurable in the serum, and levels of thyroglobulin increase with TSH stimulation and in proportion to functional thyroid mass. Athyreotic infants
have markedly reduced levels of thyroglobulin. In contrast, thyroglobulin levels may be increased in neonates and in patients with Graves
disease and other forms of autoimmune thyroid disease, differentiated
thyroid carcinoma, or endemic goiter.

FETAL AND NEWBORN THYROID

Fetal serum T4 and free T4 increase from midgestation to approximately 9.5 μg/dL and 1.4 ng/dL, respectively, at term. Fetal levels of
T3 are low before 20 weeks and then gradually increase to approximately 60 ng/dL at term. Reverse T3 levels, however, are high in
the fetus (300 ng/dL at 30 weeks) and decrease to 200 ng/dL at
term. Serum levels of TSH gradually increase to 6 mIU/L at term.
Approximately one third of fetal T4 at term is derived from the
transplacental passage of maternal T4. Maternal T4 plays a key role
in fetal development, especially that of the brain, beginning before
fetal synthesis of thyroid hormone begins. Therefore a fetus with
congenital hypothyroidism may be partially protected by maternal
T4 if the mother is euthyroid but may be at risk for neurodevelopmental injury if the mother is hypothyroid.
Immediately after birth there is an acute release of TSH, with
peak serum concentrations reaching 70-­100 mIU/L 30 minutes
after delivery in full-­term infants. TSH declines rapidly over the
ensuing 24 hours and more gradually over the next 5 days to <10
mIU/L. After the first 1-­3 months of life, normal levels of TSH are
<5 mIU/L. The postnatal surge in TSH stimulates an increase in
levels of T4 to approximately 16 μg/dL and of T3 to approximately
300 ng/dL in about 4 hours. T4 levels gradually decrease during the
first 2 weeks of life to 10-­12 μg/dL. T3 levels decline during the first
week of life to below 200 ng/dL. Reverse T3 levels remain high for 2
weeks (200 ng/dL) and decrease by 4 weeks to around 50 ng/dL. In
preterm infants, changes in thyroid function after birth are qualitatively similar to but quantitatively smaller than in full-­term infants.

Serum T4 and T3 levels are decreased in proportion to gestational
age and birthweight.

SERUM THYROXINE-­BINDING GLOBULIN

The thyroid hormones are transported in plasma bound primarily to TBG, a glycoprotein synthesized in the liver. TBG binds
approximately 70% of T4 and 50% of T3. Estimating TBG binding
is occasionally necessary because changes caused by various clinical conditions can affect measured levels of total (but not free) T4
and T3. TBG levels increase in pregnancy; in the newborn period;
with hepatitis; and with the administration of estrogens (oral contraceptives), selective estrogen receptor modulators, heroin or
methadone, mitotane, and 5-­f luorouracil. TBG levels decrease with
androgens, anabolic steroids, glucocorticoids, nicotinic acid, and l-­
asparaginase. These effects are the result of altered hepatic synthesis
of TBG. Severe TBG deficiency may be caused by genetic variants,
decreased production with hepatocellular disease, or massive protein loss in the gut (protein-­losing enteropathies) or the urine (congenital nephrotic syndrome) (see Chapter 602). Some medications,
including furosemide, salicylates, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory
drugs, heparin, and free fatty acids, can elevate levels of free T4 by
inhibiting binding to TBG.

THYROID ULTRASONOGRAPHY

The primary clinical uses of thyroid ultrasound are to assess thyroid
morphology and to evaluate the characteristics of thyroid nodules.
In infants with congenital hypothyroidism, evaluation of the size
and location of the thyroid may clarify the diagnosis of thyroid dysgenesis; however, the sensitivity of ultrasound is user-­dependent,
and it will not reliably detect ectopic thyroid glands. Ultrasound
is more accurate than physical examination for estimating thyroid
gland size and assessing thyroid nodules. Certain characteristics
of thyroid nodules, such as irregular margins, microcalcifications,
hypoechogenicity, and taller-­than-­wide shape, increase the likelihood that a thyroid nodule is malignant and guide decisions about
the need for fine-­needle aspiration. In children with autoimmune
thyroiditis or Graves disease, ultrasound may reveal heterogeneous
echotexture or changes in vascularity. However, ultrasound generally is not clinically useful in these conditions unless a thyroid
nodule is suspected. Ultrasound may also be useful to evaluate thyroglossal duct cysts.

RADIONUCLIDE STUDIES

The availability of highly sensitive tests of thyroid function has
decreased the necessity for radioiodine uptake studies except in
specific clinical situations. The ability of the thyroid to take up
and organify iodine can be evaluated by measuring the uptake of
radioactive isotope 123I (half-­life: 13 hours). Technetium (99mTc) is
also a useful radioisotope for children because it is trapped but not
organified by the thyroid and has a half-­life of only 6 hours. Thyroid
scintigraphy can demonstrate the anatomic distribution of tracer
uptake by thyroid tissue and may be indicated to assess for possible thyroid dysgenesis or ectopic thyroid tissue or to evaluate possible autonomous (hot) thyroid nodules. 131I may be used to treat
hyperthyroidism or thyroid cancer, but its use generally should be
avoided for thyroid uptake and scintigraphy because of its cytotoxic
effect.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3402 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System

Chapter 602

Chapter 603

Disorders of Thyroxine-­
Binding Globulin

Hypothyroidism

Ari J. Wassner and Jessica R. Smith
Approximately 70% of circulating thyroxine (T4) and 50% of triiodothyronine (T3) are bound to thyroxine-­binding globulin (TBG), and most of the
remainder is bound to albumin and prealbumin (also called transthyretin).
Only the unbound (free) fractions of these hormones, comprising 0.03% of
serum T4 and 0.3% of T3, can exert biologic activity. Because regulation of
the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­thyroid axis is mediated by the concentrations
of free thyroid hormones, abnormalities of thyroid hormone binding tend
to alter concentrations of total, but not free, thyroid hormones. Therefore
abnormalities in levels of TBG are not associated with clinical disease and do
not require treatment. They are usually discovered as an incidental finding
of abnormally low or high levels of T4 and may be a source of confusion in
the diagnosis of hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism.
Congenital TBG deficiency is an X-­linked recessive trait that occurs
in 1 in 1,700 male newborns. It is most often discovered through screening programs for neonatal hypothyroidism that measure levels of T4 as the
primary screening test. Affected males have low levels of total T4 (usually
<4 μg/dL) and elevated T3 resin uptake, but levels of free T4 and thyrotropin (TSH) are normal. The diagnosis is confirmed by the measurement
of absent or low serum levels of TBG, although rare cases may have normal concentrations of TBG with reduced affinity for T4. No treatment is
required, but testing may be indicated in potentially affected family members to avoid the incorrect diagnosis of hypothyroidism in the future. More
than 40 different pathogenic variants have been reported in the TBG gene.
Acquired causes of TBG deficiency are listed in Table 602.1.
TBG excess is a benign X-­linked dominant variant that occurs in
approximately 1 in 25,000 individuals. It has been recognized primarily in
adults, but newborn screening programs may uncover the condition in the
neonate. The level of T4 is elevated, T3 is variably elevated, TSH and free
T4 are normal, and T3 resin uptake is decreased. Elevated serum levels of
TBG confirm the diagnosis. Affected neonates have been found to have
levels of T4 as high as 95 μg/dL, which decrease to 20-­30 μg/dL after 2-­3
weeks. Affected patients are euthyroid, but family studies may be indicated
to alert other affected family members. Acquired causes of TBG excess are
listed in Table 602.1.
Familial dysalbuminemic hyperthyroxinemia is an autosomal dominant variant caused by an abnormal albumin with a markedly increased
affinity for T4. This leads to increased serum concentrations of T4 (and in
some cases T3) that can be mistaken for thyrotoxicosis. However, levels of
free T4, free T3, and TSH are normal, and affected patients are euthyroid.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Table 602.1  Causes of Acquired Thyroxine-­Binding
Globulin (TBG) Deficiency and Excess
DECREASED TBG

INCREASED TBG

Androgens
Anabolic steroids
Glucocorticoids
Hepatocellular disease
Severe illness
Nephrotic syndrome
Protein-­losing enteropathy
Nicotinic acid
l-­Asparaginase

Estrogens
Selective estrogen receptor
modulators
Pregnancy
Hepatitis
Porphyria
Heroin, methadone
Mitotane
5-­Fluorouracil
Perphenazine

Ari J. Wassner and Jessica R. Smith
Hypothyroidism is a state of insufficient thyroid hormone action at the
tissue level. Hypothyroidism most often results from deficient production of thyroid hormone caused either by a defect in the thyroid gland
itself (primary hypothyroidism) or by reduced thyrotropin (TSH)
stimulation (central or secondary hypothyroidism; Table 603.1). Hypothyroidism may be present from birth (congenital) or may be acquired,
although some acquired cases are due to congenital defects in which
the onset of hypothyroidism is delayed.

CONGENITAL HYPOTHYROIDISM

Most cases of congenital hypothyroidism are caused by abnormal formation of the thyroid gland (thyroid dysgenesis), and ∼30% of cases
are due to inborn errors of thyroid hormone synthesis (dyshormonogenesis) or other causes. Most infants with congenital hypothyroidism are detected by newborn screening programs in the first week after
birth, before significant clinical signs or symptoms develop. In regions
without newborn screening, severely affected infants usually manifest
features within the first week of life, but in infants with milder hypothyroidism, the clinical manifestations may not be evident for weeks
or months.

Epidemiology

The incidence of congenital hypothyroidism was initially reported to
be 1 in 4,000 infants based on the earliest established neonatal screening programs. The incidence of diagnosis has increased to about 1 in
2,000, primarily because more stringent screening algorithms have
resulted in the detection of milder cases of hypothyroidism, mostly in
patients with a eutopic thyroid gland.

Etiology

See Table 603.1.

Primary Hypothyroidism

Thyroid Dysgenesis. Thyroid dysgenesis is the most common cause

of permanent congenital hypothyroidism, accounting for 80–85% of
cases. In approximately one third of cases of dysgenesis, no thyroid tissue is present (agenesis). In the other two thirds of infants, rudiments
of thyroid tissue are present, either in the normal position (hypoplasia)
or in an ectopic location along the embryologic path of descent of the
thyroid from the base of the tongue (lingual thyroid) to the normal position. Thyroid dysgenesis occurs twice as common in females as in males.
The cause of thyroid dysgenesis is largely unknown. The condition is
usually sporadic, but familial cases have been reported rarely. Thyroid
developmental anomalies, such as thyroglossal duct cysts and thyroid
hemiagenesis, are present in 8–10% of first-­degree relatives of infants
with thyroid dysgenesis. However, most thyroid dysgenesis is unlikely
to be genetic given the high degree of discordance among monozygotic
twins.
A small minority (2–5%) of thyroid dysgenesis is caused by genetic
defects in one of several transcription factors essential for thyroid morphogenesis and differentiation, including NKX2.1 (formerly TTF1),
FOXE1 (formerly TTF2), and PAX8. NKX2.1 is expressed in the thyroid, lung, and central nervous system, and recessive pathogenic variants in NKX2-­1 cause thyroid dysgenesis, respiratory distress, and
neurologic problems (chorea and ataxia) (brain-­lung-­thyroid syndrome). Recessive pathogenic variants in FOXE1 cause thyroid dysgenesis, spiky or curly hair, cleft palate, and sometimes choanal atresia
and bifid epiglottis (Bamforth-­Lazarus syndrome). PAX8 is expressed
in the thyroid and kidney, and dominant PAX8 variants are associated
with thyroid dysgenesis and kidney and ureteral malformations.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3402 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System

Chapter 602

Chapter 603

Disorders of Thyroxine-­
Binding Globulin

Hypothyroidism

Ari J. Wassner and Jessica R. Smith
Approximately 70% of circulating thyroxine (T4) and 50% of triiodothyronine (T3) are bound to thyroxine-­binding globulin (TBG), and most of the
remainder is bound to albumin and prealbumin (also called transthyretin).
Only the unbound (free) fractions of these hormones, comprising 0.03% of
serum T4 and 0.3% of T3, can exert biologic activity. Because regulation of
the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­thyroid axis is mediated by the concentrations
of free thyroid hormones, abnormalities of thyroid hormone binding tend
to alter concentrations of total, but not free, thyroid hormones. Therefore
abnormalities in levels of TBG are not associated with clinical disease and do
not require treatment. They are usually discovered as an incidental finding
of abnormally low or high levels of T4 and may be a source of confusion in
the diagnosis of hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism.
Congenital TBG deficiency is an X-­linked recessive trait that occurs
in 1 in 1,700 male newborns. It is most often discovered through screening programs for neonatal hypothyroidism that measure levels of T4 as the
primary screening test. Affected males have low levels of total T4 (usually
<4 μg/dL) and elevated T3 resin uptake, but levels of free T4 and thyrotropin (TSH) are normal. The diagnosis is confirmed by the measurement
of absent or low serum levels of TBG, although rare cases may have normal concentrations of TBG with reduced affinity for T4. No treatment is
required, but testing may be indicated in potentially affected family members to avoid the incorrect diagnosis of hypothyroidism in the future. More
than 40 different pathogenic variants have been reported in the TBG gene.
Acquired causes of TBG deficiency are listed in Table 602.1.
TBG excess is a benign X-­linked dominant variant that occurs in
approximately 1 in 25,000 individuals. It has been recognized primarily in
adults, but newborn screening programs may uncover the condition in the
neonate. The level of T4 is elevated, T3 is variably elevated, TSH and free
T4 are normal, and T3 resin uptake is decreased. Elevated serum levels of
TBG confirm the diagnosis. Affected neonates have been found to have
levels of T4 as high as 95 μg/dL, which decrease to 20-­30 μg/dL after 2-­3
weeks. Affected patients are euthyroid, but family studies may be indicated
to alert other affected family members. Acquired causes of TBG excess are
listed in Table 602.1.
Familial dysalbuminemic hyperthyroxinemia is an autosomal dominant variant caused by an abnormal albumin with a markedly increased
affinity for T4. This leads to increased serum concentrations of T4 (and in
some cases T3) that can be mistaken for thyrotoxicosis. However, levels of
free T4, free T3, and TSH are normal, and affected patients are euthyroid.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Table 602.1  Causes of Acquired Thyroxine-­Binding
Globulin (TBG) Deficiency and Excess
DECREASED TBG

INCREASED TBG

Androgens
Anabolic steroids
Glucocorticoids
Hepatocellular disease
Severe illness
Nephrotic syndrome
Protein-­losing enteropathy
Nicotinic acid
l-­Asparaginase

Estrogens
Selective estrogen receptor
modulators
Pregnancy
Hepatitis
Porphyria
Heroin, methadone
Mitotane
5-­Fluorouracil
Perphenazine

Ari J. Wassner and Jessica R. Smith
Hypothyroidism is a state of insufficient thyroid hormone action at the
tissue level. Hypothyroidism most often results from deficient production of thyroid hormone caused either by a defect in the thyroid gland
itself (primary hypothyroidism) or by reduced thyrotropin (TSH)
stimulation (central or secondary hypothyroidism; Table 603.1). Hypothyroidism may be present from birth (congenital) or may be acquired,
although some acquired cases are due to congenital defects in which
the onset of hypothyroidism is delayed.

CONGENITAL HYPOTHYROIDISM

Most cases of congenital hypothyroidism are caused by abnormal formation of the thyroid gland (thyroid dysgenesis), and ∼30% of cases
are due to inborn errors of thyroid hormone synthesis (dyshormonogenesis) or other causes. Most infants with congenital hypothyroidism are detected by newborn screening programs in the first week after
birth, before significant clinical signs or symptoms develop. In regions
without newborn screening, severely affected infants usually manifest
features within the first week of life, but in infants with milder hypothyroidism, the clinical manifestations may not be evident for weeks
or months.

Epidemiology

The incidence of congenital hypothyroidism was initially reported to
be 1 in 4,000 infants based on the earliest established neonatal screening programs. The incidence of diagnosis has increased to about 1 in
2,000, primarily because more stringent screening algorithms have
resulted in the detection of milder cases of hypothyroidism, mostly in
patients with a eutopic thyroid gland.

Etiology

See Table 603.1.

Primary Hypothyroidism

Thyroid Dysgenesis. Thyroid dysgenesis is the most common cause

of permanent congenital hypothyroidism, accounting for 80–85% of
cases. In approximately one third of cases of dysgenesis, no thyroid tissue is present (agenesis). In the other two thirds of infants, rudiments
of thyroid tissue are present, either in the normal position (hypoplasia)
or in an ectopic location along the embryologic path of descent of the
thyroid from the base of the tongue (lingual thyroid) to the normal position. Thyroid dysgenesis occurs twice as common in females as in males.
The cause of thyroid dysgenesis is largely unknown. The condition is
usually sporadic, but familial cases have been reported rarely. Thyroid
developmental anomalies, such as thyroglossal duct cysts and thyroid
hemiagenesis, are present in 8–10% of first-­degree relatives of infants
with thyroid dysgenesis. However, most thyroid dysgenesis is unlikely
to be genetic given the high degree of discordance among monozygotic
twins.
A small minority (2–5%) of thyroid dysgenesis is caused by genetic
defects in one of several transcription factors essential for thyroid morphogenesis and differentiation, including NKX2.1 (formerly TTF1),
FOXE1 (formerly TTF2), and PAX8. NKX2.1 is expressed in the thyroid, lung, and central nervous system, and recessive pathogenic variants in NKX2-­1 cause thyroid dysgenesis, respiratory distress, and
neurologic problems (chorea and ataxia) (brain-­lung-­thyroid syndrome). Recessive pathogenic variants in FOXE1 cause thyroid dysgenesis, spiky or curly hair, cleft palate, and sometimes choanal atresia
and bifid epiglottis (Bamforth-­Lazarus syndrome). PAX8 is expressed
in the thyroid and kidney, and dominant PAX8 variants are associated
with thyroid dysgenesis and kidney and ureteral malformations.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 603 u Hypothyroidism 3403
Table 603.1  Etiologic Classification of Congenital
Hypothyroidism
PRIMARY HYPOTHYROIDISM
Defect of thyroid development (dysgenesis)
• Agenesis
• Hypoplasia
• Ectopia
Defects in thyrotropin (TSH) responsiveness
• TSH receptor–blocking antibodies
• Pathogenic variants in TSH receptor (TSHR)
• Defects in Gsα (GNAS)—pseudohypoparathyroidism
Defect in thyroid hormone synthesis (dyshormonogenesis)
• Defective iodide uptake into follicular cell: sodium–iodide
symporter (NIS)
• Defective iodide transport from follicular cell into colloid:
Pendred syndrome (SLC26A4)
• Iodide organification defects: thyroperoxidase (TPO), dual
oxidase 2 (DUOX2), dual oxidase maturation factor 2 (DUOXA2)
• Thyroglobulin synthesis defect: thyroglobulin (TG)
• Deiodination defect: iodotyrosine deiodinase (IYD)
• Thyroid hormone transport defect: monocarboxylate
transporter 8 (SLC16A2)—X-­linked
Iodine deficiency (endemic goiter)
Iodine excess
Maternal medications
• Iodides, amiodarone
• Methimazole, propylthiouracil
• Radioactive iodine (131I)
CENTRAL (SECONDARY) HYPOTHYROIDISM
Isolated TSH deficiency
• Pathogenic variant in TSH β-­subunit (TSHβ)—depending on
variant measured TSH level may be low, normal, or elevated
• Pathogenic variant in TRH receptor (TRHR)
• Pathogenic variant in IGSF1—X-­linked central hypothyroidism
and macroorchidism (prolactin deficiency and variable GH
deficiency)
• Pathogenic variant in other genes: TBL1X, IRS4
Multiple pituitary hormone deficiencies
• Pathogenic variant in POU1F1—deficiency of TSH, GH, and
prolactin
• Pathogenic variant in PROP1—deficiency of TSH, GH, LH, FSH,
prolactin, and variably ACTH
• Pathogenic variant in HESX1—variable deficiencies of TSH, GH,
LH, FSH, prolactin, and ACTH
• Pathogenic variants in other genes: OTX2, LHX3, LHX4, SOX3,
FGF8, FGFR1, GLI2, LEPR
ACTH, Adrenocorticotropic hormone; FSH, follicle-­stimulating hormone; GH, growth
hormone; LH, luteinizing hormone; TRH, thyrotropin-­releasing hormone.

Inactivating variants in the TSH receptor (TSHR) have been
described in patients with congenital hypothyroidism, including thyroid dysgenesis or hypoplasia. TSHR variants may be homozygous or
heterozygous with or without a concurrent change in another congenital hypothyroidism gene (such as DUOX2 or TG). Infants with a severe
TSHR defect have elevated TSH levels and are detected by newborn
screening, whereas patients with a mild defect may remain euthyroid
without treatment.
Congenital hypothyroidism can occur in infants with pseudohypoparathyroidism type 1a. These patients have somatic inactivating variants of the G-­protein stimulatory α-­subunit Gsα (GNAS), leading to
impaired signaling of the TSH receptor (see Chapter 612).

Defects in Thyroid Hormone Synthesis (Dyshormonogenesis). A variety of defects in thyroid hormone biosynthesis account

for 15% of cases of permanent congenital hypothyroidism detected by
neonatal screening programs (1 in 30,000-­50,000 live births). Because
increased TSH stimulation has a trophic effect on thyroid follicular
cells, a goiter is often present. When the synthetic defect is incomplete,
the onset of hypothyroidism may be delayed for months or years.
Defective Iodide Transport. Rare defects in iodide uptake are
caused by pathogenic variants in the sodium-­iodide symporter (NIS)

responsible for concentrating iodide in the thyroid gland. In contrast
to other defects of thyroid hormone synthesis, uptake of radioiodine
and pertechnetate is low, as in cases of thyroid dysgenesis. However,
impaired iodide transport may be suggested by the absence of normal
salivary gland iodine uptake on scintigraphy. A reduced saliva:serum
ratio of 123I supports the diagnosis, which can be confirmed by genetic
testing of NIS. This condition may respond to large doses of potassium iodide, but treatment with levothyroxine is more reliable and
preferable.
Pendred syndrome is a clinical syndrome consisting of sensorineural deafness and goiter. This syndrome is caused by a pathogenic variant
in the chloride-­iodide transport protein pendrin (SLC26A4) expressed
in the thyroid gland and the cochlea. Pendrin allows the transport of
iodide across the apical membrane of the thyroid follicular cell into the
colloid, where it undergoes organification and incorporation into the
tyrosine residues on thyroglobulin. Patients with a variant in SLC26A4
have impaired iodide organification and a positive perchlorate discharge test. Pathogenic variants in pendrin are a relatively common
genetic cause of sensorineural deafness, but some patients diagnosed
based on their hearing disorder have no goiter or thyroid dysfunction.
This finding has fueled speculation that pendrin is not the sole apical
iodine transporter in the thyroid, but no other specific transporter has
been confirmed to date.
Defects of Iodine Organification. Defects of iodine organification are the most common type of thyroid hormone synthetic defect.
After the thyroid takes up iodide, it is rapidly oxidized and incorporated
into tyrosine residues on thyroglobulin. These reactions are catalyzed
by the key enzyme thyroperoxidase (TPO) and require H2O2 generated
locally by the dual oxidase 2 system (DUOX2 and DUOXA2). Defects
can occur in any of these components of organification, and there is
considerable clinical and biochemical heterogeneity. In the Dutch neonatal screening program, a complete organification defect was present
in 1 in 60,000 live births, but the prevalence in other areas is unknown.
A characteristic finding of organification defects is a marked discharge
of thyroid radioactivity when perchlorate or thiocyanate is administered 2 hours after a test dose of radioiodine (perchlorate discharge of
40–90% of radioiodine compared with <10% in normal individuals).
Numerous pathogenic variants in TPO have been reported in children
with congenital hypothyroidism.
Pathogenic variants in DUOX2 can cause permanent or transient
congenital hypothyroidism. Previously, it was thought that monoallelic
DUOX2 variants cause transient disease and biallelic variants cause
permanent disease, but the reverse has been observed in some cases,
and this relationship remains variable and unclear. DUOX2 variants
have been reported in 15–40% of patients with apparent dyshormonogenesis, with pathogenic variant rates as high as 50–60% in studies from
China and South Korea. Dual oxidase maturation factor 2 (DUOXA2)
is required to express DUOX2 enzymatic activity, and recessive variants in DUOXA2 are a rare cause of congenital hypothyroidism.
Defects of Thyroglobulin Synthesis. Defects of thyroglobulin
synthesis are characterized by congenital hypothyroidism with goiter
and absent or low levels of circulating thyroglobulin. More than 40 different pathogenic variants in the thyroglobulin gene (TG) have been
described.
Defects in Deiodination. Monoiodotyrosine and diiodotyrosine
normally are released from thyroglobulin along with thyroxine (T4)
and triiodothyronine (T3). The IYD gene (formerly DEHAL1) encodes
the thyroidal enzyme iodotyrosine deiodinase, which deiodinates these
intermediates so that the liberated iodide is recycled into thyroid hormone synthesis. In patients with rare variants in IYD, urinary excretion
of monoiodotyrosine and diiodotyrosine rapidly causes severe iodine
deficiency, leading to hypothyroidism and goiter that may present soon
after birth or may be delayed.
Defects in Thyroid Hormone Transport. Passage of thyroid
hormone into cells is facilitated by specific plasma membrane transporters. Pathogenic variants in the transporter MCT8 (SLC16A2),
located on the X chromosome, impair the movement of T4 and T3
into cells. This leads to severe neurologic manifestations, including
profound developmental delay, reduced muscle mass, dysarthria,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3404 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
athetoid movements, and hypotonia that evolves to spastic paraplegia
(Allan-­Herndon-­Dudley syndrome). This syndrome is also characterized by low serum T4 levels, normal or mildly elevated serum TSH
levels, and elevated serum T3 levels. Treatment with thyroid hormone
analogs that do not require MCT8 for transmembrane transport can
improve hypermetabolism in this disorder but has little effect on the
neurologic phenotype.
Thyrotropin Receptor–Blocking Antibodies. Maternal TSHR–
blocking antibodies (TRBAbs) cause about 2% of cases of congenital hypothyroidism detected by neonatal screening programs (1 in
50,000-­100,000 infants). Transplacentally acquired maternal TRBAbs
inhibit the binding of TSH to its receptor in the neonate. This condition should be suspected whenever there is a history of maternal
autoimmune thyroid disease, including autoimmune thyroiditis or
Graves disease, maternal hypothyroidism, or transient congenital
hypothyroidism in previous siblings. However, TRBAbs can occur in
the absence of any maternal history. When suspected, levels of TRBAb
(measured as thyrotropin-­binding inhibitory immunoglobulin [TBII])
should be measured in the mother during pregnancy or after birth in
the neonate. Affected infants and their mothers also can have TSHR-­
stimulating antibodies and TPO antibodies. Ultrasonography typically
demonstrates a normally positioned but small thyroid gland; however,
thyroid tissue often will not be detected by scintigraphy because the
blockade of TSHR function suppresses thyroidal iodine uptake. Serum
thyroglobulin levels are low for the same reason. Treatment with levothyroxine is required initially, but remission of hypothyroidism occurs
in approximately 3-­6 months once the TRBAbs are cleared from the
infant’s circulation. Correct diagnosis of this cause of congenital hypothyroidism prevents unnecessarily protracted treatment and alerts the
clinician to possible recurrences in future pregnancies. The prognosis
is generally favorable, but developmental delay may occur in patients
whose mothers had unsuspected (and untreated) hypothyroidism
caused by TRBAbs during pregnancy.
Radioiodine Administration. Neonatal hypothyroidism can
occur when radioiodine is administered to a mother during (a usually
unrecognized) pregnancy as treatment for Graves disease or thyroid
cancer. The fetal thyroid is capable of trapping iodide by 70-­75 days of
gestation. Therefore a pregnancy test must be performed in any individual capable of pregnancy before 131I is given, regardless of menstrual
history or reported history of contraception. Administration of radioactive iodine to lactating individuals is also contraindicated because it
is excreted in breast milk.
Iodine Exposure. Congenital hypothyroidism can result from
fetal exposure to excessive iodine. Perinatal exposure can occur from
iodine-­based antiseptic used to prepare the skin for cesarean section or
to paint the cervix before delivery. In the neonate, especially in those
of low birthweight (LBW), topical iodine-­containing antiseptics used
in nurseries or perioperatively can cause transient hypothyroidism,
which newborn screening tests may detect. In older children, excess
iodine may be present in proprietary preparations used to treat asthma
or in amiodarone, an antiarrhythmic drug with high iodine content.
In most of these instances, a goiter is present (see Chapter 605). Hypothyroidism has also been reported in breastfed infants born to mothers
who consume large amounts of iodine daily (up to 12 mg) in nutritional supplements or large quantities of iodine-­rich seaweed. Iodine-­
induced hypothyroidism is transient once the exposure is discontinued
and therefore is important to distinguish from other forms of congenital hypothyroidism.
Iodine Deficiency (Endemic Goiter). See Chapter 605.3.
Iodine deficiency or endemic goiter is the most common cause of
congenital hypothyroidism worldwide. The recommended iodine
intake in adults is 150 μg daily, increasing to 220 μg daily during pregnancy to allow for fetal iodine requirements. Despite efforts at universal salt iodization, in many countries economic, political, and practical
obstacles continue to prevent the realization of this goal. Although
the U.S. population is generally iodine sufficient, approximately 15%
of women of reproductive age are iodine deficient. Borderline iodine
deficiency is more likely to cause problems in preterm infants, who
depend on a maternal source of iodine for normal thyroid hormone

production and often receive insufficient dietary iodine from standard
preterm infant formulas or parenteral nutrition that is low in iodine.

Central (Secondary) Hypothyroidism

Thyrotropin (TSH) Deficiency. Central hypothyroidism caused by

TSH deficiency can occur in any condition associated with developmental defects of the pituitary or hypothalamus (see Chapter 595).
Central hypothyroidism occurs in 1 in 16,000-­30,000 infants. However,
neonatal screening does not detect many cases, mainly because many
screening programs are designed to detect only primary hypothyroidism by measuring neonatal TSH. The majority (75%) of infants with
central hypothyroidism have additional pituitary hormone deficiencies
and may present with hypoglycemia, persistent jaundice, micropenis
or cryptorchidism (in males), and midline defects such as midline cleft
lip or palate or midface hypoplasia.
Congenital TSH deficiency may be caused by pathogenic variants in
genes encoding transcription factors essential to pituitary development
or thyrotroph cell differentiation. POU1F1 variants cause deficiency of
TSH, growth hormone, and prolactin. Patients with PROP1 variants
also have deficiency of TSH, growth hormone, prolactin, luteinizing
hormone, follicle-­
stimulating hormone, and variable deficiency of
adrenocorticotropic hormone. HESX1 pathogenic variants are associated with TSH, growth hormone, prolactin, and adrenocorticotropic
hormone deficiencies and are found in some patients with optic nerve
hypoplasia (septo-­optic dysplasia syndrome; see Chapter 631). Variants in multiple other genes involved in pituitary development can
cause central hypothyroidism (Table 603.1).
Isolated congenital deficiency of TSH is rare. The most common
genetic cause is a pathogenic variant in IGSF1, which results in an
X-­linked syndrome of congenital central hypothyroidism and macroorchidism. The mechanism remains unclear, but IGSF1 deficiency
may impair TRH receptor signaling in pituitary thyrotrophs. Prolactin deficiency is usually present, and some patients also have growth
hormone deficiency. Central hypothyroidism occurs in about 10% of
female carriers of IGSF1 deficiency. Patients with pathogenic variants
in the gene encoding the TSH β-­subunit (TSHB) have central hypothyroidism with very low TSH levels, although in some cases, TSH levels
are normal or even elevated. In other cases, levels of the TSH α-­subunit
are elevated. Variants in TRHR, which encodes the TRH receptor, are
a rare cause of congenital central hypothyroidism. In this condition,
both TSH and prolactin fail to respond to TRH stimulation.

Thyroid Function in Preterm and Low Birthweight
Infants

Postnatal thyroid function in preterm and LBW infants is qualitatively
similar but quantitatively reduced compared with term infants. The
cord blood T4 concentration is decreased in proportion to gestational
age and birthweight. The postnatal TSH surge is reduced, and very premature or very LBW infants experience a decrease in serum T4 in the
first week of life, in contrast to term infants in whom T4 increases during this time. Serum T4 gradually increases to the range observed in
term infants by about 6 weeks of life. However, serum free T4 concentrations are less affected than total T4, and free T4 levels may be normal
when measured by the gold standard technique of equilibrium dialysis.
Preterm and LBW infants also have a higher incidence of delayed TSH
elevation and apparent transient primary hypothyroidism. Mechanisms underlying these changes in thyroid function in preterm and
LBW infants may include immaturity of the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­
thyroid axis, loss of the maternal contribution of thyroid hormone normally present in the third trimester, severe illness and complications of
prematurity, and exposure to medications that can affect thyroid function (e.g., dopamine and glucocorticoids).

Clinical Manifestations

Before neonatal screening programs, congenital hypothyroidism was
rarely recognized in the newborn because most affected infants are
asymptomatic at birth, even if there is complete agenesis of the thyroid gland. This is because of transplacental passage of maternal T4,
which provides fetal levels that are approximately one-­third normal at

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 603 u Hypothyroidism 3405
birth. Because symptoms are usually not present at birth, the clinician
depends on neonatal screening tests to diagnose congenital hypothyroidism. However, some infants escape newborn screening, and laboratory errors occur, so pediatricians must be alert for symptoms and
signs of hypothyroidism if they develop. Birth weight and length are
normal, but head size may be slightly increased because of myxedema
of the brain. The anterior and posterior fontanels are open widely, and
the presence of this sign at birth may be a clue to early recognition
of congenital hypothyroidism (only 3% of normal newborns have a
posterior fontanel wider than 0.5 cm). Prolonged jaundice (indirect
hyperbilirubinemia) may be present because of delayed maturation
of hepatic glucuronide conjugation. Affected infants cry little, sleep
much, have poor appetites, and are generally sluggish. Feeding difficulties, especially sluggishness, lack of interest, somnolence, and choking spells during nursing, may be present during the first month of
life. Respiratory difficulties, partly caused by macroglossia, include
apneic episodes, noisy respirations, and nasal obstruction. There may
be constipation that does not respond to treatment. The abdomen is
large, and an umbilical hernia is often present. The temperature may be
subnormal (often <35°C/95°F), and the skin may be cold and mottled,
particularly on the extremities. Edema of the genitals and extremities
may be present. The pulse is slow, and heart murmurs, cardiomegaly,
and asymptomatic pericardial effusion are common. Macrocytic anemia is often present. Because symptoms appear gradually and may be
nonspecific, the clinical diagnosis of neonatal hypothyroidism is often
delayed.
Approximately 10% of infants with congenital hypothyroidism have
associated congenital anomalies. Cardiac anomalies are most common,
but anomalies of the nervous system and eye have also been reported.
Infants with congenital hypothyroidism may have associated hearing
loss. Pathogenic variants in specific genes involved in thyroid gland
development result in congenital hypothyroidism with other syndromic features (Table 603.2).
If congenital hypothyroidism goes undetected and untreated, the
clinical manifestations progress. Delay of physical and mental development becomes more severe over time, and by 3-­6 months of age,
the clinical picture is fully developed (Fig. 603.1). When deficiency
of thyroid hormone is only partial, the symptoms may be milder and
their onset delayed. Although breast milk contains significant amounts
of thyroid hormones, particularly T3, this is inadequate to protect the
breastfed infant from the effects of congenital hypothyroidism.
In the patient with untreated congenital hypothyroidism, growth is
stunted, extremities are short, and head size is normal or increased.
The anterior fontanel is large, and the posterior fontanel may remain

open. The eyes appear far apart, and the bridge of the broad nose is
depressed. The palpebral fissures are narrow, and the eyelids are swollen. The mouth is kept open, and the thick, broad tongue protrudes.
Dentition is delayed. The neck is short and thick, and there may be fat
deposits above the clavicles and between the neck and shoulders. The
hands are broad, and the fingers are short. The skin is dry and scaly,
and there is little perspiration. Myxedema occurs mainly in the skin of
the eyelids, the back of the hands, and the external genitalia. The skin
shows general pallor with a sallow complexion. Carotenemia can cause
a yellow discoloration of the skin, but the sclerae remain white. The
scalp is thickened, and the hair is coarse, brittle, and scanty. The hairline reaches far down on the forehead, which usually appears wrinkled,
especially when the infant cries.
Development is usually delayed. Hypothyroid infants appear lethargic and are late in acquiring gross and fine motor skills. The voice is
hoarse, and they do not learn to talk. The degree of physical and intellectual delay increases with age. Sexual maturation may be delayed or
even absent. The muscles are usually hypotonic, but in rare instances,
generalized muscular pseudohypertrophy occurs (Kocher-­Debré-­
Sémélaigne syndrome). Affected older children can have an athletic
appearance because of pseudohypertrophy, particularly in the calf
muscles. Its pathogenesis is unknown; nonspecific histochemical and
ultrastructural changes seen on muscle biopsy return to normal with
treatment.
Some infants with mild congenital hypothyroidism have normal
thyroid function at birth and are not identified by newborn screening programs. In particular, some children with ectopic thyroid tissue
produce adequate amounts of thyroid hormone for some time (even
years) until the abnormal thyroid tissue fails. Affected children come
to clinical attention because of a growing mass at the base of the tongue
or in the midline of the neck, often at the level of the hyoid. Occasionally, thyroid ectopy is associated with thyroglossal duct cysts. Surgical removal of ectopic thyroid tissue from a euthyroid patient usually
results in hypothyroidism because most such patients have no other
thyroid tissue.

Laboratory Findings

In countries where newborn screening is performed, this is the most
important method for identifying infants with congenital hypothyroidism. Blood obtained by heelprick between 1 and 5 days of life is placed
on a filter paper card and sent to a central screening laboratory. Most

Table 603.2  Genes and Thyroid Development
GENE

THYROID
PHENOTYPE

FOXE1

Athyreosis

Cleft palate, choanal atresia, kinky
hair, bifid epiglottis

NKX2-­1

Athyreosis to
normal gland

Respiratory distress syndrome,
developmental delays/hypotonia,
ataxia/choreoathetosis

PAX8

Athyreosis to
normal gland

Cysts within thyroid remnants, kidney
and urinary tract malformations

GLIS3

Athyreosis to
normal gland

Congenital glaucoma; deafness; liver/
kidney and pancreatic abnormalities

TSHR

Athyreosis to
normal gland

None

Athyreosis,
ectopy

Cardiac defects

NKX2-­5

OTHER FEATURES

From Kim G, Nandi-­Munshi D, Diblasi CC. Disorders of the thyroid gland. In: Gleason
CA, Juul SE, eds. Avery’s Diseases of the Newborn, 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2018, Table 98.3, p. 1396.

A

B

Fig. 603.1 Congenital hypothyroidism in an infant 6 mo of age. The

infant ate poorly in the neonatal period and was constipated. She had
persistent nasal discharge and a large tongue, was very lethargic, and
had no social smile and no head control. A, Notice the puffy face, dull
expression, and hirsute forehead. Tests revealed a negligible uptake
of radioiodine. Osseous development was that of a newborn. B, Four
months after treatment, note decreased face puffiness, decreased hirsutism of the forehead, and the alert appearance.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3406 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
screening programs measure the level of TSH, which detects infants
with primary hypothyroidism, including some with milder disease in
whom TSH is elevated but T4 is normal. However, this approach may
not detect rarer disorders such as central hypothyroidism or primary
congenital hypothyroidism with delayed TSH elevation. Some screening programs begin by measuring levels of T4, followed by reflex measurement of TSH when the T4 is low. This approach identifies infants
with primary hypothyroidism, some with central hypothyroidism or
delayed TSH elevation, and infants with thyroxine-­binding globulin
deficiency (a benign variant). All newborn screening results should
be interpreted based on age-­specific reference ranges, particularly in
the first week of life (Table 603.3). Regardless of the approach used
for screening, some infants escape detection because of technical or
human errors, and clinicians must remain vigilant for clinical manifestations of hypothyroidism.
Several groups of patients deserve vigilance for congenital hypothyroidism. Infants with trisomy 21 or cardiac defects have an increased
risk of congenital hypothyroidism. Monozygotic twins are usually discordant for congenital hypothyroidism. However, if twins are
monochorionic, fetal hypothyroidism in the affected twin may be compensated by the normal twin through their shared fetal circulation. In
such cases, the affected twin may go undetected on newborn screening
in the first days of life and present later with untreated hypothyroidism.
Preterm and LBW neonates have an increased incidence of congenital
hypothyroidism and are more likely to have delayed TSH elevation that
may be missed on initial screening. Therefore in all of these groups of
infants, many newborn screening programs perform a routine second
test 2-­4 weeks after birth.
Patients with congenital hypothyroidism have low serum levels of
T4 and free T4. Serum levels of T3 are often normal and are not helpful
for diagnosis. If primary hypothyroidism is present, levels of TSH are
elevated, often to >100 mU/L in severe cases. Serum levels of thyroglobulin are usually low in infants with thyroid agenesis, defects of the
TSH receptor (including TSHR pathogenic variants and TRBAb), or
defects in the synthesis or secretion of thyroglobulin itself. In contrast,
thyroglobulin levels are usually elevated in patients with thyroid ectopy
and other defects of thyroid hormone synthesis, but there is a wide
overlap of ranges.
Delay of osseous development can be shown radiographically at
birth in approximately 60% of congenitally hypothyroid infants and
indicates some deficiency of thyroid hormone during intrauterine life.
The distal femoral and proximal tibial epiphyses, normally present at
birth, are often absent (Fig. 603.2A). In untreated patients, the discrepancy between chronologic age and osseous development increases over
time. The epiphyses often have multiple foci of ossification (epiphyseal
dysgenesis; see Fig. 603.2B). Deformity (beaking) of the 12th thoracic
or 1st or 2nd lumbar vertebra is common. X-­rays of the skull show
large fontanels and wide sutures, and intersutural (wormian) bones
are common. The sella turcica may be enlarged and round, and in rare
instances, there may be bony erosion and thinning. Formation and
eruption of teeth can be delayed. Cardiac enlargement or pericardial
effusion may be present.
Scintigraphy can help define the underlying cause in infants with
congenital hypothyroidism, but treatment should not be delayed to
obtain such imaging. 123I–sodium iodide is superior to 99mTc–sodium
pertechnetate for this purpose. Scintigraphy will demonstrate an ectopic thyroid gland, but the absence of uptake in disorders of the TSH
receptor (including TRBAb) or NIS may be mistaken for thyroid agenesis. Ultrasound of the thyroid can document the presence or absence
of an anatomically normal gland, but it can miss some ectopic glands
that are detectable by scintigraphy. Demonstration of ectopic thyroid
tissue or the absence of thyroid tissue in its normal location is diagnostic of thyroid dysgenesis and establishes the need for lifelong treatment.
A normally located thyroid gland with normal or increased uptake
indicates a defect in thyroid hormone synthesis. Although extensive
evaluation can be performed to elucidate the precise nature of the synthetic defect, this rarely affects clinical management and is unnecessary
in most cases. Similarly, genetic testing may reveal potentially relevant
variants in 60% or more of patients with defects of thyroid hormone

synthesis. However, such testing may be costly, is not always conclusive, and usually does not alter management.

Treatment

Levothyroxine (l-­T4) given orally is the treatment for congenital hypothyroidism. Although T3 is the biologically active form of thyroid hormone, 80% of circulating T3 is derived from deiodination of circulating
T4, and therefore treatment with l-­T4 alone restores normal serum levels of T4 and T3. The recommended initial dose of l-­T4 is 10-­15 μg/kg/
day (37.5-­50 μg/day for most term infants), and within this range the
starting dose can be adjusted based on the severity of hypothyroidism.
Newborns with more severe hypothyroidism, as judged by a serum T4
<5 μg/dL and/or imaging studies confirming aplasia, should be started
at the higher end of the dosage range. Rapid normalization of thyroid
function (ideally within 2 weeks) is essential in achieving optimal
neurodevelopmental outcomes. Lower doses of l-­T4 (8-­10 mcg/kg/
day) may be considered for infants with mild hypothyroidism (mildly
elevated TSH and normal free T4).
l-­T4 should be prescribed in tablet form. A liquid l-­T4 preparation
has been approved, but optimal dosing may differ slightly from the tablet form. Tablets should be crushed and mixed with a small volume
(1-­2 mL) of liquid. l-­T4 tablets should not be mixed with soy protein
formulas, concentrated iron, or calcium because these can inhibit l-­T4
absorption. Although it is often recommended to administer l-­T4 on
an empty stomach and avoid food for 30-­60 minutes, this is not practical in an infant. As long as the method of administration is consistent,
dosing can be adjusted based on serum thyroid test results to achieve
the desired treatment goals. One trial has suggested that brand-­name
l-­T4 may be superior to generic formulations in children with severe
congenital hypothyroidism.
The goals of treatment are to maintain serum TSH in the reference
range for age and the serum free T4 or total T4 in the upper half of the
reference range for age (see Table 603.3). Levels of serum T4 or free
T4 and TSH should be monitored at recommended intervals (every
1-­2 months in the first 6 months of life, and then every 2-­4 months
between 6 months and 3 years of age). Care should be taken to avoid
undertreatment, which has been related to adverse neurodevelopmental outcomes, including decreased intelligence quotient (IQ).
About 35% of infants with congenital hypothyroidism and a normally located thyroid gland have transient disease and do not require
lifelong therapy. In patients who might have transient disease, a trial
of l-­T4 may be undertaken after 3 years of age for 4 weeks to assess
whether the TSH rises significantly, indicating the presence of permanent hypothyroidism. Such a trial is unnecessary in infants with proven
thyroid dysgenesis or in those who have previously manifested elevated
levels of TSH after 6-­12 months of therapy because of poor medication
adherence or an inadequate dose of T4.

Prognosis

Thyroid hormone is critical for normal neurodevelopment, particularly in the early postnatal months. Prompt diagnosis and initiation of
adequate treatment of congenital hypothyroidism in the first 2 weeks of
life are essential to prevent irreversible brain damage and normal growth
and development. In most infants detected by newborn screening, verbal development, psychomotor development, and global IQ scores are
similar to unaffected siblings. However, the most severely affected newborns—those with the lowest T4 levels and most delayed skeletal maturation—may have reduced IQ and other neuropsychologic sequelae such
as incoordination, hypotonia or hypertonia, or problems with attention
or speech despite early diagnosis and adequate treatment. Psychometric
testing can show problems with vocabulary and reading comprehension,
arithmetic, and memory. Approximately 10% of children with congenital
hypothyroidism have a neurosensory hearing deficit. Outcome studies in
adults diagnosed and treated as neonates reveal delayed social development, lower self-­esteem, and a lower health-­related quality of life. The
latter appears to be related to those individuals with lower neurocognitive outcomes and associated congenital malformations.
Delay in diagnosis or treatment, failure to rapidly correct the initial
hypothyroidism, inadequate treatment, or poor adherence to treatment

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 603 u Hypothyroidism 3407
Table 603.3  Thyroid Function Tests
AGE

U.S. REFERENCE VALUE

CONVERSION FACTOR

SI REFERENCE VALUE

THYROID THYROGLOBULIN, SERUM
Cord blood

14.7-­101.1 ng/mL

×1

14.7-­101.1 μg/L

Birth to 35 mo

10.6-­92.0 ng/mL

×1

10.6-­92.0 μg/L

3-­11 yr

5.6-­41.9 ng/mL

×1

5.6-­41.9 μg/L

12-­17 yr

2.7-­21.9 ng/mL

×1

2.7-­21.9 μg/L

THYROID-­STIMULATING HORMONE, SERUM
Premature Infants (28-­36 wk)
First wk of life
0.7-­27.0 mIU/L

×1

0.7-­27.0 mIU/L

Term Infant
Birth to 4 days

1.0-­17.6 mIU/L

×1

1.0-­17.6 mIU/L

2-­20 wk

0.6-­5.6 mIU/L

×1

0.6-­5.6 mIU/L

5 mo-­20 yr

0.5-­5.5 mIU/L

×1

0.5-­5.5 mIU/L

THYROXINE-­BINDING GLOBULIN, SERUM
Cord blood

1.4-­9.4 mg/dL

×10

14-­94 mg/L

1-­4 wk

1.0-­9.0 mg/dL

×10

10-­90 mg/L

1-­12 mo

2.0-­7.6 mg/dL

×10

20-­76 mg/L

1-­5 yr

2.9-­5.4 mg/dL

×10

29-­54 mg/L

5-­10 yr

2.5-­5.0 mg/dL

×10

25-­50 mg/L

10-­15 yr

2.1-­4.6 mg/dL

×10

21-­46 mg/L

Adult

1.5-­3.4 mg/dL

×10

15-­34 mg/L

THYROXINE, TOTAL, SERUM
Full-­Term Infants
1-­3 days

8.2-­19.9 μg/dL

×12.9

106-­256 nmol/L

1 wk

6.0-­15.9 μg/dL

×12.9

77-­205 nmol/L

1-­12 mo

6.1-­14.9 μg/dL

×12.9

79-­192 nmol/L

Prepubertal Children
1-­3 yr

6.8-­13.5 μg/dL

×12.9

88-­174 nmol/L

3-­10 yr

5.5-­12.8 μg/dL

×12.9

71-­165 nmol/L

Pubertal Children and Adults
>10 yr

4.2-­13.0 μg/dL

×12.9

54-­167 nmol/L

THYROXINE, FREE, SERUM
Full term (3 days)

2.0-­4.9 ng/dL

×12.9

26-­63.1 pmol/L

Infants

0.9-­2.6 ng/dL

×12.9

12-­33 pmol/L

Prepubertal children

0.8-­2.2 ng/dL

×12.9

10-­28 pmol/L

Pubertal children and adults

0.8-­2.3 ng/dL

×12.9

10-­30 pmol/L

THYROXINE, TOTAL, WHOLE BLOOD
Newborn screen (filter paper)

6.2-­22 μg/dL

×12.9

80-­283 nmol/L

TRIIODOTHYRONINE, FREE, SERUM
Cord blood

20-­240 pg/dL

×0.01536

0.3-­0.7 pmol/L

1-­3 days

180-­760 pg/dL

×0.01536

2.8-­11.7 pmol/L

1-­5 yr

185-­770 pg/dL

×0.01536

2.8-­11.8 pmol/L

5-­10 yr

215-­700 pg/dL

×0.01536

3.3-­10.7 pmol/L

10-­15 yr

230-­650 pg/dL

×0.01536

3.5-­10.0 pmol/L

>15 yr

210-­440 pg/dL

×0.01536

3.2-­6.8 pmol/L

TRIIODOTHYRONINE RESIN UPTAKE TEST (RT3U), SERUM
Newborn
26–36%

×0.01

0.26-­0.36 fractional uptake

Thereafter

×0.01

0.26-­0.35 fractional uptake

26–35%

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3408 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 603.3  Thyroid Function Tests—cont’d
AGE

U.S. REFERENCE VALUE

CONVERSION FACTOR

SI REFERENCE VALUE

TRIIODOTHYRONINE, TOTAL, SERUM
Cord blood

30-­70 ng/dL

×0.0154

0.46-­1.08 nmol/L

1-­3 days

75-­260 ng/dL

×0.0154

1.16-­4.00 nmol/L

1-­5 yr

100-­260 ng/dL

×0.0154

1.54-­4.00 nmol/L

5-­10 yr

90-­240 ng/dL

×0.0154

1.39-­3.70 nmol/L

10-­15 yr

80-­210 ng/dL

×0.0154

1.23-­3.23 nmol/L

>15 yr

115-­190 ng/dL

×0.0154

1.77-­2.93 nmol/L

Adapted from Nicholson JF, Pesce MA. Reference ranges for laboratory tests and procedures. In: Behrman RE, Kliegman RM, Jenson HB, eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics, 17th ed.
Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2004:2412–2413; TSH from Lem AJ, de Rijke YB, van toor H, et al. Serum thyroid hormone levels in healthy children from birth to adulthood and in short
children born small for gestational age. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012;97:3170–3178; Free T3 from Elmlinger MW, Kuhnel W, Lambrecht H-­G, et al. Reference intervals from birth to
adulthood for serum thyroxine (T4), triiodothyronine (T3), free T3, free T4, thyroxine binding globulin (TBG), and thyrotropin (TSH). Clin Chem Lab Med. 2001;39:973–979.

Table 603.4  Etiologic Classification of Acquired
Hypothyroidism

A

B

Fig. 603.2 Congenital hypothyroidism. A, Absence of distal femoral

epiphyses in a 3-­mo-­old infant who was born at term. This is evidence
for onset of the hypothyroid state during fetal life. B, Epiphyseal dysgenesis in the head of the humerus in a 9-­yr-­old girl who had been
inadequately treated with thyroid hormone.

in the first 2-­3 years of life may result in variable degrees of neurodevelopmental impairment. Without treatment, severely affected infants
have profound intellectual disability and growth stunting. When hypothyroidism develops after 2 years of age, the outlook for neurodevelopment is much better even if diagnosis and treatment are delayed, which
illustrates the critical dependence of brain development on thyroid
hormone in the first year of life.

ACQUIRED HYPOTHYROIDISM
Epidemiology

Hypothyroidism occurs in approximately 0.3% (1 in 333) of school-­age
children. Subclinical hypothyroidism (defined as an elevated TSH with
normal T4 or free T4) is more common, occurring in approximately
2% of adolescents. Autoimmune thyroiditis is the most common cause
of acquired hypothyroidism: 6% of children age 12-­19 years have evidence of autoimmune thyroiditis, and females are twice as likely to be
affected as males. Although this condition typically arises in adolescence, it may present as early as the first year of life.

Etiology

The most common cause of acquired hypothyroidism (Table 603.4) is
autoimmune thyroiditis (also called Hashimoto or chronic lymphocytic thyroiditis; see Chapter 604). Children with trisomy 21, Turner
syndrome, Klinefelter syndrome, celiac disease, or type 1 diabetes
mellitus are at higher risk for associated autoimmune thyroid disease
(see Chapter 604), as are those with autoimmune polyglandular syndromes (APSs; see Chapter 608). APS type 1 (APS-­1) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder caused by pathogenic variants in AIRE. It is
classically characterized by the triad of mucocutaneous candidiasis,
hypoparathyroidism, and primary adrenal insufficiency. Autoimmune

Autoimmune
• Autoimmune thyroiditis (Hashimoto thyroiditis)
• Autoimmune polyglandular syndromes types 1 and 2 (APS-­1, APS-­2)
• IPEX
• Celiac disease
Drug-­induced
• Excess iodide: amiodarone, nutritional supplements,
expectorants
• Anticonvulsants: oxcarbazepine, phenytoin, phenobarbital,
valproate
• Antithyroid drugs: methimazole, propylthiouracil
• Miscellaneous: lithium, rifampin, tyrosine kinase inhibitors,
interferon-­α, stavudine, thalidomide, aminoglutethimide,
dopamine, amiodarone, tetracycline, ipilimumab, nivolumab
Iatrogenic
• Irradiation (e.g., cancer therapy, bone marrow transplant)
• Radioactive iodine (131I)
• Thyroidectomy
Systemic infiltrative disease
• Cystinosis
• Langerhans cell histiocytosis
Consumptive: inactivation of thyroid hormone by large liver
hemangiomas (type 3 deiodinase)
Decreased sensitivity to thyroid hormone (MCT8, SEC16A2, THRA,
THRB pathogenic variants)
Hypothalamic-­pituitary disease (often with multiple pituitary
hormone deficiencies)
• Central nervous system tumors (e.g., craniopharyngioma)
• Meningoencephalitis
• Cranial irradiation
• Head trauma
• Langerhans cell histiocytosis
IPEX, Immunodysregulation polyendocrinopathy X-­linked.

thyroiditis is a less common feature (∼10%), as are type 1 diabetes mellitus, primary hypogonadism, pernicious anemia, vitiligo, alopecia,
nephritis, hepatitis, and gastrointestinal dysfunction. APS type 2 (APS-­
2) is far more common than APS-­1, and its pathogenesis remains an
obscure combination of genetic and environmental factors. APS-­2 may
consist of any combination of autoimmune thyroiditis (∼70%), type 1
diabetes mellitus, celiac disease, or less common manifestations such as
primary adrenal insufficiency, primary hypogonadism, pernicious anemia, and vitiligo. Patients with any of these other autoimmune conditions are at increased risk of developing hypothyroidism. For example,
about 20% of children with type 1 diabetes mellitus develop thyroid
autoantibodies and about 5% become hypothyroid.
In children with trisomy 21, thyroid autoantibodies develop in approximately 30%, and subclinical or overt hypothyroidism occurs in approximately 15–20%. In females with Turner syndrome, thyroid autoantibodies

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 603 u Hypothyroidism 3409
develop in approximately 40%, and subclinical or overt hypothyroidism
occurs in approximately 15–30%, rising with increasing age. Additional
autoimmune conditions with an increased risk of hypothyroidism include
immune dysregulation–polyendocrinopathy–enteropathy–X-­linked syndrome (IPEX) and IPEX-­like disorders, immunoglobulin G4–related diseases, Sjögren syndrome, and multiple sclerosis. Williams syndrome is
associated with subclinical hypothyroidism, but this does not appear to be
autoimmune, and thyroid autoantibodies are absent.
Medications can cause acquired hypothyroidism. Some medications
containing iodine (e.g., expectorants or nutritional supplements) may
cause hypothyroidism through the Wolff-­Chaikoff effect (see Chapter
605). Amiodarone, a drug used for cardiac arrhythmias and consisting of 37% iodine by weight, causes hypothyroidism in approximately
20–30% of treated children. Children treated with amiodarone should
have serial monitoring of thyroid function.
Anticonvulsants, including phenytoin, phenobarbital, and valproate, may cause thyroid dysfunction, usually in the form of subclinical
hypothyroidism. In some cases, this is because of their effect of stimulating hepatic cytochrome P450 metabolism and excretion of T4. The
anticonvulsant oxcarbazepine can cause central (secondary) hypothyroidism. Hypothyroidism can be caused by overtreatment with antithyroid drugs (methimazole or propylthiouracil) for Graves disease.
Additional drugs that can produce hypothyroidism include lithium,
rifampin, tyrosine kinase inhibitors, interferon-­α, stavudine, thalidomide, and aminoglutethimide.
Children who receive therapeutic irradiation, such as for Hodgkin
disease or other head and neck malignancies or before bone marrow
transplantation, are at risk for thyroid damage and hypothyroidism.
Approximately 30% of such children acquire elevated TSH levels within
a year after therapy, and another 15–20% progress to hypothyroidism
within 5-­7 years. Radioactive iodine ablative treatment or thyroidectomy for Graves disease or thyroid cancer results in iatrogenic hypothyroidism. Thyroid tissue in a thyroglossal duct cyst may constitute
the only source of thyroid hormone, and in this case, excision of the
cyst results in hypothyroidism. Ultrasonographic examination or a
radionuclide scan before surgery is indicated in these patients.
Children with nephropathic cystinosis, a disorder characterized by
intralysosomal storage of cystine in body tissues, acquire impaired thyroid function. Hypothyroidism is usually subclinical but may be overt,
and periodic assessment of TSH levels is indicated. By 13 years of age,
two thirds of these patients require l-­T4 replacement.
Histiocytic infiltration of the thyroid in children with Langerhans
cell histiocytosis (see Chapter 556.1) can result in hypothyroidism.
Children with chronic hepatitis C infection are at risk for subclinical
hypothyroidism that does not appear to be autoimmune.
Consumptive hypothyroidism can occur in children with large
hemangiomas of the liver. These tumors may express massive amounts
of the enzyme type 3 deiodinase, which inactivates T4 and T3, respectively, to the inert metabolites reverse T3 and diiodothyronine (T2).
Hypothyroidism occurs when increased thyroidal secretion of thyroid
hormones is insufficient to compensate for their rapid inactivation.
Some patients with mild forms of congenital hypothyroidism (thyroid
dysgenesis or genetic defects in thyroid hormone synthesis) do not develop
clinical manifestations until childhood. Although these conditions are
often detected by newborn screening, very mild defects can escape detection and present later with apparently acquired hypothyroidism.
Any hypothalamic or pituitary disease can cause acquired central
hypothyroidism (see Chapter 595). TSH deficiency may result from a
hypothalamic-­pituitary tumor (craniopharyngioma is most common
in children) or from treatment for a tumor. Central hypothyroidism
may develop in up to 10% of children receiving craniospinal irradiation. Other causes include head trauma or infiltrative diseases affecting
the pituitary gland, such as Langerhans cell histiocytosis.

Clinical Manifestations

Slowing of growth is usually the first clinical manifestation of acquired
hypothyroidism, but this sign often goes unrecognized (Figs. 603.3 and
603.4). Goiter is a common presenting feature of primary hypothyroidism. In autoimmune thyroiditis, the thyroid is typically nontender

A

B

Fig. 603.3 A, Acquired hypothyroidism in a 6-­yr-­old female. She was

treated with a wide variety of hematinics for refractory anemia for 3
years. She had almost complete cessation of growth, constipation, and
sluggishness for 3 years. The height age was 3 years; the bone age was
4 years. She had a sallow complexion and immature facies with a poorly
developed nasal bridge. Serum cholesterol, 501 mg/dL; radioiodine
uptake, 7% at 24 hr; protein-­bound iodine (PBI), 2.8 mg/dL. B, After
therapy for 18 months, note the nasal development, increased luster
and decreased pigmentation of hair, and maturation of the face. The
height age was 5.5 years; the bone age was 7 years. There was a decided improvement in her general condition. Menarche occurred at 14
years. The ultimate height was 155 cm (61 in). She graduated from high
school. The disorder was well controlled with daily l-­thyroxine.

A

B

Fig. 603.4 A, This 12-­yr-­old male with hypothyroidism has short stat-

ure (108 cm, <3rd percentile), generalized myxedema, sleepy expression, protuberant abdomen, and coarse hair. Body proportions are immature for his age (1.25:1). B, Same boy 4 months after treatment. His
height increased by 4 cm, and there is a marked change in body habitus
owing to loss of myxedema, improved muscle tone, and bright facial
expression. (From LaFranchi SH. Hypothyroidism. Pediatr Clin North
Am. 1979;26:33–51.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3410 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
and firm, with a rubbery consistency and pebbly (bosselated) surface. Weight gain is mainly caused by fluid retention (myxedema),
not true adiposity. Myxedematous changes of the skin, constipation,
cold intolerance, decreased energy, and an increased need for sleep
develop insidiously. School performance usually does not suffer, even
in severely hypothyroid children. Additional features may include bradycardia, muscle weakness or cramps, nerve entrapment, and ataxia.
Skeletal maturation is delayed, and the degree of delay reflects the
duration of the hypothyroidism. Adolescents typically have delayed
puberty. Older adolescent females may have menometrorrhagia, and
some may develop galactorrhea because of increased TRH, which
stimulates prolactin secretion. In fact, long-­standing primary hypothyroidism can result in enlargement of the pituitary gland, sometimes
leading to headaches and vision problems. This is believed to result
from thyrotroph hyperplasia but may be mistaken for a pituitary tumor,
particularly a prolactinoma if prolactin is elevated (see Chapter 595).
Rarely, young children with profound hypothyroidism may develop
secondary sex characteristics (pseudoprecocious puberty), including breast development or vaginal bleeding in females and testicular
enlargement in males. It is hypothesized that this phenomenon results
from abnormally high concentrations of TSH binding and stimulating
the follicle-­stimulating hormone receptor.
Laboratory abnormalities in hypothyroidism may include hyponatremia, macrocytic anemia, hypercholesterolemia, and elevated
creatine phosphokinase. Table 603.5 lists complications of severe hypothyroidism, all of which normalize with adequate replacement of T4.

Diagnostic Studies

Children with suspected hypothyroidism should undergo measurement of serum TSH and free T4. Because the normal range for thyroid tests varies by age and is different in children than in adults, it
is important to interpret results using age-­specific reference ranges
(see Table 603.3). Detection of autoantibodies to thyroglobulin or
TPO is diagnostic of autoimmune thyroiditis. Measurement of urine
iodine can confirm excess iodine exposure, if suspected. In cases of
goiter resulting from autoimmune thyroiditis, ultrasonography typically shows diffuse enlargement and heterogeneous echotexture, but

ultrasonography generally is not indicated unless the physical exam
raises suspicion for a thyroid nodule. A bone age x-­ray at diagnosis
may suggest the duration and severity of hypothyroidism based on the
degree of bone age delay.

Treatment and Prognosis

l-­T4 is the treatment for children with hypothyroidism. The dose on a
weight basis gradually decreases with age. For children ages 1-­3 years,
the average daily l-­T4 dose is 4-­6 μg/kg; for ages 3-­10 years, 3-­5 μg/kg;
and for ages 10-­16 years, 2-­4 μg/kg. Treatment should be monitored
by measuring serum TSH every 4-­6 months and 4-­6 weeks after any
change in dosage, and TSH should be maintained in the age-­specific
reference range. In young children (under age 3 years), serum free T4
should also be measured and ideally maintained in the upper half of
the age-­specific reference range. In older children with primary hypothyroidism, serum free T4 need not be measured routinely but may
be helpful in certain situations, such as to assess for poor medication
adherence. In children with central hypothyroidism, in which TSH
levels by definition do not reflect systemic thyroid status, serum free
T4 alone should be monitored and maintained in the upper half of the
age-­specific reference range.
During the first year of treatment, deterioration of schoolwork, poor
sleeping habits, restlessness, short attention span, and behavioral problems may develop. However, these issues are transient and more easily
managed if families are forewarned about them. Some practitioners
feel that these symptoms may be partially ameliorated by starting at
a lower dose of l-­T4 and advancing slowly. The development of persistent headaches or vision changes should prompt an evaluation for
pseudotumor cerebri, a rare complication after initiation of l-­T4 treatment in older children (age 8-­13 years).
In older children, after catch-­up growth is complete, the growth rate
provides a good index of the adequacy of therapy. In children with long-­
standing hypothyroidism, catch-­up growth may be incomplete, and final
adult height may be irremediably compromised (see Fig. 603.4).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Table 603.5  Clinical Presentation and Implications of Hypothyroidism
PRESENTATION

SIGNS AND IMPLICATIONS

General metabolism

Weight gain, cold intolerance,
fatigue

Increase in body mass index, low metabolic rate, myxedema,* hypothermia*

Cardiovascular

Fatigue on exertion, shortness of
breath

Dyslipidemia, bradycardia, hypertension, endothelial dysfunction or increased
intima–media thickness,* diastolic dysfunction,* pericardial effusion,*
hyperhomocysteinemia,* electrocardiogram changes*

Neurosensory

Hoarseness of voice, decreased
taste, vision, or hearing

Neuropathy, cochlear dysfunction, decreased olfactory and gustatory sensitivity

Neurologic and
psychiatric

Impaired memory, paresthesia,
mood impairment

Impaired cognitive function, delayed relaxation of tendon reflexes, depression,*
dementia,* ataxia,* carpal tunnel syndrome, and other nerve entrapment
syndromes,* myxedema coma*

Gastrointestinal

Constipation

Reduced esophageal motility, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease,* ascites (very rare)

Endocrinologic

Infertility and subfertility, menstrual
disturbance, galactorrhea

Goiter, glucose metabolism dysregulation, infertility, sexual dysfunction, increased
prolactin, pituitary hyperplasia*

Musculoskeletal

Muscle weakness, muscle cramps,
arthralgia

Creatine phosphokinase elevation, Hoffman syndrome,* osteoporotic fracture*
(most probably caused by overtreatment)

Hemostasis and
hematologic

Bleeding, fatigue

Mild anemia, acquired von Willebrand disease,* decreased protein C and S,*
increased red cell distribution width,* increased mean platelet volume*

Skin and hair

Dry skin, hair loss

Coarse skin, loss of lateral eyebrows,* yellow palms of the hand,* alopecia areata*

Electrolytes and
kidney function

Deterioration of kidney function

Decreased estimated glomerular filtration rate, hyponatremia*

*Uncommon presentation.
From Chaker L, Bianco AC, Jonklaas J, et al. Hypothyroidism. Lancet. 2017;390:1550–1560, Table 1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 604 u Thyroiditis 3411

Chapter 604

Thyroiditis
Jessica R. Smith and Ari J. Wassner
Thyroiditis refers to inflammation of the thyroid gland. Thyroiditis can
be acute or chronic and can be categorized by etiology, pathology, and/or
clinical features. Painful thyroiditis is typically due to infection or trauma,
whereas painless thyroiditis is often autoimmune-­mediated or due to drug
exposure.
Depending on the etiology and phase of illness, patients with thyroiditis may be euthyroid, hypothyroid, or thyrotoxic. The classic pattern of
thyroid function changes in transient forms of thyroiditis is thyrotoxicosis followed by hypothyroidism and then restoration of euthyroidism. In
some cases, hypothyroidism can persist after transient thyroiditis. The thyrotoxicosis caused by thyroiditis is not due to increased thyroid hormone
synthesis (in contrast to Graves disease), but rather release of preformed
thyroid hormone from the damaged gland, which can last up to 60 days.
Treatment for patients with thyroiditis is directed at alleviating symptoms of pain and symptoms of thyrotoxicosis such as tachycardia, palpations, and tremors. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
usually alleviate thyroid pain effectively, but a short course of steroids
(prednisone) can be considered if pain is severe. Because the thyrotoxicosis is caused by the release of preformed thyroid hormone, antithyroid
drugs (which block thyroid hormone synthesis) are ineffective. Instead,
treatment with β blockers (atenolol or propranolol) may be used to control
cardiovascular symptoms until thyrotoxicosis resolves. Thyroid function
tests should be monitored every 6-­8 weeks until they normalize. If hypothyroidism is prolonged or symptomatic, replacement with levothyroxine
may be initiated.

THYROIDITIS WITH PAIN

Acute infectious (suppurative) thyroiditis is uncommon in children and
typically is preceded by a respiratory infection or pharyngitis. The most
common pathogenic organisms are α-­hemolytic streptococci and Staphylococcus aureus, followed by gram-­negative organisms and anaerobic
bacteria. Other pathogens, including mycobacteria, fungi, and pneumocystis, cause more indolent infection and occur in immunocompromised
patients. Abscess formation can occur, and the left thyroid lobe is more
commonly affected than the right. Recurrent episodes or detection of
mixed bacterial flora suggest that the infection arises from a piriform
sinus fistula or, less commonly, from a thyroglossal duct remnant. Acute
infectious thyroiditis is characterized by acute onset of neck pain, thyroid
tenderness, swelling, erythema, dysphagia, and decreased range of motion
of the neck. Fever, chills, sore throat, and leukocytosis are common. Thyroid function is usually normal, but thyrotoxicosis can occur. A suspected
abscess can be assessed by thyroid ultrasound, and fine needle aspiration
can help identify the responsible microorganism. Treatment of a thyroid
abscess includes incision and drainage and administration of parenteral
antibiotics. After the infection subsides, a CT scan with contrast may be
obtained to identify a fistulous tract that may require surgical resection.
Subacute thyroiditis (de Quervain disease, subacute granulomatous
thyroiditis) is believed to have a viral or postviral etiology and is usually transient. It typically presents with low-­grade fever, minimal thyroid tenderness, and laboratory evidence of thyrotoxicosis (suppressed
TSH and elevated T4 and T3). Mild symptoms of thyrotoxicosis may be
present, but radioiodine uptake is depressed in the thyrotoxic phase.
The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) is increased. The course is
variable but usually follows the classic pattern of thyrotoxicosis, hypothyroidism, and finally resolution to euthyroidism, usually occurring
over several months. There is a strong association with HLA-­B35.
Radiation thyroiditis can occur after treatment with radioactive iodine or external beam radiation. Thyroid pain and tenderness
develop after 2-­5 days because of radiation-­induced destruction of the
thyroid follicular cells and subsequent release of preformed thyroid
hormone. The neck pain is responsive to antiinflammatory therapies.

Palpation-­or trauma-­induced thyroiditis can result from direct
trauma to the thyroid gland, typically from surgery, accidental trauma,
biopsy, or rarely, vigorous palpation.

THYROIDITIS WITHOUT PAIN
Autoimmune Thyroiditis (Hashimoto Thyroiditis,
Chronic Lymphocytic Thyroiditis)

Autoimmune thyroiditis is the most common cause of thyroid disease
in children and adolescents and accounts for many of the formerly designated adolescent or simple goiters. It is also the most common cause
of acquired hypothyroidism, with or without goiter. Between 1 and 2%
of school-­age children and 6–8% of adolescents have positive thyroid
autoantibodies as evidence of autoimmune thyroid disease.

Etiology

This typical organ-­specific autoimmune disease results from a combination of inherited susceptibility in genes involved in immunoregulation and from environmental triggers, both poorly characterized. Early
in the disease, there may be thyroid hyperplasia only. This is followed
by infiltration of lymphocytes and plasma cells into thyroid follicles
and formation of lymphoid follicles with germinal centers. Chronic
inflammation eventually leads to follicular fibrosis and atrophy. Certain
human leukocyte antigen (HLA) haplotypes (HLA-­DR4, HLA-­DR5)
are associated with an increased risk of goiter and thyroiditis, and others (HLA-­DR3) are associated with the atrophic variant of thyroiditis.
A variety of different autoantibodies to thyroid antigens are also present.
Circulating antibodies to thyroperoxidase (TPO-­Abs) or thyroglobulin
(Tg-­Abs) are detectable in most children with autoimmune thyroiditis and
many patients with Graves disease. TPO-­Abs are involved in activation of
the complement cascade and antibody-­dependent, cell-­mediated cytotoxicity. Tg-­Abs do not appear to play a role in the autoimmune destruction of
the gland. TSH receptor-­blocking antibodies (TRBAbs) may cause thyroid
atrophy and have been demonstrated in 18% of patients with severe hypothyroidism (TSH >20 mU/L) caused by autoimmune thyroiditis.

Clinical Manifestations

Autoimmune thyroiditis is 4-­6 times more common in females than in
males. It can occur during the first 3 years of life but becomes more common after 6 years of age and reaches its peak incidence during adolescence.
The most common clinical manifestations are goiter and growth deceleration. Goiter is primarily caused by thyroid inflammation and fibrosis, and
it can appear insidiously and may be variable in size. In most patients,
the thyroid is diffusely enlarged, firm, and nontender. In some patients
the gland may be asymmetric. Most affected children are euthyroid and
asymptomatic. Children who develop hypothyroidism may be symptomatic, but others may have no symptoms despite laboratory evidence of
overt hypothyroidism. In some cases, autoimmune thyroiditis can cause
transient thyroiditis as a result of autoimmune thyroid destruction (so-­
called Hashitoxicosis). Such children may present with manifestations of
thyrotoxicosis, such as tremulousness, irritability, increased sweating, and
hyperactivity. Ophthalmopathy can occur in autoimmune thyroiditis even
in the absence of Graves disease, although this is rare in childhood.
The clinical course of autoimmune thyroiditis is variable. Goiter may
persist or regress spontaneously. Most children who are euthyroid at
presentation remain euthyroid, but a subset of patients develop hypothyroidism within months or years. In children who have subclinical
hypothyroidism at diagnosis (elevated TSH, normal free thyroxine [T4]),
approximately 35% revert to euthyroidism, 50% continue to have subclinical hypothyroidism, and approximately 15% develop overt hypothyroidism (elevated serum TSH, subnormal free T4) within 5 years. There are few
reliable predictors of progression to hypothyroidism, so periodic monitoring of TSH levels is indicated in children with autoimmune thyroiditis.
Familial clusters of autoimmune thyroiditis are common, and the
incidence in siblings or parents of affected children may be as high as
25%. The concurrence within families of patients with autoimmune
thyroiditis and Graves disease reflects a fundamental pathophysiologic
relationship among these autoimmune thyroid disorders.
Autoimmune thyroiditis is associated with other autoimmune disorders.
Autoimmune thyroiditis occurs in 10% of patients with type 1 autoimmune polyglandular syndrome (APS-­1), characterized by autoimmune

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3412 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
polyendocrinopathy, candidiasis, and ectodermal dysplasia (APECED),
a rare autosomal recessive disorder caused by pathogenic variants in the
autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene (see Chapter 608). Autoimmune thyroiditis occurs in 70% of patients with type 2 autoimmune polyglandular syndrome (APS-­2), including type 1 diabetes mellitus, autoimmune
primary adrenal insufficiency, pernicious anemia, vitiligo, and alopecia.
TPO-­Abs are found in approximately 20% of White and 4% of Black children with type 1 diabetes mellitus. The onset of APS-­2 typically occurs in
late childhood or early adulthood. Its cause is unknown but may be related
to predisposing genetic factors shared among these autoimmune conditions (see Chapter 608). Autoimmune thyroiditis has also been described
in children with immunodysregulation polyendocrinopathy enteropathy X-­linked (IPEX) syndrome, including early-­onset diabetes and colitis
(see Chapter 608).
Autoimmune thyroiditis is common in patients with celiac disease
or certain chromosomal disorders, particularly Turner syndrome
(8–30%) and trisomy 21 (7–10%). Males with Klinefelter syndrome
also appear to be at increased risk for autoimmune thyroid disease.
Table 604.1 compares the characteristics of autoimmune thyroiditis
to other forms of thyroiditis.

Laboratory and Imaging Findings

Thyroid function tests are often normal. Elevation of serum TSH indicates
hypothyroidism, which may be subclinical (normal free T4) or overt (low
free T4). TPO-­Abs are present in most children with autoimmune thyroiditis. Tg-­Abs are present in many adolescents but are somewhat less
sensitive in young children. Testing for both antibodies will detect about
95% of children with autoimmune thyroiditis. Antibody levels are lower
in children than in adults, so repeated measurements of borderline levels
may be indicated. Measurement of thyroid autoantibody levels is useful
only for diagnosing autoimmune thyroiditis; antibody levels do not correlate with thyroid function and should not be monitored routinely after
the initial diagnosis. In adolescent females with overt hypothyroidism,
measurement of TSH receptor antibodies may identify patients at future
risk of having babies with transient congenital hypothyroidism caused by
transplacental passage of TRBAbs.
Thyroid scintigraphy and ultrasonography usually are not necessary for the diagnosis of autoimmune thyroiditis. If performed, thyroid scintigraphy reveals decreased radioisotope uptake that is patchy
and irregular. Thyroid ultrasonography shows diffusely heterogeneous
echogenicity and frequently an increased number of hyperplastic,
benign-­appearing cervical lymph nodes. Thyroid ultrasound is indicated for patients with a palpable thyroid nodule or significant thyroid
asymmetry.

Treatment

If hypothyroidism is overt (elevated TSH with low free T4) or symptomatic, treatment with levothyroxine is indicated at doses specific to
size and age. Goiter may decrease in size but can persist for years. In a
euthyroid patient, treatment with levothyroxine is unlikely to significantly decrease the goiter’s size, and doses of levothyroxine sufficient to
suppress TSH should be avoided because of potential adverse effects.
Because autoimmune thyroiditis is self-­limited in some instances, the
need for continued therapy may be reevaluated periodically, particularly after growth and pubertal development are complete. Untreated
euthyroid patients should have periodic monitoring for risk of progression to hypothyroidism. There is some controversy about the
management of patients with subclinical hypothyroidism. Subclinical
hypothyroidism has not been demonstrated to have clinically significant adverse effects, but studies are small and of limited quality. Therefore observation without treatment is acceptable, but some clinicians
prefer to treat until growth and puberty are complete and then reevaluate their thyroid function.

OTHER CAUSES OF THYROIDITIS

Painless thyroiditis (silent thyroiditis) is characterized by transient thyrotoxicosis, followed sometimes by hypothyroidism, and then recovery.
It accounts for 1–5% of cases of thyrotoxicosis. It can also occur in the
postpartum period and in response to certain types of drugs.
Drug-­induced thyroiditis can be caused by medications including
lithium, amiodarone, interferon-­α, interleukin-­2, and tyrosine kinase
inhibitors. Patients taking lithium are susceptible to both lithium-­
induced hypothyroidism and painless thyroiditis. The antiarrhythmic
drug amiodarone contains a high concentration of iodine and can
cause two types of thyrotoxicosis. Type 1 is caused by increased synthesis of thyroid hormone (hyperthyroidism), typically occurs in patients
with underlying thyroid autoimmunity, and is amenable to treatment
with antithyroid drugs (methimazole). Type 2 is a destructive thyroiditis causing excessive release of preformed thyroid hormone, which can
be treated with glucocorticoids (prednisone).
Fibrous thyroiditis (invasive or Riedel thyroiditis) is quite rare in
children and is characterized by extensive fibrosis and macrophage
and eosinophil infiltration of the thyroid gland. The thyroid becomes
enlarged, hard, and affixed to surrounding structures. Thyroid function tests are normal, and a biopsy is required to confirm the diagnosis.
Glucocorticoids may alleviate symptoms.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Table 604.1  Characteristics of Thyroiditis Syndromes
CHARACTERISTIC

AUTOIMMUNE
THYROIDITIS

PAINLESS
THYROIDITIS

SUBACUTE
THYROIDITIS

ACUTE INFECTIOUS
THYROIDITIS

FIBROUS
THYROIDITIS

Sex ratio (F:M)

4-­6:1

2:1

5:1

1:1

3-­4:1

Cause

Autoimmune

Autoimmune

Unknown (probably
viral)

Infectious (bacterial)

Unknown

Pathologic findings

Lymphocytic
infiltration, germinal
centers, fibrosis

Lymphocytic
infiltration

Giant cells,
granulomas

Abscess formation

Dense fibrosis

Thyroid function

Usually euthyroidism;
some
hypothyroidism

Thyrotoxicosis,
hypothyroidism, or
both

Thyrotoxicosis,
hypothyroidism, or
both

Usually euthyroidism

Usually euthyroidism

TPO antibodies

Present, persistent

Present, persistent

Low titer, absent, or
transient

Absent

Usually present

ESR

Normal

Normal

High

High

Normal

123I uptake

Usually low

Low

Low

Normal

Low or normal

ESR, Erythrocyte sedimentation rate; 123I, iodine 123; TPO, thyroid peroxidase.
Data from Farwell AP, Braverman LE. Inflammatory thyroid disorders. Otolaryngol Clin North Am. 1996;4:541–556.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 605 u Goiter 3413

Chapter 605

Goiter
Jessica R. Smith and Ari J. Wassner
A goiter is an enlargement of the thyroid gland. Average thyroid volume
is approximately 1 mL at birth and increases with age and body mass
index. For clinical assessment of thyroid size, the “rule of thumb” states
that in older children (>5 years) each lobe of the thyroid gland is approximately the size of the distal phalanx of the child’s thumb. Children with
an enlarged thyroid can have normal thyroid function (euthyroidism),
underproduction of thyroid hormone (hypothyroidism), or overproduction of thyroid hormone (hyperthyroidism). Most goiters are discovered
by the patient or a caregiver or on physical examination. Detection of a
goiter should prompt an investigation of its cause and assessment of thyroid function.
Goiter may be congenital or acquired, endemic or sporadic. Goiter
often results from increased pituitary secretion of thyroid-­stimulating
hormone (TSH) in response to decreased circulating levels of thyroid
hormone. The most common causes of pediatric goiter are inflammation (autoimmune thyroiditis) and, in endemic areas, iodine deficiency
(endemic goiter). Other causes include inborn errors in thyroid hormone synthesis (dyshormonogenesis), maternal ingestion of antithyroid
drugs, goitrogens, abnormal activation of the TSH receptor by circulating antibodies (TRSAb) in Graves disease or by genetic gain-­of-­function
pathogenic variants, or disorders of inappropriate TSH secretion. Thyroid
enlargement can also result from thyroid nodules or infiltrative processes.

605.1 Congenital Goiter
Ari J. Wassner and Jessica R. Smith
Congenital goiter usually results from a defect in fetal thyroxine (T4)
synthesis that leads to neonatal hypothyroidism. This defect may be
intrinsic to the fetal thyroid or may be caused by transplacental transfer from the mother of substances that decrease fetal thyroid hormone synthesis. Antithyroid drugs (methimazole or propylthiouracil)
administered during pregnancy to treat maternal thyrotoxicosis cross
the placenta and can interfere with fetal synthesis of thyroid hormone.
The neonatal consequences are most severe when overtreatment with
antithyroid drugs causes concomitant hypothyroidism in the mother,
which reduces the supply of maternal thyroid hormone to the fetus.
Fetal effects can occur even with low doses of antithyroid drugs; therefore infants born to women treated with such drugs in the third trimester should undergo serum thyroid studies at birth, even if they appear
clinically euthyroid. Levothyroxine treatment may be indicated for
severe hypothyroidism or to reduce the size of goiter that causes airway
obstruction. Hypothyroidism caused by maternal antithyroid drugs
is transient and resolves once the antithyroid drug has been excreted
by the neonate, usually after 1-­2 weeks. Like antithyroid drugs, other
medications containing large amounts of iodine can cause congenital
goiter, including amiodarone and some cough preparations.
In cases of congenital goiter and hypothyroidism in which no cause is
identifiable from the maternal or medication history, an intrinsic defect in
synthesis of thyroid hormone (dyshormonogenesis) should be suspected.
Such disorders are caused by genetic defects in one of the proteins critical to thyroid hormone synthesis and are usually inherited in autosomal
recessive fashion. Neonatal screening programs detect congenital hypothyroidism caused by such a defect in about 1 in 25,000 infants. Treatment
with levothyroxine should be initiated immediately. If a specific defect is
suspected, genetic testing to identify a mutation may be considered (see
Chapter 603). Monitoring subsequent pregnancies with ultrasonography
can be useful to detect fetal goiter (see Chapter 117).
Iodine deficiency is an important cause of congenital goiter that is rare
in countries that have adopted universal salt iodization, but iodine deficiency persists in endemic areas (see Chapter 605.3). Severe maternal

iodine deficiency early in pregnancy can cause neurologic damage during
fetal development because maternal hypothyroidism reduces the transfer
of maternal thyroid hormones that typically protect neurodevelopment in
a fetus unable to synthesize its own thyroid hormone.
Goiter is almost always present in the infant with neonatal Graves disease. Thyroid enlargement results from transplacental passage of maternal
TSH receptor-­stimulating antibodies that promote thyroid hyperplasia
(see Chapter 606.2). These goiters usually are not large, and the infant
manifests clinical symptoms of hyperthyroidism. The diagnosis of maternal Graves disease is usually known but occasionally may be discovered by
evaluating unexpected neonatal hyperthyroidism. Activating pathogenic
variants of the TSH receptor are a rare cause of congenital goiter with
hyperthyroidism.
A very large congenital goiter of any cause can lead to tracheal compression and respiratory distress that interferes with feeding and can even be
fatal. Therefore intervening to reduce the size of a large fetal goiter may be
necessary before delivery. Treatment should be directed at the underlying
cause. Iodine deficiency should be treated if present. In pregnant women
treated with antithyroid drugs, reducing the dose of maternal medication
is appropriate. In severe cases, fetal goiter caused by fetal hypothyroidism
(including dyshormonogenesis) may be reduced by intraamniotic injections of levothyroxine. If the fetal goiter is caused by fetal hyperthyroidism
(e.g., fetal Graves disease), treatment with antithyroid drugs administered
to the mother is indicated. Large obstructing fetal goiters are often managed with the ex utero intrapartum treatment (EXIT) procedure during
elective delivery (see Chapter 117). When postnatal respiratory obstruction is severe, endotracheal intubation, hormone therapy, and occasionally
partial thyroidectomy is indicated (Fig. 605.1).
When a palpable congenital goiter is lobulated, asymmetric, firm, or
unusually large, a teratoma in or near the thyroid must be considered
(see Chapter 607).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

605.2 Intratracheal Goiter
Ari J. Wassner and Jessica R. Smith
One of the many potential ectopic locations of thyroid tissue is within the
trachea. When present, intraluminal thyroid tissue lies beneath the tracheal mucosa and is often continuous with the normally located extratracheal thyroid gland. Both eutopic and ectopic thyroid tissue are susceptible
to goitrous enlargement. Therefore when airway obstruction is associated
with a goiter, it must be ascertained whether the obstruction is extratracheal
or intratracheal. If obstructive manifestations are mild, administration of
levothyroxine usually decreases the size of the goiter. When symptoms are
severe, surgical removal of the intratracheal goiter is indicated.

A

B

Fig. 605.1 Congenital goiter in infancy. A, Large congenital goiter in

an infant born to a mother with thyrotoxicosis who had been treated
with iodides and methimazole during pregnancy. B, A different infant, 6
wk old, with increasing respiratory distress and cervical mass since birth.
Notice the anterior deviation and posterior compression of the trachea.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3414 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System

605.3 Endemic Goiter and Cretinism
Ari J. Wassner and Jessica R. Smith

ETIOLOGY

Goiter caused by iodine deficiency is termed endemic goiter, whereas cretinism refers to the clinical manifestations of severe hypothyroidism in
early life. The association of dietary iodine deficiency with endemic goiter
and cretinism is well established. The thyroid gland can overcome a moderate deficiency of iodine by increasing the efficiency of thyroid hormone
synthesis. This increased activity is achieved by compensatory thyroid
hypertrophy and hyperplasia (goiter). In cases of severe iodine deficiency,
these compensatory mechanisms are insufficient, and hypothyroidism can
result. The World Health Organization estimates that nearly 2 billion individuals have insufficient iodine intake, including one third of the world’s
school-­age children. Thus despite significant progress in the global effort
to reduce iodine deficiency, it remains a leading cause of preventable intellectual disability worldwide.
Because seawater is rich in iodine, endemic goiter is rare in coastal
populations that consume much of their diet from the sea. In areas
of iodine deficiency, iodized salt provides excellent prophylaxis, and
endemic goiter has effectively disappeared in the United States and
other countries that have introduced salt iodization programs. The U.S.
recommended dietary allowance of iodine is:
• Infants under 6 months: 110 μg/day
• Infants 7-­12 months: 130 μg/day
• Children 1-­8 years: 90 μg/day
• Children 9-­13 years: 120 μg/day
• Children 14 years and older: 150 μg/day
• Pregnant women: 220 μg/day
• Lactating women: 290 μg/day
Although the overall dietary iodine intake in the United States is considered adequate, recent data indicate that the median urinary iodine
concentration among pregnant U.S. women has dropped to <150 μg/L
(mild iodine deficiency). This highlights the re-­emerging risk of iodine
deficiency even in industrialized countries. These risks can be mitigated by the continued monitoring of iodine status, the adjustment of
salt iodization levels, and the targeted supplementation of vulnerable
subpopulations (e.g., promoting iodine-­containing prenatal vitamins).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

In mild iodine deficiency, thyroid enlargement generally is not noticeable except when demand for thyroid hormone synthesis is increased,
such as during rapid growth in adolescence and pregnancy. In regions
of moderate iodine deficiency, goiter in school children can disappear
with maturity and reappear during pregnancy or lactation. Iodine-­
deficient goiter is more common in girls than in boys. In areas of severe
iodine deficiency, nearly half the population may have large goiters,
and endemic cretinism is common (Fig. 605.2).
Serum T4 levels are often low in individuals with endemic goiter,
although clinical hypothyroidism is rare. Despite low serum T4 levels,
serum TSH concentrations are often normal or only mildly increased
because of the elevated circulating levels of T3 produced in response to
iodine deficiency.
Endemic cretinism is the most severe consequence of iodine deficiency
and occurs only in association with endemic goiter. The term endemic cretinism includes two distinct but overlapping syndromes (neurologic and
myxedematous). The incidence of the two syndromes varies among different populations, but both syndromes are found in all endemic areas,
and some individuals have intermediate or mixed features.
The neurologic syndrome is characterized by intellectual disability; deaf-­mutism; disturbances in standing and gait; and pyramidal signs such as clonus of the foot, Babinski sign, and patellar
hyperreflexia. Affected persons have a goiter but minimally impaired
thyroid function and have normal pubertal development and adult
stature. Persons with the myxedematous syndrome also have intellectual disability, deafness, and neurologic symptoms. In contrast
to the neurologic type, they also have delayed growth and pubertal
development and myxedema. Serum T4 levels are low, TSH levels are

Fig. 605.2 A 14-­yr-­old male with a large nodular goiter was seen in
2004, in an area of severe iodine-­deficiency disorders in northern Morocco. He had tracheal and esophageal compression and hoarseness,
probably as a result of damage to the recurrent laryngeal nerves. (From
Zimmermann MB, Jooste PL, Pandav CS. Iodine-­deficiency disorders.
Lancet. 2008;372:1251–1262, Fig. 2.)

markedly elevated, goiter is absent, and ultrasound demonstrates thyroid atrophy.

PATHOGENESIS

The pathogenesis of the neurologic syndrome is attributed to maternal
iodine deficiency and hypothyroidism during pregnancy, leading to fetal
and postnatal hypothyroidism. Maternal thyroid hormone is critical for
early fetal neurodevelopment. Thyroid hormone receptors are expressed
in the fetal brain as early as 7 weeks of gestation. Although the fetal thyroid gland does not produce significant amounts of thyroid hormone until
midgestation, as early as 6 weeks there is measurable T4 in the coelomic
fluid that is of maternal origin. In addition, there is transplacental passage
of maternal thyroid hormone into the fetus throughout gestation, which
ameliorates the neurologic effects of fetal hypothyroidism in the second
half of pregnancy. Thus maternal iodine deficiency affects fetal neurodevelopment throughout pregnancy. However, iodine intake after birth is
often sufficient for the infant to maintain (near-­)normal thyroid function.
The pathogenesis of the myxedematous syndrome and its persistent postnatal hypothyroidism is not well understood. Multiple environmental factors have been implicated (Table 605.1), as have thyroid
autoimmunity and TSH receptor-­blocking antibodies, but studies are
conflicting, and the pathogenesis remains obscure.

TREATMENT

The optimal treatment of endemic goiter is prevention by ensuring iodine
sufficiency in women before pregnancy. A single intramuscular injection
of iodinated poppy seed oil administered to women prevents iodine deficiency during future pregnancies for approximately 5 years. This therapy
is also effective in children younger than 4 years with myxedematous cretinism. However, older children and adults respond poorly, indicating a
progressive inability of the thyroid gland to synthesize hormone, and
these patients require treatment with levothyroxine. Large-­scale prevention efforts include universal salt iodization in many countries, as well as

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 605 u Goiter 3415
Table 605.1  Goitrogens and Their Mechanisms
GOITROGEN

MECHANISM

FOODS
Cassava, lima beans,
linseed, sorghum, sweet
potato

Contain cyanogenic glucosides that
are metabolized to thiocyanates that
compete with iodine for uptake by
the thyroid

Cruciferous vegetables
(cabbage, kale, cauliflower,
broccoli, turnips)

Contain glucosinolates; metabolites
compete with iodine for uptake by
the thyroid

Soy, millet

Flavonoids impair thyroid peroxidase
activity

INDUSTRIAL POLLUTANTS
Perchlorate
Competitive inhibitor of the sodium-­
iodide symporter, decreasing iodide
transport into the thyroid
Others (e.g., disulfides
from coal processes)

Reduce thyroidal iodine uptake

Smoking

Smoking during breastfeeding is
asso­ciated with reduced iodine
concentrations in breast milk; high
serum concentration of thiocyanate
from smoking might compete with
iodine for active transport into the
secretory epithelium of the lactating
breast

NUTRIENTS
Selenium deficiency

Accumulated peroxides can damage
the thyroid, and deiodinase deficiency
impairs thyroid hormone activation

Iron deficiency

Reduces heme-­dependent thyroperoxi­
dase activity in the thyroid and may
blunt the efficacy of iodine prophylaxis

Vitamin A deficiency

Increases TSH stimulation and
goiter through decreased vitamin
A–mediated suppression of the
pituitary TSH-­β gene

TSH, Thyroid-­stimulating hormone.
From Zimmermann MB, Jooste PL, Pandav CS. Iodine-­deficiency disorders. Lancet.
2008;372:1251–1262, Table 1.

iodination of irrigation water in some areas. Nevertheless, political, economic, and practical obstacles have limited iodization efforts in many
parts of the world.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

In a normal thyroid gland, the acute intake of large doses of iodine
inhibits thyroid hormone synthesis (Wolff-­Chaikoff effect). However,
this effect is short-­lived and normally does not lead to hypothyroidism.
If iodine administration continues, an autoregulatory mechanism limits iodide uptake by the thyroid, allowing thyroid hormone synthesis
to resume. This “escape” from the Wolff-­Chaikoff effect may not occur
in individuals with underlying thyroid abnormalities (such as autoimmune thyroid disease or thyroid irradiation) or in neonates, potentially
leading to hypothyroidism and iodine-­induced goiter.

Iodine-­Deficiency Goiter

Iodine deficiency is the most common cause of goiter worldwide, but salt
iodization has nearly eradicated this entity in the United States and many
other countries. A severely iodine-­restricted diet can result in a goiter and
hypothyroidism in children, adolescents, or neonates born to mothers with
severe iodine deficiency (urine iodine concentration <50 mcg/L). Children
with moderate or severe iodine deficiency and goiter have subclinical or
mild hypothyroidism, but their serum T3 concentrations may be normal or
high because of preferential thyroidal T3 secretion. Acquired iodine deficiency can be treated with either iodine or levothyroxine supplementation.

Goitrogens

Certain foods contain goitrogenic substances (see Table 605.1). When
consumed alone, these substances are unlikely to cause goiter but can
contribute to goiter formation when iodine intake is marginal.
Lithium carbonate can cause goiter and hypothyroidism in children.
Lithium decreases T4 and T3 synthesis and release; the mechanism producing the goiter or hypothyroidism is similar to that described for
iodide goiter. Lithium and iodide act synergistically to produce goiter,
so their combined use should be avoided.
Amiodarone, a drug used to treat cardiac arrhythmias, can cause
thyroid dysfunction with goiter because it is rich in iodine. Amiodarone
can often cause hypothyroidism, particularly in patients with underlying
autoimmune thyroid disease. In other patients, it can cause thyrotoxicosis through either transient thyroiditis or the Jod-­Basedow effect.

SIMPLE GOITER (COLLOID GOITER)

Some children with euthyroid goiters have a simple goiter, a condition of
unknown cause not associated with thyroid dysfunction and not caused
by inflammation or neoplasia. Simple goiter is more common in girls,
may be familial, and has its peak incidence during adolescence. Histologic
examination of the thyroid either is normal or reveals variable follicular
size, dense colloid, and flattened epithelium. The size of the goiter is variable. It can occasionally be firm, asymmetric, or nodular. Levels of TSH are
normal, thyroid scintigraphy is normal, and thyroid antibodies are absent.
Simple goiters usually decrease in size gradually over several years, without treatment. Patients should be reevaluated periodically because some
have antibody-­negative autoimmune thyroiditis and therefore are at risk
for changes in thyroid function (see Chapter 604).

MULTINODULAR GOITER

605.4 Acquired Goiter
Jessica R. Smith and Ari J. Wassner
Acquired goiter is usually sporadic and may develop from a variety of
causes. The most common cause of acquired goiter is autoimmune thyroiditis (see Chapter 604). Other causes in children include painless sporadic thyroiditis and subacute thyroiditis (de Quervain disease; see Chapter
604). Ingestion of excess iodide or certain medications can cause goiter, as
can congenital defects in thyroid hormone synthesis. The occurrence of
goiter in siblings, onset in early life, and possible association with hypothyroidism are important clues to diagnosing congenital dyshormonogenesis.

IODIDE GOITER

Excessive iodine ingestion can result in a goiter. Large amounts of
iodine are found in certain foods (such as seaweed) and some expectorants for chronic reactive airway disease or cystic fibrosis. Some
children with iodine-­induced goiter have underlying autoimmune thyroiditis or a subclinical congenital defect in thyroid hormone synthesis.

Multinodular goiter is usually a firm goiter with a lobulated surface and
one or more palpable nodules. Areas of cystic change, hemorrhage, and
fibrosis may be present. The incidence of this condition has decreased
markedly with the use of iodine-­enriched salt. Ultrasonographic examination can reveal multiple nodules that are nonfunctioning on thyroid
scintigraphy. Thyroid function is usually normal. Some children with
autoimmune thyroiditis develop a multinodular goiter, and in such cases,
thyroid antibodies may be present, and TSH may be elevated. If hypofunctioning nodules within a multinodular goiter grow to a significant size (≥1
cm) or have suspicious sonographic features, fine needle aspiration should
be considered to rule out malignancy (see Chapter 607). Children with
McCune-­Albright syndrome or TSH receptor–activating mutations can
develop a toxic multinodular goiter, characterized by suppressed TSH,
hyperthyroidism, and multiple hyperfunctioning nodules.

TOXIC GOITER (HYPERTHYROIDISM)
See Chapter 606.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3416 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System

Chapter 606

Thyrotoxicosis
Jessica R. Smith and Ari J. Wassner
Although the terms hyperthyroidism and thyrotoxicosis are often
interchanged in the literature, they are not synonymous. Hyperthyroidism specifically refers to the synthesis and secretion of excess
thyroid hormone from the thyroid gland; in contrast, thyrotoxicosis refers to any state of excess circulating thyroid hormone (and
its clinical manifestations) regardless of its source. This distinction
is physiologically and clinically relevant because different therapies
may be indicated depending on the mechanism of thyroid hormone
excess.
Graves disease is the most common cause of hyperthyroidism
in children (Table 606.1). It is an autoimmune disorder that results
in the production of thyrotropin (TSH) receptor–stimulating antibodies (TRSAbs) that bind and activate the G protein–coupled TSH
receptor (TSHR) to cause increased thyroid hormonogenesis and
diffuse glandular growth. In infants born to mothers with Graves
disease, hyperthyroidism can be caused by transplacental passage
of TRSAbs, but this is transitory and resolves when TRSBAbs are
cleared from the neonate’s circulation. Etiologies of nonautoimmune
hyperthyroidism include hyperfunctioning thyroid nodules and
germline gain-­of-­function pathogenic variants in the TSHR (either
autosomal dominant or sporadic). Hyperthyroidism can also occur
in patients with McCune-­Albright syndrome because of an activating pathogenic variant of the stimulatory α-­subunit of the G protein. These patients can also develop a multinodular goiter. Other
rare causes of hyperthyroidism include iodine-­induced hyperthyroidism, TSH-­secreting adenomas, toxic multinodular goiters, and
hyperfunctioning thyroid carcinoma. Thyrotoxicosis not caused by
hyperthyroidism (i.e., not the result of overproduction of thyroid
hormone by the gland) can be caused by thyroiditis (see Chapter 604)
or ingestion of exogenous thyroid hormone. Choriocarcinoma,
hydatidiform mole, and struma ovarii can cause hyperthyroidism
but are rarely diagnosed in children.
Laboratory evaluation of primary thyrotoxicosis reveals suppression of serum TSH and elevation of serum total thyroxine
(T4) and/or total triiodothyronine (T3) levels. Elevated T4 and T3
with normal or elevated TSH suggests hyperthyroidism caused by
inappropriate TSH secretion, which may be caused by a dominant-­
negative pathogenic variant in thyroid hormone receptor-­β (THRB)
resulting in resistance to thyroid hormone (RTH). TSH-­secreting
pituitary tumors are extremely rare in the pediatric population.
Elevated T4 and/or T3 levels with normal TSH may also be caused
by abnormalities of thyroid hormone–binding proteins such as
thyroxine-­binding globulin excess or familial dysalbuminemic
hyperthyroxinemia. In such cases, free T4 levels are normal, and
patients are euthyroid.

606.1 Graves Disease
Jessica R. Smith and Ari J. Wassner

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Graves disease occurs in approximately 0.02% of children (1:5,000)
and is the most common cause of pediatric hyperthyroidism. It has
a peak incidence in the 11-­to 15-­year-­old age-­group, and there is

a 5:1 female:male ratio. Many children with Graves disease have a
family history of autoimmune thyroid disease. Although rare in very
young children, Graves disease has been reported between 6 weeks
and 2 years of age in children born to mothers without a history of
hyperthyroidism.

ETIOLOGY

Graves disease is a form of autoimmune thyroid disease characterized by infiltration of the thyroid gland by T-­helper cells (CD4+),
cytotoxic T cells (CD8+), and activated B lymphocytes. A postulated failure of T suppressor cells allows the expression of T helper
cells sensitized to the TSH antigen to interact with B cells, which

Table 606.1  Pathogenic Mechanisms and Causes and
Effects of Thyrotoxicosis
Thyrotoxicosis with hyperthyroidism (normal or high radioactive
iodine uptake)
EFFECT OF INCREASED THYROID STIMULATORS
TSH-­receptor antibody

Graves disease

Inappropriate TSH secretion

TSH-­secreting pituitary adenoma;
resistance to thyroid hormone β

Excess hCG secretion

Trophoblastic tumors
(choriocarcinoma or hydatidiform
mole); hyperemesis gravidarum

AUTONOMOUS THYROID FUNCTION
Activating pathogenic variant
in TSH receptor or Gsα
protein

Solitary hyperfunctioning adenoma;
multinodular goiter; familial
nonautoimmune hyperthyroidism

Thyrotoxicosis without hyperthyroidism (low radioactive iodine
uptake)
INFLAMMATION AND RELEASE OF STORED HORMONE
Autoimmune destruction of
thyroid gland

Autoimmune thyroiditis;
postpartum thyroiditis

Viral infection*

Subacute (painful) thyroiditis (de
Quervain thyroiditis)

Toxic drug effects

Drug-­induced thyroiditis
(amiodarone, lithium, interferon-­α)

Bacterial or fungal infection

Acute suppurative thyroiditis

Radiation

Radiation thyroiditis

EXTRATHYROIDAL SOURCE OF HORMONE
Excess intake of thyroid
hormone

Excess exogenous thyroid hormone
(iatrogenic or factitious)

Ectopic hyperthyroidism
(thyroid hormone produced
outside the thyroid gland)

Struma ovarii; functional thyroid
cancer

Ingestion of contaminated food

Hamburger thyrotoxicosis

EXPOSURE TO EXCESSIVE IODINE
Jod-­Basedow effect

Iodine-induced hyperthyroidism
(radiocontrast agents or iodine in
medications)

*Etiology is not definitive.
Gsα, G protein alpha subunit; hCG, human chorionic gonadotropin; TSH, thyroid-­
stimulating hormone.
Modified from De Leo S, Lee SY, Braverman LE. Hyperthyroidism. Lancet. 2016;388:906–
916, Table 1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 606 u Thyrotoxicosis

3417

Table 606.2  Conditions Associated with Graves Disease
Type 1 diabetes mellitus
Celiac disease
Autoimmune adrenal insufficiency
Vitiligo
Psoriasis
Pernicious anemia
Alopecia areata
Myasthenia gravis
Rheumatoid arthritis
Trisomy 21
Turner syndrome

differentiate into plasma cells that produce TRSAbs. TRSAbs bind
to and activate the TSHR, resulting in thyroid hyperplasia and
unregulated thyroid hormone synthesis. Some patients with Graves
disease also produce TSH receptor–blocking antibodies (TRBAbs)
that bind to and block activation of the TSHR. In these cases, the
clinical course of the disease correlates to the ratio between stimulating and blocking antibodies.
Ophthalmopathy may occur in Graves disease and appears to
be caused primarily by autoimmunity to the TSHR, which is also
expressed in orbital adipocytes and fibroblasts. TRSAb-­mediated
activation of these cells stimulates the synthesis of glycosaminoglycans and cytokines, resulting in retro-­orbital inflammation and
edema. Although 50–75% of children with Graves disease have
some eye findings, the symptoms are much milder than in adults;
significant ophthalmopathy is rare.
Graves disease is associated with specific human leukocyte antigen (HLA) haplotypes. It is also associated with other HLA-­related
disorders, such as autoimmune adrenal insufficiency, type 1 diabetes mellitus, myasthenia gravis, and celiac disease (Table 606.2).
Systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, vitiligo, idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, and pernicious anemia have
also been described in children with Graves disease. In family clusters, the condition associated most commonly with Graves disease
is autoimmune thyroiditis. Polymorphisms in the TSHR gene and
numerous immunomodulatory genes—including FOXP3, IL2RA,
CD40, CTLA4, PTPN22, and FCRL3—have also been associated
with increased susceptibility to Graves disease.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The clinical course of Graves disease is variable, and children typically take longer to remit than adults. Because symptoms develop
gradually, the interval between onset and diagnosis is typically
6-­12 months and may be longer in prepubertal children than in
adolescents.
Signs and symptoms of Graves disease in children are shown in
Figure 606.1 and Table 606.3. Tremulousness, headaches, mood
disturbances, behavioral swings, difficulties with sleep, decreased
attention span, hyperactivity, and a decline in school performance
are all common findings in childhood. Many hyperthyroid children are referred for evaluation of attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Children with hyperthyroidism may show
acceleration in growth velocity and advanced skeletal maturation.
The effect on growth may be more pronounced if hyperthyroidism
presents earlier in childhood. The onset of puberty does not appear
to be altered by hyperthyroidism, but postmenarchal females can
develop secondary amenorrhea. There may also be an increase in
appetite with either failure to gain weight or overt weight loss. Polyuria and more frequent defecation (although not usually frank diarrhea) contribute to changes in weight. Because of the increased risk

Fig. 606.1 A 15-­yr-­old female with classic Graves disease. Clinical

features include a goiter and exophthalmos. She was treated with antithyroid drugs, to which she had a good response.

of comorbid autoimmune disorders, screening for type 1 diabetes,
celiac disease, and inflammatory bowel disease should be considered in patients who present with these symptoms.
Most children with Graves disease have a diffuse goiter. The size
of the thyroid is variable, but it is typically smooth and without
nodules. A bruit can occasionally be auscultated over a markedly
enlarged gland. Ocular manifestations can produce proptosis, pain,
eyelid erythema, chemosis, decreased extraocular muscle function
and decreased visual acuity (corneal or optic nerve involvement)
(Table 606.4). In children with thyrotoxicosis and diffuse goiter,
identifying these signs of ophthalmopathy on physical examination
strongly suggests the diagnosis of Graves disease. However, stare
and lid lag are eye findings caused by increased sympathetic activity and can be seen in thyrotoxicosis of any cause, not only Graves
disease (Fig. 606.2). In general, ocular symptoms in children with
Graves disease tend to be mild and improve with the restoration of
euthyroidism.
Children with hyperthyroidism have an increase in cardiac output.
Tachycardia, palpitations, increased systolic blood pressure, and a
widened pulse pressure are common cardiac manifestations, whereas
cardiac enlargement and insufficiency and atrial fibrillation are rare
complications.
The skin is smooth and flushed, with excessive sweating. Occasionally, associated vitiligo or psoriasis can be present. Graves dermopathy, characterized by indurated, nonpitting edema often on the
anterior shins (pretibial myxedema), is rare in children. Proximal
muscular weakness may be present. Thyroid hormone stimulates
bone resorption, leading to low bone density and increased fracture
risk in patients with chronic hyperthyroidism. Bone density returns
to normal with treatment.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3418 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 606.3  Clinical Manifestation of Thyrotoxicosis
SYMPTOMS

SIGNS

Constitutional

Weight loss despite increased appetite; heat-­related
symptoms (heat intolerance, sweating, and polydipsia)

Weight loss

Neuromuscular

Tremor; nervousness; anxiety; fatigue; weakness; disturbed
sleep; poor concentration

Tremor of the extremities; hyperactivity; hyperreflexia;
pelvic and girdle muscle weakness

Cardiovascular

Palpitations

Tachycardia; systolic hypertension

Pulmonary

Dyspnea, shortness of breath

Tachypnea

Gastrointestinal

Hyperdefecation; nausea, vomiting

Abdominal tenderness

Skin

Increased perspiration

Warm and moist skin

Reproductive
Ocular (Graves
disease)

Menstrual disturbances
Diplopia; sense of irritation in the eyes; eyelid swelling; retro-­ Proptosis; eyelid retraction and lag; periorbital edema;
orbital pain or discomfort
conjunctival injection and chemosis; ophthalmoplegia

From De Leo S, Lee SY, Braverman LE. Hyperthyroidism. Lancet. 2016;388:906–916, Table 2.

Table 606.4  Clinical Assessment of the Patient with
Graves Ophthalmopathy
ACTIVITY MEASURES*
• Spontaneous retrobulbar pain
• Pain on attempted up or down gaze
• Redness of the eyelids
• Redness of the conjunctivae
• Swelling of the eyelids
• Inflammation of the caruncle and/or plica
• Conjunctival edema
SEVERITY MEASURES
• Lid aperture (distance between the lid margins in millimeters with
the patient looking in the primary position, sitting relaxed, and
with distant fixation)
• Swelling of the eyelids (absent/equivocal, moderate, severe)
• Redness of the eyelids (absent/present)
• Redness of the conjunctivae (absent/present)
• Conjunctival edema (absent, present)
• Inflammation of the caruncle or plica (absent, present)
• Exophthalmos (measured in millimeters using the same Hertel
exophthalmometer and the same intercanthal distance for an
individual patient)
• Subjective diplopia score†
• Eye muscle involvement (ductions in degrees)
• Corneal involvement (absent/punctate keratopathy/ulcer)
• Optic nerve involvement (best corrected visual acuity, color vision,
optic disc, relative afferent pupillary defect (absent/present), plus
visual fields if optic nerve compression is suspected
*Based on the classic features of inflammation in Graves ophthalmopathy.
†Subjective diplopia score: 0, no diplopia; 1, intermittent (i.e., diplopia in primary
position of gaze, when tired or when first awakening); 2, inconstant (i.e., diplopia at
extremes of gaze); 3, constant (i.e., continuous diplopia in primary or reading position).
The clinical activity score (CAS) is the sum (1 point each) of all items present; a CAS ≥3/7
indicates active ophthalmopathy.
From Davies TF, Laurberg P, Bahn RS. Hyperthyroid disorders. In: Melmed S, Polonsky
KS, Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology, 13th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Table 12.4.

Thyroid storm is an extreme form of hyperthyroidism characterized by severely elevated thyroid hormone levels, hyperthermia, tachycardia, heart failure, altered mental status, and GI symptoms (Table
606.5). If untreated, there may be rapid progression to delirium, coma,
and death. Precipitating events include trauma, infection, radioactive
iodine (RAI) treatment, or surgery.

Fig. 606.2 Retraction of upper eyelids in the primary gaze (Dalrymple
sign). (From Kanski JJ. Systemic Diseases and the Eye: Signs and Differential Diagnosis. London: Mosby; 2001.)

LABORATORY FINDINGS

In Graves disease, serum TSH is suppressed and free T4 and T3 are
elevated. Most patients with Graves disease have measurable TRSAbs
at diagnosis. TRSAbs can be measured either by a functional assay
(thyroid-­stimulating immunoglobulin [TSI]) that assesses the presence
of antibodies capable of stimulating TSHR-­mediated cyclic adenosine
monophosphate (cAMP) generation, or by a competitive binding assay
(thyrotropin-­binding inhibitory immunoglobulin [TBII]) that assesses
the presence of antibodies that bind to the TSHR, regardless of their
effect on receptor activity. In a patient with thyrotoxicosis, both assays
are highly sensitive and specific for Graves disease.
When the diagnosis cannot be established by history, physical examination, and laboratory evaluation, RAI uptake can be
measured, preferably using 123I. RAI uptake is elevated in Graves
disease, whereas it is low in other causes of thyrotoxicosis like thyroiditis or exogenous thyroid hormone ingestion. If scintigraphy
is also performed, the increased RAI uptake in Graves disease is
present diffusely throughout the gland, whereas focally increased
uptake is observed in hyperfunctioning thyroid nodules.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Elevated serum levels of T4 or free T4 and T3 in association with suppressed levels of TSH are diagnostic of thyrotoxicosis (see Table 606.1).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 606 u Thyrotoxicosis
Table 606.5  Diagnostic Criteria for Thyroid Storm
POINTS
TEMPERATURE °F (°C)
99-­99.9 (37.2-­37.7)

5

100-­100.9 (37.8-­38.2)

10

101-­101.9 (38.3-­38.8)

15

102-­102.9 (38.9-­39.4)

20

103-­103.9 (39.4-­39.9)

25

≥104.0 (>40.0)

30

CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM EFFECTS
Absent

0

Mild (agitation)

10

Moderate (delirium, psychosis, extreme lethargy)

20

Severe (seizure, coma)

30

GASTROINTESTINAL-­HEPATIC DYSFUNCTION
Absent

0

Moderate (diarrhea, nausea/vomiting, abdominal pain)

10

Severe (unexplained jaundice)

20

CARDIOVASCULAR DYSFUNCTION
Tachycardia
90-­109

5

110-­119

10

120-­129

15

130-­139

20

≥140

25

Congestive Heart Failure
Absent

0

Mild (pedal edema)

5

Moderate (bibasilar rales)

10

Severe (pulmonary edema)

15

Atrial Fibrillation
Absent

0

Present

10

Precipitating History
Absent

0

Present

10

In adults, a score ≥45 is highly suggestive of thyroid storm; a score of 25-­44 is suggestive
of impending thyroid storm; a score of <25 is unlikely to represent thyroid storm.
Data are from HB Burch, L Wartofsky. Life-­threatening thyrotoxicosis. Thyroid storm.
Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am. 1993;22:263–277. From De Leo S, Lee SY, Braverman
LE. Hyperthyroidism. Lancet. 2016;388:906–916, Table 3.

The combination of diffuse goiter and prolonged thyrotoxicosis (>8
weeks) is most often caused by Graves disease; the presence of circulating TSHR antibodies or characteristic eye or skin changes is
diagnostic.
If the etiology of thyrotoxicosis is unclear, 123I radioiodine
uptake can distinguish hyperthyroidism (increased uptake) from
other causes of thyrotoxicosis, which will determine the appropriateness of antithyroid medication. If a discrete thyroid nodule
is palpated, 123I scintigraphy should be performed to assess for a

3419

hyperfunctioning nodule. Some children with toxic multinodular
goiter may have a TSHR-­activating pathogenic variant or McCune-­
Albright syndrome. If precocious puberty, polyostotic fibrous dysplasia, or café-­au-­lait macules are present, then McCune-­Albright
syndrome is likely.
Patients with thyroid hormone resistance have elevated levels
of free T4 and T3, but levels of TSH are inappropriately elevated
or normal. They must be differentiated from patients with TSH-­
secreting pituitary tumors who have elevated serum levels of the
common α-­subunit shared by TSH, luteinizing hormone (LH),
follicle-­stimulating hormone (FSH), and human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG). Most other causes of elevated serum T4 are uncommon but can result in an erroneous diagnosis. Patients with elevated
thyroxine-­
binding globulin levels or familial dysalbuminemic
hyperthyroxinemia have high serum T4 but normal levels of free
T4 and TSH and are clinically euthyroid. Rare patients with pathogenic variants in SLC16A2 (encoding the MCT8 thyroid hormone
transporter) or THRA (encoding thyroid hormone receptor α) can
present with high serum T3, inappropriately normal or high TSH,
and low or low-­normal serum T4 concentrations.
When thyrotoxicosis is caused by exogenous thyroid hormone,
free T4 and TSH levels are the same as those seen in Graves disease, but in contrast to Graves disease, thyroid size is small, serum
thyroglobulin is very low, and 123I radioiodine uptake is suppressed.

TREATMENT
Antithyroid Drugs

In most cases, antithyroid drugs (ATDs) are the preferred initial
therapy for Graves disease in children. Alternative treatments
include radioiodine ablation (in children older than 10 years of
age) and thyroidectomy. Each therapeutic option has advantages
and disadvantages (Table 606.6). Methimazole is the first-­
line
ATD for children with Graves disease and functions by blocking
the organification of iodide necessary to synthesize thyroid hormone. Methimazole has a long serum half-­life (6-­8 hours) that
allows once-­or twice-­daily dosing. Propylthiouracil is similar to
methimazole, but its use is not recommended in children because
of its potential to cause liver failure. However, in rare instances of
severe hyperthyroidism in which methimazole cannot be used, a
short course of propylthiouracil may be offered to restore euthyroidism before definitive therapy.
Adverse reactions can occur with ATDs and range from mild
to life-­threatening. Minor adverse effects occur in approximately
10–20% of patients, and severe adverse effects occur in 2–5%. Reactions most commonly occur during the first 3 months of therapy
but can occur at any time. Transient urticaria is common and may
be managed with antihistamines or by a short period off therapy
followed by restarting ATD. Agranulocytosis is a severe adverse
reaction that occurs in 0.1–0.5% of patients and can lead to a fatal
infection. Therefore during any episode of significant fever, pharyngitis, or oral ulcers, patients should stop taking methimazole and
have an absolute neutrophil count checked. On the other hand,
transient, asymptomatic granulocytopenia (<2,000/mm3) is common in Graves disease; it is not a harbinger of agranulocytosis and
is not a reason to discontinue treatment. Other severe reactions
include hepatitis (0.2–1.0%), a lupus-­like polyarthritis syndrome,
glomerulonephritis, and antineutrophilic cytoplasmic antibody–
positive vasculitis. Severe liver disease, including liver failure
requiring transplantation, has been reported with propylthiouracil. The most common liver disease associated with methimazole
is cholestatic jaundice, which is reversible when the drug is discontinued. Patients with severe adverse effects should be treated with
radioiodine or thyroidectomy. Importantly, methimazole and propylthiouracil have been associated with congenital malformations
in infants exposed to these drugs in utero. Methimazole exposure
may be associated with aplasia cutis, omphalocele, choanal atresia,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3420 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 606.6  Treatments for Graves Disease
TREATMENT

ADVANTAGE

DISADVANTAGE

COMMENT

Antithyroid
drugs

Noninvasive
Less initial cost
No risk of permanent hypothyroidism
Possible remission

Remission rate 30–50% (with long-­term
treatment)
Adverse drug reactions
Drug compliance required

First-­line treatment in children and
adolescents

Radioactive
iodine (131I)

Cure of hyperthyroidism

Permanent hypothyroidism
Might worsen ophthalmopathy
Pregnancy must be deferred for 6-­12 mo,
mother cannot breastfeed; small potential
risk of exacerbation of hyperthyroidism

No evidence for infertility or
birth defects with currently
recommended doses

Surgery

Rapid, effective (especially in patients
with large goiter)

Most invasive therapy
Potential complications (recurrent laryngeal
nerve damage, hypoparathyroidism)
Permanent hypothyroidism
Pain, surgical scar

Useful when coexisting suspicious
nodule is present or thyromegaly
is massive
Option for patients who do not
desire radioiodine

Modified from Cooper DS. Hyperthyroidism. Lancet. 2003;362:459–468.

Table 606.7  Management of Thyroid Storm in
Adolescents
GOAL

TREATMENT

Inhibition of thyroid
hormone formation
and secretion

Propylthiouracil 400 mg q8h PO/IV/NGT
Saturated solution of potassium iodide, 3
drops every 8 hr

Sympathetic
blockade

Propranolol 20-­40 mg q4-­6h or 1 mg IV slowly
(repeat doses until heart rate slows); not
indicated in patients with asthma or heart
failure that is not rate related

Glucocorticoid
therapy

Prednisone 20 mg bid

Supportive therapy

Intravenous fluids (depending on indication:
glucose, electrolytes, multivitamins)
Temperature control (cooling blankets,
acetaminophen; avoid salicylates)
O2 if required
Digitalis for heart failure and to slow ventricular
response; pentobarbital for sedation
Treatment of precipitating event (e.g., infection)

From Goldman L, Ausiello D, eds. Cecil Textbook of Medicine, 22nd ed. Philadelphia:
WB Saunders; 2004:1401.

and urinary system malformations, whereas propylthiouracil may
be associated with malformations of the head, neck, and urinary
system.
The initial dosage of methimazole is 0.5-­1.0 mg/kg/24 hr (max 40
mg/day) administered once or twice daily. Smaller initial dosages
should be used in early childhood or for mild disease. Careful surveillance is required after treatment is initiated. Low serum free T4
or elevated serum TSH indicates overtreatment and warrants a dose
reduction. The clinical response becomes apparent in 3-­4 weeks, and
adequate control is typically evident within 2-­4 months. The dose is
slowly decreased to the minimal level required to maintain a euthyroid state.
Most studies report a remission rate of approximately 25% after
2 years of ATD treatment in children. However, extended treatment
appears to be associated with higher remission rates of 30–50% after

4-­10 years of drug treatment. Among patients who remit, relapse
may occur, often within 6-­12 months after therapy has been discontinued. In cases of relapse, ATD therapy may be resumed, or
definitive therapy with radioiodine or thyroidectomy can be pursued. Rituximab has been used as an adjuvant therapy for difficult-­
to-­treat Graves disease.
Thyroid hormones potentiate the actions of catecholamines, leading to symptoms of tachycardia, tremor, excessive sweating, lid lag,
and stare. To ameliorate cardiovascular symptoms, a β-­adrenergic
blocking agent such as propranolol or atenolol is a useful initial supplement to ATDs. However, these agents do not alter thyroid function or treat Graves ophthalmopathy. Table 606.7 lists additional
therapies for thyroid storm.

Definitive Therapy

Radioiodine ablation or thyroidectomy is indicated when medical
management is not possible because of patient nonadherence or
severe side effects of ATDs, when an adequate trial of medical management has failed to result in remission, or if the patient prefers
definitive therapy.
Radioiodine ablation with 131I is an effective therapy for Graves
disease in children. In patients with severe hyperthyroidism, euthyroidism should be restored with methimazole before radioiodine
ablation to deplete the gland of preformed hormone and reduce the
risk of a thyrotoxic flare from radiation thyroiditis. If a patient is taking methimazole, it should be stopped 3-­5 days before radioiodine
administration. The goal of radioiodine ablation is to administer a
sufficient dose of radioiodine to ensure complete ablation of thyroid
tissue. Some centers measure radioiodine uptake before treatment
and use this to calculate an 131I dose that delivers an absorbed thyroid dose of >150 μCi/g thyroid tissue (based on thyroid gland mass
estimated by clinical examination or ultrasound). Alternatively, an
empiric fixed dose of 131I (usually 10-­15 mCi) can be offered. The
theoretical advantage of calculated doses is that they define the lowest administered dose for each patient who achieves the therapeutic
target. This benefit is most important in small children because the
absorbed radiation dose to the bone marrow and other normal tissues is inversely proportional to body size. Based on this concept
and theoretical modeling of radiation exposure, 131I therapy should
be avoided in children younger than 5 years of age. It should be used
in children between 5 and 10 years of age if the administered dose is
<10 mCi. Radioiodine ablation has a low failure rate (5–20%), and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 606 u Thyrotoxicosis
patients with persistent hyperthyroidism more than 6 months after
their first 131I therapy can be offered retreatment.
Thyroidectomy is a safe procedure when performed by an experienced surgeon. Thyroid surgery should be performed only after
the patient has been rendered euthyroid with methimazole. A saturated solution of potassium iodide (SSKI; 1-­3 drops, 2-­3 times per
day) may be added for 7-­14 days before surgery to decrease the vascularity of the gland. Complications of surgical treatment include
hypoparathyroidism (transient or permanent) and paralysis of the
vocal cords. Total or near-­total thyroidectomy should be performed
rather than a less extensive subtotal resection. Patients become
hypothyroid postoperatively, and recurrence of hyperthyroidism is
rare. Referral to a surgeon with extensive experience in thyroidectomy and a low personal complication rate is paramount.
Graves ophthalmopathy usually remits gradually and independently of hyperthyroidism, but control of ophthalmopathy is
facilitated by maintaining consistent euthyroidism. Severe ophthalmopathy can require treatment with high-­dose glucocorticoids,
orbital radiotherapy, or orbital decompression surgery. Teprotumumab, a human monoclonal antibody against the insulin-­like
growth factor 1 receptor (IGF-­1R) is effective in adults with ophthalmopathy. Cigarette smoking is a risk factor for thyroid eye disease and should be avoided or discontinued to avoid progression of
eye involvement.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

606.2 Congenital Hyperthyroidism
Jessica R. Smith and Ari J. Wassner
Neonatal Graves disease is caused by transplacental passage of TRSAbs from mothers with a history of Graves disease. These mothers
can have active Graves disease, Graves disease in remission, or a
prior history of Graves disease treated with radioiodine ablation or
thyroidectomy. Occasionally, there is a maternal history of autoimmune thyroiditis. High levels of TRSAb typically result in fetal and
neonatal hyperthyroidism. However, if the mother has been treated
with ATDs, the onset of hyperthyroidism may be delayed by 3-­7
days postnatally until the ATD is metabolized by the neonate. If
TRBAbs are also present, they may delay the onset of hyperthyroidism for several weeks or even cause neonatal hypothyroidism.
Neonatal Graves disease typically remits spontaneously within 6-­12
weeks but can persist longer, depending on the titer and rate of
clearance of the TRSAbs (and TRBAbs, if present).
Neonatal hyperthyroidism occurs in approximately 2% of infants
born to mothers with a history of Graves disease. Fetal tachycardia
and goiter may suggest the diagnosis prenatally, and close ultrasound surveillance is recommended in mothers with uncontrolled
hyperthyroidism, particularly in the third trimester. Elevated serum
titers of TRSAb (more than 3 times the upper limit of normal) or a
history of a prior child with neonatal thyroid dysfunction increases
the likelihood of neonatal Graves disease.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Many infants born with neonatal Graves disease are premature and
have intrauterine growth restriction. Many infants also have a goiter, and tracheal compression can occur if the goiter is very large.
Other signs and symptoms of neonatal Graves disease include stare,
periorbital edema, retraction of the eyelids, hyperthermia, irritability, diarrhea, feeding difficulties, poor weight gain, tachycardia, heart

3421

Fig. 606.3 Twins with neonatal hyperthyroidism confirmed by abnor-

mal thyroid function tests. Clinical features include lack of subcutaneous tissue owing to a hypermetabolic state and a wide-­eyed, anxious
stare. They were given the diagnosis of neonatal Graves disease, but,
in fact, their mother did not have Graves disease; they had persistent,
not transient, hyperthyroidism. At age 8 years, they were treated with
radioiodine. They are now believed to have had some other form of neonatal hyperthyroidism, such as a constitutive activation of the thyroid-­
stimulating hormone receptor.

failure, hypertension, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, cholestasis, jaundice, thrombocytopenia, and hyperviscosity (Fig. 606.3). Laboratory
evaluation shows suppressed serum TSH and elevated serum levels of
T4, free T4, and T3. TRSAbs are elevated at birth and typically resolve
within 3 months of life. If symptoms and signs are not recognized
and treated promptly, cardiac failure and death can occur. Permanent
sequelae of neonatal hyperthyroidism can include craniosynostosis
and developmental delay.

TREATMENT

Treatment should be initiated at the onset of symptoms to avoid
short-­
term and long-­
term complications. Therapy consists of
methimazole (0.5-­1.0 mg/kg/24 hr given every 12 hr) and oral or
intravenous administration of a nonselective β-­adrenergic blocker
such as propranolol to decrease sympathetic hyperactivity. In
refractory cases, Lugol solution or potassium iodide (1-­2 drops per
day) can be added. The first dose of iodide should be given at least
1 hour after the first dose of ATD to prevent the iodide from being
used for further thyroid hormone synthesis. If severe hyperthyroidism induces heart failure, parenteral fluid therapy, corticosteroids,
and digitalization may be indicated. Once serum thyroid hormone
levels begin to decrease, ATDs should be gradually tapered to keep
the infant euthyroid. Occasionally, a block-­and-­replace method
with concurrent ATD and thyroid hormone replacement therapy
may be required to ensure euthyroidism.
Most cases of neonatal Graves disease remit by 3 months of age, but
occasionally neonatal hyperthyroidism persists into childhood. Typically, there is a family history of hyperthyroidism. Neonatal hyperthyroidism without evidence for autoimmune disease in mother or
infant may be caused by a gain-­of-­function pathogenic variant in the
TSHR gene that results in constitutive activation of the receptor. This
can be transmitted in an autosomal dominant manner or can occur
sporadically. Neonatal hyperthyroidism has also been reported in
patients with McCune-­Albright syndrome because of an activating
pathogenic variant of the G protein stimulatory α-­subunit. Under
these circumstances, hyperthyroidism recurs when ATDs are discontinued, and these children eventually must be treated with radioiodine or surgery.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3422 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
PROGNOSIS

Advanced osseous maturation, microcephaly, and cognitive impairment occur when treatment of neonatal hyperthyroidism is delayed.
Intellectual development is normal in most treated infants with neonatal Graves disease, although some have neurocognitive problems
likely caused by in utero hyperthyroidism. Therefore neurocognitive development should be monitored throughout childhood. After
the resolution of neonatal hyperthyroidism, some infants develop
transient or permanent central hypothyroidism that requires thyroid hormone replacement, likely resulting from poorly understood
changes in hypothalamic-­pituitary-­thyroid feedback caused by in
utero hyperthyroidism.

Resistance to Thyroid Hormone

The actions of thyroid hormones are mediated by two thyroid
hormone receptors (α and β), each with a unique tissue distribution. Inactivating pathogenic variants in each of these receptors
gives rise to a distinct syndrome of resistance to thyroid hormone.
Resistance to thyroid hormone β (RTHβ) is an autosomal dominant
disorder caused by pathogenic variants in the THRB gene. Because
this receptor mediates the normal feedback of thyroid hormone
on the hypothalamus and pituitary, patients have elevated serum
levels of T4 and T3, but serum TSH levels are inappropriately normal or elevated. Goiter is almost always present, but symptoms of
thyroid dysfunction are variable among individuals. There may be
clinical features of hypothyroidism such as developmental delay,
growth retardation, delayed skeletal maturation, and some features
of hyperthyroidism like tachycardia and hyperreflexia. Affected
children have an increased prevalence of learning disabilities and
ADHD. The clinical symptoms, goiter, and elevated thyroid hormone levels may be mistaken for Graves disease, but RTHβ is confirmed by the presence of normal or elevated (not suppressed) TSH
levels. This condition must also be differentiated from a pituitary
TSH-­secreting tumor, which is not familial and in which serum levels of the common α-­subunit are elevated.
More than 100 distinct variants in THRB have been identified in
patients with RTHβ, and genotype-­phenotype correlation is poor
even among affected members of the same family. Nearly all mutations have a dominant-­negative effect in which the variant receptor
interferes with normal receptor action, leading to disease even in
heterozygotes. Individuals carrying two mutant alleles are severely
affected. A very rare autosomal recessive form of this disorder has
been reported in individuals homozygous for a deletion of the
THRB gene.
Treatment usually is not required unless growth and skeletal
stunting are present. Different therapies, including levothyroxine
and triiodothyroacetic acid, have been successful in some patients.
Intermittent administration of T3 may be useful for reducing goiter
size. Symptoms of hyperthyroidism can be treated with β blockers,
but ATDs or radioiodine ablation are generally not used because
they increase TSH levels and goiter size.
Pathogenic variants in the THRA gene, which encodes thyroid
hormone receptor α, have also been reported. THRA variants are
dominant negative and cause RTHα in heterozygous individuals.
Clinical symptoms are those of untreated primary hypothyroidism,
including skeletal dysplasia with short stature and macrocephaly,
developmental delay, constipation, bradycardia, and macrocytic
anemia. Serum thyroid function tests show subtle abnormalities of
low or low-­normal T4, high or high-­normal T3 (with elevated T3/
T4 ratio), and normal TSH, as well as the unique finding of markedly low reverse T3. Treatment has not been clearly established for
RTHα.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 607

Carcinoma of the Thyroid
Jessica R. Smith and Ari J. Wassner
Carcinoma of the thyroid is rare in childhood, with an annual incidence in children younger than 15 years of approximately 4-­5 in
100,000 cases. The incidence of childhood thyroid cancer increases
with age and peaks in adolescence. Females are more commonly
affected than males. Compared to adults, childhood thyroid cancers are characterized by significantly higher rates of metastasis
and recurrence. Despite often being metastatic at discovery, most
pediatric thyroid cancers with adequate treatment have a favorable
outcome.

PATHOGENESIS

The majority of differentiated thyroid cancers are of follicular cell
origin; papillary carcinoma (85–90%) is the most common subtype. Although their histologic features are similar, papillary thyroid cancers of childhood are genetically distinct from their adult
counterparts. About 70% of adults with papillary thyroid cancer
exhibit pathogenic somatic variants in BRAF or RAS; pediatric
papillary thyroid cancers are more commonly caused by somatic
gene fusion events involving the oncogenic tyrosine kinases RET
or NTRK1/3. Follicular carcinoma (8%) is the next most common
type of childhood thyroid cancer and is also derived from thyroid
follicular cells. Medullary carcinoma (4%), derived from thyroid C
cells, and anaplastic thyroid cancers are relatively rare.
Up to 10% of cases of follicular cell–derived thyroid cancers may
be familial. Genetic syndromes associated with an increased risk
of thyroid neoplasia include PTEN hamartoma tumor syndromes
(Cowden, Bannayan-­
Riley-­
Ruvalcaba, and Proteus syndromes)
characterized by macrocephaly, mucocutaneous lesions (fibromas),
and breast cancer and endometrial tumors; familial adenomatous
polyposis (pathogenic variant in APC); and DICER1 syndrome,
which includes tumors of the lung, kidney, female reproductive
tract, and other organs. The evaluation of a child with a thyroid
nodule should include a medical and family history to assess for features of these syndromes. In addition, some families have a strong
history of nonsyndromic nonmedullary thyroid cancer, but no specific genetic causes have been confirmed.
The thyroid gland of children is susceptible to radiation exposure, particularly in very young patients. Even a low dose (1 Gy)
of radiation exposure results in a 7.7-­fold increased relative risk of
thyroid cancer. In past decades, irradiation of the cervical region for
benign conditions (e.g., enlarged thymus or tonsils, adenitis) was a
predominant cause of thyroid cancer in children. Currently, therapeutic irradiation for other regional neoplasms or bone marrow
transplantation and the increased survival of these children have
made this cause of thyroid cancer increasingly prevalent. Higher
radiation dose, younger age at the time of treatment, and female sex
are additional risk factors for the development of thyroid cancer.
The relative risk of thyroid cancer is highest after radiation doses of
5-­30 Gy, above which the excess risk declines but does not disappear. In studies of cancer survivors treated with radiation, ∼10–30%
develop benign thyroid nodules. There is an increased incidence of
thyroid cancer beginning within 3-­5 years after radiation treatment
and peaking after 15-­25 years.
Autoimmune thyroiditis and Graves disease may be associated
with an increased risk of thyroid cancer, but data remain conflicting.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 607 u Carcinoma of the Thyroid
Therefore thyroid nodules detected in patients with these disorders
should be evaluated for possible thyroid cancer. Thyroid cancer has
been reported rarely in children with congenital goiter or ectopic thyroid tissue.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Thyroid cancer usually presents as a painless nodule in the anterior
neck. Rapid growth and large size, firmness, fixation to adjacent tissues,
hoarseness, dysphagia, or neck lymphadenopathy should heighten the
concern for thyroid cancer. Cervical lymph node metastasis is common, so any unexplained cervical lymphadenopathy warrants examination of the thyroid.
The lungs are the most common site of distant metastasis. Pulmonary metastases are usually asymptomatic, and pulmonary function
testing may be normal even with widespread metastases. Radiologically, metastases may appear as diffuse miliary or nodular infiltrations, typically greatest in the posterior basal lung fields. Other sites
of metastasis, including bones and brain, are rare in children. Almost
all children with thyroid cancer are euthyroid, but rarely is the carcinoma functional and produces clinical and laboratory evidence of
hyperthyroidism.

DIAGNOSIS

Patients usually present with a neck mass, and thyroid ultrasound
demonstrates a thyroid nodule and/or diffuse infiltration of the thyroid. Although several imaging features (including calcifications,
irregular margins, and the presence of abnormal lymph nodes)
are significantly associated with thyroid cancer risk, the absence
of these features does not exclude the possibility of thyroid cancer.
The appropriate technique for evaluating sonographically suspicious nodules is fine needle aspiration (FNA), which can detect the
characteristic nuclear abnormalities of papillary thyroid carcinoma,
which is the most common form. In most cases, operative pathology is required to confirm the diagnosis of thyroid cancer and to
determine the extent of disease.

TREATMENT

The primary therapy for thyroid cancer is surgical resection.
Because intrathyroidal spread is common in papillary thyroid cancer, near-­total thyroidectomy is recommended. Before surgery, neck
ultrasonography should be performed to assess for abnormal lymph
nodes, and suspicious lymph nodes may be biopsied preoperatively
to determine the need for lymph node dissection. In patients with
metastatic thyroid cancer, adjunctive therapy may be required with
radioactive iodine (131I) to ablate unresectable thyroid cancer and
thyroid-­stimulating hormone (TSH) suppression with supraphysiologic levothyroxine to reduce TSH-­stimulated growth of residual
cancer cells.

PROGNOSIS

Although regional and distant metastases are more common in the
pediatric population than in adults, most children with thyroid cancer have an excellent prognosis. Long-­term survival from pediatric
thyroid cancer is >97%, although the disease may recur in up to
15–20%. Even in children with pulmonary metastasis at diagnosis,
30-­year survival is 90%, and many patients who cannot achieve
complete cure remain asymptomatic with stable or slowly progressive cancer burden over many years. For rare children with aggressive cancers that progress despite conventional therapy, targeted
molecular therapies directed at the underlying genetic pathogenic
variants are available and effective in many cases. Psychosocial supports, including access to social work and mental health professionals, are essential in caring for children with thyroid cancer.
Children with thyroid cancer require lifelong monitoring because
of the risk of disease recurrence years or decades after initial treatment. For most patients, serum thyroglobulin is a sensitive and
specific cancer marker. Circulating autoantibodies to thyroglobulin
can confound the measurement of thyroglobulin levels and should
be measured whenever serum thyroglobulin is assayed. Because

3423

most thyroid cancer recurrences occur in the thyroid bed or cervical lymph nodes, surveillance should include serial neck ultrasounds. Patients with a higher risk of recurrence or with distant
metastases may require additional anatomic imaging (such as chest
CT), whole-­body radioactive iodine scanning (123I), or combined
anatomic and functional imaging (SPECT/CT).

MEDULLARY THYROID CARCINOMA

Medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) arises from the parafollicular cells (C cells) of the thyroid and accounts for approximately
4% of thyroid malignancies in children. In children, the majority
of MTC cases are hereditary, as part of the syndrome of multiple
endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN2; see Chapter 609). Activating
pathogenic variants in the RET proto-­oncogene are responsible for
most cases of MTC. These variants occur in the germline in patients
with MEN2, but somatic RET changes are present in many sporadic
cases of MTC.
The most common presentation of sporadic MTC is an asymptomatic thyroid nodule. When MTC occurs sporadically, it is usually unicentric, but in the familial form it may be multicentric. MTC
begins as hyperplasia of the parafollicular cells (C ­cell hyperplasia),
which is often present histologically in thyroid glands removed prophylactically from patients with MEN2. The diagnosis of MTC can
also be made by cytology after FNA of a thyroid nodule. Because C
cells produce calcitonin, a high calcitonin concentration in an FNA
specimen or in a patient’s serum can help confirm the diagnosis of
MTC. The diagnosis warrants genetic testing for a germline RET
variant, and in variant-­positive patients, screening for pheochromocytoma and hyperparathyroidism should be obtained before
anesthesia for thyroidectomy.
The most important treatment for MTC is surgical resection.
Preoperative evaluation should include neck ultrasound to identify
potential lymph node metastases. Baseline serum levels of calcitonin
and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) should be measured preoperatively, and higher levels are correlated with a greater likelihood of
metastatic disease. Surgical treatment includes total thyroidectomy
and lymph node dissection of any involved lymph node compartments. Complete resection is often curative, but this can be difficult to achieve in patients with metastatic disease. Surveillance with
neck ultrasound and serum levels of calcitonin and CEA can assess
for the presence or progression of residual disease. Other treatment
modalities for advanced or metastatic disease include specific RET
inhibitors, external beam radiation, and radiofrequency ablation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

607.1 Thyroid Nodules
Jessica R. Smith and Ari J. Wassner
The frequency of thyroid nodules increases with age. Sonographically
detectable thyroid nodules are present in 19–67% of adults but in only
1–2% of children. Although the risk of malignancy in a thyroid nodule
is higher in children (20–25%) than in adults (5–15%), the majority of
thyroid nodules in children are benign.
Benign disorders that can present as a thyroid mass include benign
adenomatous or colloid nodules and various congenital cysts (Table
607.1). A thyroid mass that appears suddenly or enlarges rapidly can
indicate hemorrhage into a cyst, a benign adenoma, or an infectious
process.
Evaluation of a child with a thyroid nodule should begin by
measuring serum TSH. A low serum TSH suggests a possible
hyperfunctioning (autonomous) thyroid nodule, which should be
evaluated by scintigraphy (123I or 99mTc-­pertechnetate). Autonomous nodules generally are not malignant and do not require
biopsy. Patients with a normal or elevated TSH should undergo
neck ultrasound, and any sonographically suspicious nodule(s)
of significant size should be evaluated by ultrasound-­guided FNA

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3424 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
(Fig. 607.1). Thyroid cytology is evaluated using a standardized system, most commonly the Bethesda System for Reporting Thyroid
Cytopathology. Cytology may be interpreted as benign, positive for
papillary thyroid cancer, indeterminate, or nondiagnostic. The predictive value of cytology for thyroid cancer varies by category and
to some degree among institutions. In general, cytology positive for
papillary thyroid cancer confers a >98% likelihood of cancer, and
near-­total thyroidectomy is appropriate. For a nodule of indeterminate cytology, lobectomy is commonly performed for definitive
diagnosis; this may be followed by completion thyroidectomy if
pathology shows a significant thyroid cancer. Molecular testing for
oncogenic mutations may inform the management of certain indeterminate cytology. Patients with cytologically benign nodules have
a low likelihood of malignancy and should be monitored with serial
neck ultrasound. Surgical resection may be offered for benign nodules that cause symptoms, including dysphagia, globus sensation, or
undesired appearance.

Table 607.1  Etiologic Classification of Solitary Thyroid
Nodules
Lymphoid follicle, as part of autoimmune thyroiditis
Thyroid developmental anomalies
Intrathyroidal thyroglossal duct cyst
Intrathyroidal ectopic thymus
Thyroid abscess (acute infectious thyroiditis)
Simple cyst
Neoplasms
Benign
Colloid (adenomatous) nodule
Follicular adenoma
Hyperfunctioning (toxic) adenoma
Lymphohemangioma
Malignant
Papillary carcinoma
Follicular carcinoma
Anaplastic carcinoma
Medullary carcinoma
Nonthyroidal
Lymphoma
Teratoma

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Neck ultrasonography sonographic pattern

Benign or very low suspicion
<3% risk of malignancy

Low suspicion
5–10% risk of malignancy

Intermediate suspicion
15–30% risk of malignancy

High suspicion
>70–90% risk of malignancy

• Purely cystic nodules

• Partially cystic nodules
• Solid isoechoic or hyperechoic
nodules

• Solid hypoechoic nodules with
smooth margins

• Solid hypoechoic nodules or solid
hypoechoic component of a
partially cystic nodule with one
or more of the following: irregular
margins, microcalcifications,
taller-than-wide shape, rim
calciﬁcations with small extrusive
soft-tissue component,
extrathyroid extension, and
suspicious lymph nodes

>1·5 cm

>1 cm

>1 cm

FNAC DCs in order of increasing risk of malignancy

Benign (DC 2)
<3% risk of
malignancy

Surveillance*

Nondiagnostic
(DC 1)
5–10% risk of
malignancy

Repeat FNAC

AUS or FLUS
(DC 3)
30–45% risk of
malignancy

FN or SFN
(DC 4)
30–70% risk
of malignancy

Surgery
(consider molecular testing)

Suspicious
(DC 5)
70–85% risk
of malignancy

Malignant
(DC 6)
97–99% risk
of malignancy

Surgery

Fig. 607.1 Management algorithm for thyroid nodules based on sonographic patterns and cytology diagnostic categories of the Bethesda System.
*Fine-­needle aspiration can be considered (1) for nodules with a low-­suspicion sonographic pattern and the largest diameter greater than 2 cm and
(2) if there are suspicious clinical findings (e.g., firm mass, neck pain, cough, voice change, and a history of childhood neck irradiation or familial
thyroid cancer), regardless of the sonographic appearances. AUS, Atypia of undetermined significance; DC, diagnostic category; FLUS, follicular
lesion of undetermined significance; FN, follicular neoplasm; FNAC, fine needle aspiration cytology; SFN, suspicious for follicular neoplasm. (From
Cabanillas ME, McFadden DG, Durante C. Thyroid cancer. Lancet. 2016;388:2783–2794, Fig. 2.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 608 u Autoimmune Polyglandular Syndromes

Chapter 608

Autoimmune
Polyglandular Syndromes
Christina M. Astley, Jessica R. Smith, and
Ari J. Wassner
An autoimmune polyglandular syndrome (APS) occurs when autoimmunity is directed at multiple glands and/or nonendocrine organs,
sometimes associated with immune dysregulation. Endocrine glands
and other organs commonly affected by APS have unique autoantigens
that increase these tissues’ susceptibility to damage by an untamed
immune response. Most autoimmune endocrinopathies are caused by
cell-­mediated immunity from autoreactive T cells. Antibodies to one
or more autoantigens are commonly associated with specific autoimmune manifestations and are markers of immune dysregulation. These
autoantibodies are directly pathogenic in some nonendocrine tissues,
but this is rarely the case in autoimmune endocrine disease. A notable
exception is the autoantibodies in Graves disease that cause primary
hyperthyroidism by activating the thyroid-­stimulating hormone receptor (TSHR).
APS caused by monogenic disorders of immune dysregulation
(including APS type 1 [APS-­1]) have heritable lesions in key aspects
of immune tolerance (Table 608.1). Polygenic disorders associated
with APS (APS type 2 [APS-­2]) and some chromosomal abnormalities (e.g., trisomy 21) also result in an aberrant immune response that
causes multiorgan autoimmunity. Nongenetic factors (e.g., immune
checkpoint inhibitors for cancer therapy) may lead to autoimmune
polyglandular disease. Although APS is uncommon, patients can
experience significant morbidity, particularly if the syndrome is not
identified early and managed appropriately. There may be 1-­2 decades
between the presentations of the first and subsequent endocrinopathy. The presence of hypoparathyroidism, primary adrenal insufficiency,
neonatal type 1 diabetes mellitus, chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis,
immune dysregulation, or a family history should raise particular suspicion for APS.

MONOGENIC AUTOIMMUNE POLYGLANDULAR
SYNDROMES

The number of recognized monogenic defects of immune regulation leading to APS continues to grow (see Table 608.1). The best-­
characterized monogenic APSs are caused by pathogenic genetic
variants that primarily affect central immune tolerance (APS-­1) or the
development of regulatory T cells (immune dysregulation polyendocrinopathy enteropathy X-­linked, or IPEX). Other monogenic APSs
(the so-­called IPEX-­like disorders) are caused by defects in regulatory
T-­cell suppression or signaling.

AUTOIMMUNE POLYGLANDULAR SYNDROME
TYPE 1

APS-­1 is an archetypal monogenic polyendocrinopathy syndrome. It is
a rare, autosomal recessive disorder caused by loss-­of-­function variants
in the autoimmune regulator gene (AIRE) on chromosome 21q22.3.
AIRE plays a critical role in the presentation of self-­antigens to developing T cells in the thymus, which normally leads to central immune
tolerance by inducing apoptosis of T cells specific for these autoantigens (negative selection). AIRE also plays a role in the development
of regulatory T cells (see Chapter 174). Therefore patients with APS-­1
develop autoreactive T cells and autoantibodies directed at multiple
tissues.
APS-­1 is defined by the presence of at least two of three classic clinical features (Whitaker triad) of chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis,
hypoparathyroidism, and primary adrenal insufficiency. These three

3425

manifestations tend to emerge over time—candidiasis before around 5
years of age, hypoparathyroidism around 10 years, and adrenal insufficiency around 15 years—but the precise order and age of onset of each
component are variable. Most patients develop additional autoimmune
manifestations over time, with skin and gastrointestinal disorders typically emerging before age 20 and other endocrine disorders after the
second decade (see Table 608.1).
Nearly every endocrine gland may be affected by APS-­1. The commonly affected glands include parathyroids and adrenals. Other glands
affected, in decreasing order of frequency, are the ovaries, testes, thyroid, pancreatic β cells, and pituitary. A wide range of nonendocrine
tissues can be affected, sometimes before the first endocrinopathy is
detected. The commonly affected nonendocrine tissues are teeth and
nails, and ectodermal dystrophy is present in most patients. For this
reason, APS-­1 has also been called autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-­
candidiasis-­ectodermal dystrophy (APECED). Other manifestations
include gastrointestinal malabsorption, autoimmune hepatitis, pernicious anemia, vitiligo, and alopecia. APS-­1 patients are at increased risk
of infection, possibly related to a combination of cytokine autoantibodies, splenic dysfunction, and compromised gastrointestinal mucosal
integrity. Mucocutaneous candidiasis is quite common and can lead
to oral or esophageal cancer if not diagnosed and treated. Esophageal
cancer, autoimmune hepatitis, adrenal crisis, and severe hypocalcemia
are important causes of mortality in APS-­1 patients. Therefore APS-­1
patients require close clinical follow-­up with a multidisciplinary team
to manage disease manifestations. (Treatment of individual endocrinopathies and other manifestations are reviewed separately in the relevant chapters, including Chapters 280, 611, and 615).
The initial diagnosis of APS-­1 generally is made clinically. Pathogenic AIRE variants can be detected in the majority of patients with
clinical APS-­1, and confirmation of the diagnosis by AIRE sequencing
is indicated for any patient with known or suspected APS-­1. APS-­1
caused by pathogenic AIRE variants is more common in certain
founder populations (e.g., Iranian Jews, Sardinians, Finns, and Norwegians reported a prevalence ranging from 1 in 9,000 to 1 in 90,000).
Knowledge of the specific pathogenic variant facilitates clinical and
genetic counseling, including testing of family members. AIRE variants with autosomal dominant inheritance and an atypical APS-­2–like
clinical presentation (especially with pernicious anemia or vitiligo)
have been reported. APS-­1 patients without identifiable AIRE variants
may benefit from further evaluation (e.g., immune dysregulation gene
panel, whole exome sequencing, imaging for thymoma).
The clinical presentation of APS-­1 is variable, even within families
with the same AIRE variant, making it difficult to predict the disease
course for affected individuals. Therefore patients with APS-­1 should
have regular screening for the development of new clinical manifestations. The importance of screening is illustrated by unexplained deaths
in APS-­1 patients or their siblings, presumably the result of undiagnosed manifestations such as adrenal insufficiency.
Multiple autoantibodies may be detectable in patients with APS-­1
(Table 608.2). Many of these autoantibodies are also present in the corresponding single-­organ autoimmune disease, but autoantibodies to
some antigens (e.g., NALP5, interleukin-­17 family cytokine, and type
1 interferons) are unique to APS-­1. Measuring organ-­specific autoantibodies has variable utility for predicting the onset of endocrine
gland failure or other APS-­1 manifestations. Therefore clinical suspicion, laboratory screening, and education about symptoms of evolving
endocrinopathies and/or other APS-­1 manifestations are paramount
regardless of autoantibody status.

IMMUNE DYSREGULATION-­
POLYENDOCRINOPATHY-­ENTEROPATHY X-­LINKED

IPEX is caused by loss-­of-­function variants in FOXP3, which is
located on the X chromosome (Xp11.23) (see Chapter 174). The
inactivation of FOXP3 results in impaired peripheral immune tolerance caused by impaired development of regulatory T cells, leading to
the emergence of autoreactive T cells. The endocrinopathies commonly associated with IPEX are early-­onset type 1 diabetes mellitus
and autoimmune thyroiditis. Any diagnosis of type 1 diabetes mellitus

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

     

     

Table 608.1  Autoimmune Polyglandular Syndrome (APS) due to Monogenic Disorders of Immune Dysregulation
EPIDEMIOLOGY AND GENETICS

APS

GENETIC
ABNOR­
MALITY

INHERI­
TANCE

ONSET

ENDOCRINOPATHIES
CLASSIC
PHENO­TYPE

ADRE­NAL
INSUFFI­
CIENCY

THY­ROID

TD1

HPT

GONAD­AL
INSUFFI­­CIENCY

●●●●

●●

●●

●●●●

●●

MONOGENIC APS
APS-­1

AIRE

AR (AD rare)

Infancy

Candid­iasis, hypo­
parath­yroidism,
Addison disease,
ecto­dermal
dystrophy

IPEX

FOXP3

XL

Infancy

Enteropathy,
type 1 diabetes
in infancy, eczemat­
ous dermatitis

●●●●

●●●●

CTLA4

CLTA4

AD

Infancy

Enteropathy,
cytopenia, lympho­
cytic aggre­gates,
hypo­gamma­glob­­
ulinemia

●●

●

LRBA

LRBA

AR

Infancy

Entero­pathy,
respir­atory
tract disease,
organo­megaly,
hypo­gamma­glob­
ulinemia

●

●

STAT1

STAT1

AD

Infancy

Candid­iasis,
recur­rent
infect­ions, multiple
auto­immunity,
cerebral aneurysm

●●

●

STAT5b

STAT5b

AR

Infancy

Entero­pathy,
respir­atory
tract disease,
recurrent
infec­tions,
growth failure

●●

CD25

IL2RA

AR

Infancy

Entero­pathy,
type 1 diabetes
in infancy,
recurrent
infect­ions

●●●●

●●●●

●●●

●●

●

●●

●

●●●●

●

●

●●●●

●●

●

●

OTHER APS AND APS-­LIKE CONDITIONS
APS-­2

HLA,
MICA,
PTPN22,
CTLA4,
NALP1

Poly­genic

Adult­hood

Addison disease,
auto­immune thyroid
disease, type 1
diabetes

Turner
syn­drome

46, X
(most)

N/A

Congen­ital

Short stature, ovarian
insuffi­ciency, webbed
neck, coarc­tation of
the aorta

Kline­felter
syn­drome

47, XXY
(most)

N/A

Congen­ital

Tall stature, testi­cular
insuf­fi­ciency, gyne­
comastia

N/A (most)

Congen­ital

Hypotonia, epicanthal
folds, Brush­field
spots, single palmar
crease, develop­­
mental delay

Down
Trisomy
syn­drome 21

●●●●

●

Inheritance
AR, Autosomal recessive; AD, autosomal dominant; XL, X-­linked
●●●●, >75% (common); ●●●, 50–75%; ●●, 10–50%; ●, <10% (rare)
VZV, Varicella-­zoster virus; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; CMV, cytomegalovirus; IBD, inflammatory bowel disease; IRAE, immune-­related adverse event; TD1, type 1 diabetes; HPT, hypoparathyroidism.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

     

     

Table 608.1  Autoimmune Polyglandular Syndrome (APS) due to Monogenic Disorders of Immune Dysregulation—cont’d
NONENDOCRINE MANIFESTATIONS
OTHER
ENDO­CRINE

CAN­DIDA
INFEC­TION

OTHER
INFEC­TIONS

MALABSORP­
TION,
ENTEROP­ATHY

●●●●

●●

●●

●

●

●●●●

●●●●

●●●●

●●●●

●●●

●

●●●●

●●●●

●

●●●●

●●●●

●●●●

GH
resist­ance,
hyper­pro­
lactinemia

●●●●

AUTO­
IMMUNE
HEPATITIS

VITILIGO

●●

●●

●●

●

ECZEMA,
ALLERGIC
DISEASE

Keratocon­
junctivitis,
periodic fever,
asplenism

●●●●

Cytopenias,
bacterial
infections,
nephritis

Cytopenias, lung
disease, psoriasis
and skin disease

●

Respiratory
infection,
cytopenias,
myasthenia
gravis

●●

●●

Psoriasis,
cytopenia,
vascular, skin
disease

●●●●

●●●●

VZV infections,
cytopenia

●●●●

●●●●

EBV and CMV
infections,
cytopenia

●●

●

●

●

●

●

Tall stature,
gyneco­mastia

Short stature

OTHER

●

●

Short stature

GI
AUTOIM­
MUNITY

Lymphe­dema,
psoriasis, IBD

Lupus, Sjogren
syndrome,
multiple
sclerosis (rare)

●

Congenital heart
disease

Inheritance
AR, Autosomal recessive; AD, autosomal dominant; XL, X-­linked
●●●●, >75% (common); ●●●, 50–75%; ●●, 10–50%; ●, <10% (rare)
VZV, Varicella-­zoster virus; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; CMV, cytomegalovirus; IBD, inflammatory bowel disease; IRAE, immune-­related adverse event; TD1, type 1 diabetes; HPT, hypoparathyroidism.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Continued

     

     

Table 608.1  Autoimmune Polyglandular Syndrome (APS) due to Monogenic Disorders of Immune Dysregulation—cont’d
EPIDEMIOLOGY AND GENETICS

APS

GENETIC
ABNOR­
MALITY

INHERI­
TANCE

ONSET

ENDOCRINOPATHIES
ADRE­NAL
INSUFFI­
CIENCY

CLASSIC
PHENO­TYPE

DiGeorge
syn­
drome

22q11.2
del

AD

Congen­
ital

Absent thymus,
congenital heart
disease, hypo­­
calcemia, develo­p­
mental delay

ROHHAD

None iden­
tified

N/A

Early
child­
hood

Rapid-­onset obesity,
hypo­thalamic
dysfunc­tion, auto­
nomic dys­regulation,
neuro­blastic tumor

N/A

Post-­
treat­
ment

Oncology treat­
ment, possible
pre-­existing auto­
immunity

Check­
point
inhibitor
IRAE

●

THY­ROID

TD1

HPT

●

●

●●

●

●

GONAD­AL
INSUFFI­­CIENCY

Inheritance
AR, Autosomal recessive; AD, autosomal dominant; XL, X-­linked
●●●●, >75% (common); ●●●, 50–75%; ●●, 10–50%; ●, <10% (rare)
VZV, Varicella-­zoster virus; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; CMV, cytomegalovirus; IBD, inflammatory bowel disease; IRAE, immune-­related adverse event; TD1, type 1 diabetes; HPT, hypoparathyroidism.

before 6-­9 months of age should prompt consideration of a monogenic
APS or a genetic cause of β-­cell dysfunction. Patients with IPEX often
have autoimmune enteropathy and eczematous dermatitis. They may
also have other autoimmunity (e.g., liver, kidney, cytopenias) and
allergic dysregulation (e.g., food allergy, peripheral eosinophilia).
Therapy for IPEX consists of immune modulation with immunosuppressants (e.g., glucocorticoids, tacrolimus), novel therapeutics (e.g.,
abatacept), or stem cell transplantation.

OTHER MONOGENIC IMMUNE DYSREGULATION
DISORDERS

Several other disorders involve failure of peripheral tolerance and
emergence of autoimmunity, often with some degree of immune
dysregulation. These disorders include loss-­of-­function genetic variants in IL2RA (CD25), LRBA, CTLA4, STAT5b, and gain-of-­function
variants in STAT1 and STAT3 that are pathophysiologically similar
to IPEX. Broadly, patients with these IPEX-­like disorders are at
high risk of type 1 diabetes mellitus and autoimmune thyroiditis (see
Table 608.1). They also have multiple nonendocrine diseases, especially autoimmunity and immunodeficiency affecting the skin, lungs,
and gastrointestinal tract. STAT5b participates in the IL2/STAT5 signal transduction axis necessary for growth hormone signaling and
may also affect prolactin secretion. Therefore patients with STAT5b
defects may have nonautoimmune growth hormone insensitivity and
hyperprolactinemia in addition to immune dysregulation, hypergammaglobulinemia, and multiple autoimmunity. STAT1 gain-of-­
function variants inhibit the normal production of Th17 cytokines,
which leads to chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis. These patients
also have increased risk of infection, squamous cell cancer, enteropathy, and arterial aneurysms. Patients with CD25 defects are also at
increased risk of infection because interleukin (IL)-­2 signaling plays
a role in Th17 responses. Many IPEX-­like patients develop nonautoimmune endocrinopathies, including iatrogenic adrenal insufficiency, dysglycemia, hypocalcemia, poor bone health from high-­dose
glucocorticoid therapy, chronic inflammation/infection, and/or
malabsorption/malnutrition.

POLYGENIC AUTOIMMUNE POLYGLANDULAR
SYNDROME

APS-­2 is a clinical syndrome defined by the presence of two or more
syndrome-­
specific endocrinopathies: autoimmune primary adrenal insufficiency (Addison disease), autoimmune thyroid disease
(Hashimoto thyroiditis or Graves disease), and/or type 1 diabetes
mellitus. Some classification systems subdivide APS-­2 according to

the particular glands affected (e.g., subtype 2, 3, and 4 if adrenal, thyroid, or neither gland, respectively) or other autoimmune manifestations present (e.g., subtype 3A, 3B, and 3C if additional endocrine,
gastrointestinal, or systemic autoimmunity are present, respectively).
However, because there is no clear pathophysiologic distinction
between these subtypes, they can be considered collectively as APS-­2.
When describing the characteristics of APS-­2, it is important to recognize some degree of overlap between patients with clinical APS-­2
and those with a single autoimmune endocrinopathy who may later
develop another and be classified as APS-­2.
Unlike monogenic APSs, which are rare diseases with early-­
childhood onset and a mendelian inheritance pattern, APS-­2 is a
common polygenic disease that usually manifests after the second
decade in a patient with a personal or family history of autoimmune
disease. APS-­2 is most common in middle-­age females (prevalence
near 1 in 20,000). Primary gonadal insufficiency, vitiligo, alopecia, and
chronic atrophic gastritis (with or without pernicious anemia) can
occur. Autoimmune hypoparathyroidism and candidiasis are not typical of APS-­2 and should prompt consideration of APS-­1.
Addison disease is uncommon in the general population (prevalence near 1 in 10,000). However, patients with this condition are at
high risk of developing additional endocrine autoimmunity constituting APS-­2. Two thirds will have evidence of additional subclinical or
clinical autoimmunity. Patients with Addison disease should have close
follow-­up, screening, and education about other autoimmune manifestations. About half of patients with Addison disease have autoimmune
thyroid disease (Schmidt syndrome), and about 10% have type 1 diabetes mellitus (Carpenter syndrome). Less frequent comorbid autoimmune manifestations include Graves disease, ovarian insufficiency,
alopecia, vitiligo, pernicious anemia, or celiac disease.
APS-­2 develops less frequently in patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus than in those with Addison disease. Nevertheless, many patients with
type 1 diabetes develop additional autoimmunity, and comorbid autoimmune thyroid and gastrointestinal disease are much more common (each
about 20%) than comorbid adrenal disease (<1%). Because thyroxine and
cortisol affect insulin sensitivity, metabolism, and appetite, unexplained
hypoglycemia or deterioration in glycemic control may be the first clinical
sign of APS-­2 in a patient with preexisting type 1 diabetes mellitus. Unexplained hypoglycemia may also signal the onset of celiac disease. Indeed,
celiac disease often precedes the onset of autoimmune endocrinopathies,
including type 1 diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism, and Addison disease.
The development of APS-­2 in individuals with autoimmune thyroid disease is relatively infrequent. Nevertheless, the clinician should
consider the possibility of adrenal insufficiency before treating

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 608.1  Autoimmune Polyglandular Syndrome (APS) due to Monogenic Disorders of Immune Dysregulation—cont’d
NONENDOCRINE MANIFESTATIONS
OTHER
ENDO­CRINE

CAN­DIDA
INFEC­TION

OTHER
INFEC­TIONS

MALABSORP­
TION,
ENTEROP­ATHY

GI
AUTOIM­
MUNITY

AUTO­
IMMUNE
HEPATITIS

VITILIGO

ECZEMA,
ALLERGIC
DISEASE

OTHER

Short
stature

Thymic dysplasia/
aplasia,
congenital
heart disease,
T-­cell deficiency,
cytopenias

Hypotha­lamic
dysfun­ction,
hyperpro­
lactinemia

Autonomic dysreg­
ulation, central
hypoven­tilation

Multiple non-­
endocrine IRAE

Inheritance
AR, Autosomal recessive; AD, autosomal dominant; XL, X-­linked
●●●●, >75% (common); ●●●, 50–75%; ●●, 10–50%; ●, <10% (rare)
VZV, Varicella-­zoster virus; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; CMV, cytomegalovirus; IBD, inflammatory bowel disease; IRAE, immune-­related adverse event; TD1, type 1 diabetes; HPT, hypoparathyroidism.

Table 608.2  Autoantibodies Present in Autoimmune Polyglandular Syndromes and in Isolated Autoimmune
Endocrinopathies
TISSUE OR GLAND

AUTOANTIGEN

AUTOIMMUNE ENDOCRINOPATHIES
Adrenal
CYP21A2, CYP11A1,
CYP17A1

DISEASE
MANIFESTATION

NOTE

Primary adrenal
insufficiency

Of the adrenal autoantibodies, CYP21A2 is most strongly
associated with adrenal insufficiency. Higher risk of progression
to adrenal insufficiency in children with positive adrenal
autoantibodies (over 80%) compared with adults (near
20%). Adrenal autoantibodies detected in 50% of pediatric
hypoparathyroidism and 1% of pediatric type 1 diabetes

TPO, Tg

Autoimmune thyroiditis
(hypothyroidism)

Frequently positive without clinical thyroid disease

TSHR

Graves disease
(hyperthyroidism)

Only endocrine autoantibody that directly causes autoimmune
endocrinopathy

Pancreatic β cell

IA-­2, GAD65, insulin,
ZnT8

Type 1 diabetes mellitus

Risk of type 1 diabetes increases with the number of positive
autoantibodies; IA-­2, but not GAD65, autoantibodies associated
with time to type 1 diabetes diagnosis in APS-­1

Parathyroid

NALP5, CaSR

Hypoparathyroidism

NALP5 antibodies are present only in hypoparathyroidism caused
by APS-­1

Gonad

CYP11A1, CYP17A1,
NALP5 and TSGA10

Gonadal insufficiency

CYP11A1 antibodies associated with gonadal insufficiency in APS-­1

Pituitary

TDRD6

Hypophysitis

Poorly predictive of clinical pituitary disease

APS-­1

IFN-­ω autoantibodies are 100% sensitive and 99% specific for APS-­
1; IL-­22 autoantibodies associated with time to diagnosis and
diagnosis of candidiasis in APS-­1
IF autoantibodies associated with time to B12 deficiency in APS-­1

Thyroid

NONENDOCRINE DISEASE
Cytokines
IFN-­ω, IFN-­α, IL-­22,
IL-­17F
Gastric

IF, H+/K+ ATPase

Pernicious anemia,
autoimmune gastritis

Small intestine

TTG, gliadin

Celiac disease

Gastrointestinal

TPH, GAD65

Intestinal dysfunction

TPH autoantibodies associated with time to intestinal dysfunction in
APS-­1. Both autoantibodies associated with diagnosis of intestinal
dysfunction in APS-­1
Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3430 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 608.2  Autoantibodies Present in Autoimmune Polyglandular Syndromes and in Isolated Autoimmune
Endocrinopathies—cont’d
TISSUE OR GLAND

AUTOANTIGEN

DISEASE
MANIFESTATION

Liver

CYP1A2, TPH, AADC

Autoimmune hepatitis

Skin melanocytes

Tyrosinase, SOX9,
SOX10, AADC

Vitiligo

Hair follicle

Tyrosine hydroxylase

Alopecia

Lung

KCNRG, BPIFB1

Interstitial lung disease

NOTE
TPH autoantibodies associated with diagnosis of autoimmune
hepatitis in APS-­1

Both autoantibodies present in 90–100% of APS-­1 patients with
interstitial lung disease and are associated with time to diagnosis

AADC, Aromatic L-­amino acid decarboxylase; BPIFB1, bactericidal/permeability-­increasing fold-­containing B1; CaSR, calcium sensing receptor; CYP11A1, side chain cleavage
enzyme; CYP17A1, 17-­α-­hydroxylase; CYP1A2, cytochrome P450 1A2; CYP21A2, 21-­hydroxylase; GAD65, glutamic acid decarboxylase; IA-­2, islet antigen-­2; IF, intrinsic factor;
IFN, interferon; IL, interleukin; KCNRG, potassium channel-­regulating protein; NALP5, NACHT leucine-­rich-­repeat protein 5; TDRD6, Tudor domain containing protein 6;
Tg, thyroglobulin; TPH, tryptophan hydroxylase; TPO, thyroid peroxidase; TSGA10, testis-­specific gene 10 protein; TSHR, thyroid-­stimulating hormone receptor; TTG, tissue
transglutaminase; ZnT8, zinc transporter 8.

hypothyroidism in a patient with features suggestive of APS-­2 because
thyroid hormone replacement may precipitate adrenal crisis in this
setting. Autoantibodies to specific tissues may be detectable and may
prompt functional screening before the onset of overt clinical disease
(see Table 608.2); however, the predictive value of these autoantibodies
for the development of clinical disease is variable.
Aberrant T-­cell responses probably play a role in the pathogenesis
of multiple gland destruction present in APS-­2. The risk of autoimmunity directed against the adrenal glands, thyroid gland, and islet cells
appears to be shared across certain human leukocyte antigen (HLA)
haplotypes and other immune-­related genetic loci. However, the magnitude of this risk varies substantially for each endocrinopathy. The
prevalence of HLA-­D3 and HLA-­D4 alleles is increased in patients
with APS-­2, and they appear to confer an increased risk for the development of this disease. Particular alleles of the major histocompatibility complex class I chain-­related genes A and B (MICA and MICB)
also are associated with APS-­2. Polymorphisms in other genes (e.g.,
PTPN22, CTLA4) have been associated with individual autoimmune
endocrinopathies that constitute APS-­2, but the contribution of these
genes to the pathogenesis of APS-­2 itself is uncertain. Although not
well defined, there are likely environmental factors that promote the
development of autoimmunity in genetically susceptible individuals,
and many of the risk factors associated with endocrine and nonendocrine autoimmunity overlap (see individual chapters on these diseases
for more detailed discussions of risk factors). Next-­generation immune
therapies combined with an understanding of autoimmunity pathways
may lead to targeted treatments to prevent new endocrinopathies (e.g.,
type 1 diabetes mellitus) among those at high risk.

CHROMOSOMAL ABNORMALITIES ASSOCIATED
WITH AUTOIMMUNE POLYGLANDULAR
SYNDROME

Many genetic syndromes involving chromosomal deletions, duplications, and other copy number variations are associated with an
increased risk of autoimmunity, particularly endocrine autoimmunity
affecting the thyroid and pancreatic β cells (see Table 608.1). Clinical
practice guidelines for many of these genetic syndromes recommend
routine screening for autoimmune and endocrine manifestations.
Males with Klinefelter syndrome and females with Turner syndrome
have an increased risk of autoimmunity in multiple systems, including autoimmune endocrine disease. The mechanism of autoimmunity
in trisomy 21 remains unclear, although differences in AIRE gene
expression, HLA susceptibility, and autoantibody profiles have been
described. Thymic dysplasia is a typical feature of DiGeorge syndrome
(22q11.2 deletion), and the resulting immune dysregulation may play
a role in the increased risk of autoimmunity in this disorder. Patients
with genetic syndromes and chromosomal abnormalities may have

nonautoimmune endocrinopathies such as abnormal growth, primary
gonadal failure, and hypoparathyroidism.
Mitochondrial diseases such as Kearns-­Sayre syndrome (progressive external ophthalmoplegia, retinal pigmentation, cardiac conduction defects) and MELAS (mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic
acidosis, strokelike episodes) have been associated with polyendocrinopathy syndromes, with some rare cases reported to be associated
with autoimmunity. Endocrine manifestations of mitochondrial disease include diabetes mellitus, hypogonadism, adrenal insufficiency,
hypoparathyroidism, and hypothyroidism. These manifestations may
develop before neurologic and other organ injury and could be an early
clue of mitochondrial dysfunction.

NONGENETIC AUTOIMMUNE CAUSES OF
MULTIPLE ENDOCRINOPATHY

Rapid-­onset obesity with hypothalamic dysfunction, hypoventilation,
and autonomic dysregulation (ROHHAD) is a rare pediatric syndrome
diagnosed by its cardinal clinical features (see Chapter 468.3). Children
with ROHHAD abruptly develop rapid weight gain and associated
autonomic deficits (e.g., ophthalmologic findings, gastrointestinal dysmotility, thermal dysregulation, bradycardia), central hypoventilation,
and/or hypothalamic dysfunction. Patients have progressive dysfunction of hypothalamic-­pituitary axes such as central hypothyroidism,
growth hormone deficiency, hyperprolactinemia, and vasopressin
dysregulation (see Chapter 468.3). It is hypothesized that ROHHAD
is an autoimmune paraneoplastic neurologic syndrome based on the
presence of cerebrospinal fluid inflammatory markers, response to
immunosuppressive therapy in some patients, and identification of
neuroblastic tumors in about half. Antineural autoantibody profiling and genetic testing have not yet identified the underlying cause of
ROHHAD.
Novel immune-­modulating biologic compounds are used increasingly in the treatment of malignancies and immune disorders. Monoclonal antitumor drugs that inhibit immune checkpoints such as CLTA4,
PD1, and PD-­L1 are associated with immune-­related adverse effects
(IRAEs). Clinically important IRAEs include acute onset of multiple
autoimmune endocrinopathies, including hypophysitis with hypopituitarism (especially with CTLA4-­directed therapies), thyroiditis with
hyperthyroidism or hypothyroidism, type 1 diabetes mellitus, and primary adrenal insufficiency. Anti-­CD52 antibodies used to treat multiple sclerosis have been linked to the development of Graves disease and
other antibody-­mediated autoimmune diseases (e.g., immune thrombocytopenic purpura). Preexisting autoimmunity may be a risk factor
for developing autoimmune disease after exposure to a wide range of
immunomodulatory therapies.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 609 u Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia Syndromes

3431

in Chapter 613. In patients with MEN1, bilateral surgical exploration is
generally recommended over focused, minimally invasive approaches
because of the tendency for multiple parathyroid glands to be hyperplastic. In such cases, subtotal (3-­or 3.5-­gland) parathyroidectomy
may be required. MEN1 may be present in 15–70% of pediatric cases
of primary hyperparathyroidism, and this syndrome should be considered in any child or adolescent with primary hyperparathyroidism,
particularly if multigland hyperplasia is present.
Pituitary adenomas are the presenting feature of pediatric MEN1
in about 20% of cases and usually occur after age 10 years, although
they have been reported in patients as young as 5 years. Although these
adenomas most commonly secrete prolactin (60–70%), a few secrete
growth hormone (5–10%) or adrenocorticotrophic hormone (5%), and
the remainder are nonfunctioning (∼25%). Diagnosis and management
are similar to that of sporadic pituitary adenomas except that adenomas
associated with MEN1 may be more locally aggressive and are more
likely to cosecrete multiple pituitary hormones (see Chapter 598).
Patients with MEN1 can develop neoplasia of various enteropancreatic endocrine cells. Such tumors may occur in up to 70% of
patients by adulthood but are found in only about 5–20% of affected
children. Nonfunctioning pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors are the
most common pancreatic lesions found in children with MEN1 and
are usually detected by screening imaging. Insulinomas are the most
common functional pancreatic tumor in children with MEN1, occurring in 3–10% of cases, and present with symptoms of hypoglycemia.
These tumors may present before age 10 years but are more common in
adolescence. Although gastrinomas represent over 50% of pancreatic
tumors in adults with MEN1, they are rare in children (∼2%) and occur
after age 15 years. Rarer pancreatic tumors can secrete other hormones
such as glucagon or vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP).
MEN1 is also associated with several other rare tumors. Adrenocortical tumors in children with MEN1 may be benign or malignant, and they

Chapter 609

Multiple Endocrine
Neoplasia Syndromes
Ari J. Wassner and Jessica R. Smith
Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) syndromes are characterized by
the development of tumors in two or more endocrine glands. These
syndromes are divided clinically into two types based on the specific
endocrine organs involved (Table 609.1). MEN type 1 is characterized
by tumors of the parathyroid glands, anterior pituitary, and endocrine
pancreas. In contrast, MEN type 2 is characterized by medullary thyroid
cancer and pheochromocytoma. Both types of MEN are usually inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion, but sporadic cases can occur.

MULTIPLE ENDOCRINE NEOPLASIA TYPE 1

Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) most commonly presents in
the fourth or fifth decade of life, but endocrine tumors can develop as early
as 5 years of age. The endocrine tissues most frequently involved include
the parathyroid glands, pituitary, and cells of the endocrine pancreas.
Primary hyperparathyroidism caused by a parathyroid adenoma or
multigland hyperplasia is the most common manifestation of MEN1,
with a lifetime cumulative incidence of 90–95%. In children with
MEN1, hyperparathyroidism usually presents after 10 years of age and
is often the first endocrine disorder to develop (in about 50% of cases).
The diagnosis and management of hyperparathyroidism are discussed

Table 609.1  Clinical Manifestation of MEN Syndromes
SYNDROME

MEN 1

MEN 2
MEN 2A

MEN 2B

FAMILIAL MTC

Eponym

Wermer syndrome

Sipple syndrome

Gorlin
syndrome

–

Gene

MEN1 ∼85%

RET ∼100%

RET ∼100%

RET ∼100%

Prevalence

1/30,000

1/40,000

1/1,000,000

Hyperparathyroidism

>90%

20–30%

–

–

Duodenopancreatic NETs: nonfunctioning
55%, gastrinoma 40%, insulinoma 10%,
glucagonoma <1%, VIPoma <1%,
somatostatinoma

30–80%

–

–

–

Pituitary adenoma

30–40%

–

–

–

Adrenal cortical tumor

20–40%

–

–

–

Pheochromocytoma

< 1%

50%

50%

–

Medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC)

–

100%

100%

100%

Thymic NET/bronchopulmonary NET/
gastric NET

2%/5%/30%

Angiofibroma/collagenoma/lipoma

85%/70%/30%

–

–

–

Other tumors: meningioma 8%,
ependymoma, melanoma, thyroid 25%

0–25%

–

–

–

Marfanoid habitus

–

–

75%

–

Mucosal neuroma

–

–

∼100%

–

Cutaneous lichen amyloidosis

–

Up to 36%

–

–

–

MEN, Multiple endocrine neoplasia; NET, neuroendocrine tumor.
Modified from Al-­Salameh, A, Baudry C, Cohen R. Update on multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 and 2. La Presse Médicale. 2018;47(9):722–731, Table 1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3432 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
may be nonfunctional or hypersecrete cortisol, androgens, or aldosterone.
Pheochromocytomas have been reported rarely. Meningiomas, carcinoid
tumors, and neuroendocrine tumors of the thymus, bronchopulmonary
tree, or stomach can also occur, usually in older adolescents. Older patients
with MEN1 frequently manifest cutaneous angiofibromas or collagenomas, which are benign but may be a useful diagnostic clue.
The diagnosis of MEN1 can be made clinically based on the presence of at least two of the classical endocrine tumor types (parathyroid, pituitary, pancreas) or the presence of one of these tumors in a
first-­degree relative of a patient with known MEN1. Genetic testing
should be used to confirm a clinical diagnosis of MEN1 or to diagnose the condition preclinically in a relative of an affected individual.
The MEN1 gene on chromosome 11q13 encodes the tumor suppressor
menin. A single germline inactivating pathogenic variant in MEN1 is
inherited but is not sufficient to cause tumorigenesis; a second somatic
variant that inactivates the remaining normal allele then leads to tumor
formation in a specific tissue. MEN1 is generally inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion, although sporadic variants account for about
10% of cases. Over 1,000 MEN1 variants have been described, including deletions and changes in noncoding regions; therefore genetic testing should include analysis for deletions in patients in whom MEN1
sequencing does not reveal a pathogenic variant. Children diagnosed
with MEN1 should undergo routine age-­based clinical, laboratory, and
imaging surveillance for disease manifestations.

MULTIPLE ENDOCRINE NEOPLASIA TYPE 2

Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN2) is a rare genetic disorder
that occurs in about 1 in 2 million individuals and is characterized by the
development of medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) and pheochromocytoma. MEN2 is an autosomal dominant disorder caused by activating
pathogenic variants in the RET proto-­oncogene, a tyrosine kinase encoded
on chromosome 10q11.2. The clinical features of the syndrome are related
to the specific RET mutation present, although disease manifestations can
vary even among family members carrying the same mutation.

MULTIPLE ENDOCRINE NEOPLASIA TYPE 2A

Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A (MEN2A) is characterized by MTC,
pheochromocytoma, and primary hyperparathyroidism. At least 50 different RET pathogenic variants have been described in patients with MEN2A,
the majority occurring in exons 10 or 11 (codons 609, 611, 618, 620, or
634) in the RET extracellular domain. Almost all patients with MEN2A
develop MTC, but the occurrence of other manifestations is more variable.
MTC, or its precursor C c­ ell hyperplasia, is usually the first manifestation
to occur, but the age at which it develops is variable. Pheochromocytomas
are often bilateral and may be multiple, and they usually develop in the
third decade or later but may occur in childhood. Hyperparathyroidism
is caused by hyperplasia that may involve one or more parathyroid glands.
Hyperparathyroidism occurs at an average age of about 30 years but can
occur in childhood or adolescence. Variants in RET codon 634 confer a
relatively high risk of pheochromocytoma and hyperparathyroidism compared to variants at other sites.
Additional clinical conditions associated with MEN2A include cutaneous lichen amyloidosis and Hirschsprung disease. Cutaneous lichen
amyloidosis is a dermatologic lesion consisting of pruritic hyperpigmented papules that are usually distributed in the interscapular region
and on extensor surfaces. These skin lesions may develop before MTC
and may provide an early clue to the diagnosis of MEN2A. Some
patients with Hirschsprung disease have variants in RET, particularly
in exon 10. Although the RET variants that cause Hirschsprung disease
are generally loss-­of-­function variants, some of these can nevertheless
cause MEN2A. Therefore individuals with Hirschsprung disease who
carry such RET pathogenic variants should be evaluated for MEN2A.

MULTIPLE ENDOCRINE NEOPLASIA TYPE 2B

Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2B (MEN2B) is characterized by MTC
and pheochromocytoma, but not hyperparathyroidism. Rather, the distinguishing features of MEN2B are the presence of multiple neuromas and
a characteristic phenotype that includes Marfan-­like habitus. Nearly all
patients with MEN2B have a specific missense pathogenic variant (M918T)
in the tyrosine kinase catalytic domain of RET. Although MEN2B can be
inherited, about 75% of cases are caused by de novo variants.

MTC in MEN2B can develop early in childhood, including in infancy,
and metastasis of MTC to local and distant sites is often present at diagnosis. Pheochromocytomas occur in about half of patients. The neuromas
of MEN2B can occur throughout the digestive tract, most commonly on
the tongue, buccal mucosa, lips, and conjunctivae. Diffuse proliferation of
nerves and ganglion cells is found in mucosal, submucosal, myenteric, and
subserosal plexuses throughout the digestive tract and may be associated
with gastrointestinal symptoms. Peripheral neurofibromas and café-­au-­lait
patches may be present. Affected individuals may be tall, with arachnodactyly and a Marfan-­like appearance, including scoliosis, pectus excavatum, pes cavus, and muscular hypotonia. The eyelids may be thickened
and everted, lips thickened, and jaw prognathic. Feeding difficulties, poor
sucking, diarrhea, constipation, and failure to thrive can begin in infancy
or early childhood, sometimes years before the appearance of neuromas or
endocrine symptoms.

FAMILIAL MEDULLARY THYROID CARCINOMA

The familial occurrence of MTC without other clinical manifestations of
MEN2 has been termed familial medullary thyroid carcinoma (FMTC).
RET variants are commonly present in individuals with FMTC, and
although some families appear to have truly isolated MTC, in other kindreds, the pattern of apparent FMTC may represent MEN2A in which
other manifestations have not yet occurred or have not been diagnosed.
FMTC is frequently regarded as a form of MEN2A, and evaluation for
other manifestations of MEN2A is warranted in patients with FMTC.

MANAGEMENT OF MULTIPLE ENDOCRINE
NEOPLASIA TYPE 2

Genetic testing of affected family members often leads to the diagnosis of
MEN2 in a child before the development of any disease manifestations.
MTC is highly likely to develop in these individuals. Although thyroidectomy is curative if performed before the development of MTC or while
it is still localized to the thyroid gland, the prognosis is poor once MTC
has metastasized beyond the thyroid. Therefore prophylactic thyroidectomy is required in most individuals with MEN2. However, the timing of
prophylactic thyroidectomy must be determined for each patient based on
balancing the likelihood of developing metastatic MTC against the need to
minimize the risks of surgery, which are higher in younger children.
Factors influencing the risk of MTC include the specific RET variants
present, the history of MTC in the family, and serum levels of calcitonin.
The first two factors are not entirely predictive, as MTC behavior can vary
significantly even in family members with the same variant. Some RET
variants are associated with earlier-­onset MTC, and consensus guidelines
categorize RET variants as highest risk (M918T, usually associated with
MEN2B), high risk (codon 634 and 883 mutations), or moderate risk
(other variants) for MTC. Patients at highest risk should undergo thyroidectomy within the first year of life. Those with high-­risk variants should
undergo thyroidectomy at 5 years of age or earlier if calcitonin levels begin
to rise. Patients at moderate risk should be monitored by neck ultrasound
and serum calcitonin levels beginning at age 5 years, and thyroidectomy
should be performed if calcitonin levels rise. However, the timing of surgery may be influenced by other factors, including family history or desire
to avoid prolonged monitoring by proceeding with thyroidectomy. For
patients who do not wish to undergo prophylactic thyroidectomy, regular
careful surveillance is mandatory. Thyroidectomy should be performed
by an experienced thyroid surgeon, especially in the youngest patients, to
minimize the risk of surgical complications. Prophylactic thyroidectomy
reduces morbidity and mortality from MTC in patients with MEN2, many
of whom are found to have C cell hyperplasia, or even MTC, at the time
of prophylactic thyroidectomy. The management of MTC is described in
detail in Chapter 607.
Screening for pheochromocytoma and hyperparathyroidism should
be performed in children with MEN2. The age at which screening
should commence depends on the specific RET variant (11 years for
high and highest risk; 16 years for moderate risk). Management of
pheochromocytoma (see Chapters 555.4 and 613) and hyperparathyroidism (see Chapter 621) are discussed elsewhere.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 610 u Hormones and Peptides of Calcium Homeostasis and Bone Metabolism 3433

Section 3

Disorders of the
Parathyroid Gland
Chapter 610

Hormones and Peptides
of Calcium Homeostasis
and Bone Metabolism
Evan G. Graber and Daniel A. Doyle
Parathyroid hormone (PTH) and vitamin D are the principal regulators of calcium homeostasis (see Chapters 69 and 746). Calcitonin and
PTH-­related peptide (PTHrP) are important primarily in the fetus.

PARATHYROID HORMONE

PTH is an 84–amino acid chain (95 kDa), but its biologic activity
resides in the first 34 residues. In the parathyroid gland, a pre–pro-­
PTH (115–amino acid chain) and a pro-­PTH (90 amino acids) are synthesized. Pre–pro-­PTH is converted to pro-­PTH and pro-­PTH to PTH.
PTH (consisting of amino acids 1-­84) is the major secretory product of
the gland, but it is rapidly cleaved in the liver and kidney into smaller
COOH-­terminal, midregion, and NH2-­terminal fragments.
The occurrence of these fragments in serum has led to the development of a variety of assays. The 1-­34 aminoterminal (N-­terminus) fragments possess biologic activity but are present in low amounts in the
circulation; assay of these fragments is most useful for detecting acute
secretory changes. The carboxyterminal (C-­terminus) and midregion
fragments, although biologically inert, are cleared more slowly from
the circulation and represent 80% of plasma immunoreactive PTH;
concentrations of the C-­terminal fragment are 50-­500 times the level
of the active hormone. The C-­terminal assays are effective in detecting
hyperparathyroidism, but because C-­terminal fragments are removed
from the circulation by glomerular filtration, these assays are less useful for evaluating the secondary hyperparathyroidism characteristic of
renal disease. Only certain sensitive radioimmunoassays for PTH can
differentiate the subnormal concentrations that occur in hypoparathyroidism from normal levels.
When serum levels of calcium fall, the signal is transduced through
the calcium-­sensing receptor, and secretion of PTH increases (Fig.
610.1). PTH stimulates activity of 1α-­
hydroxylase in the kidney,
enhancing production of 1,25-­dihydroxycholecalciferol, also written as
1,25(OH)2D3. The increased level of 1,25(OH)2D3 induces synthesis of
a calcium-­binding protein (calbindin-­D) in the intestinal mucosa, with
resultant absorption of calcium. PTH also mobilizes calcium by directly
enhancing bone resorption, an effect that requires 1,25(OH)2D3. The
effects of PTH on bone and kidney are mediated through binding to
specific receptors on the membranes of target cells and through activation of a transduction pathway involving a G-­protein coupled to the
adenylate cyclase system (see Chapter 594).
The calcium-­sensing receptor regulates the secretion of PTH and
the reabsorption of calcium by the renal tubules in response to alterations in serum calcium concentrations. The gene for the receptor is
located on chromosome 3q13.3-­q21 and encodes a cell surface protein
that is expressed in parathyroid glands and kidneys and belongs to the
family of G-­protein–coupled receptors. In the normally functioning

calcium-­sensing receptor, hypocalcemia induces increased secretion
of PTH and hypercalcemia depresses PTH secretion. Loss-­of-­function
pathogenic variants cause an increased set point with respect to serum
calcium, resulting in hypercalcemia and in the conditions of familial
hypocalciuric hypercalcemia and neonatal severe hyperparathyroidism. There is a close genotype/phenotype relationship that determines
severity of illness. Acquired hypocalciuric hypercalcemia may be a
result of autoantibodies to the calcium-­sensing receptor and manifests
with hypercalcemia and hyperparathyroidism. Gain-of-­function variants result in depressed secretion of PTH in response to hypocalcemia,
leading to the syndrome of familial hypocalcemia with hypercalciuria
(see Fig. 610.1).

PARATHYROID HORMONE–RELATED PEPTIDE

PTHrP is homologous to PTH only in the first 13 amino acids of its
amino terminus, 8 of which are identical to PTH. Its gene is on the
short arm of chromosome 12 and that of PTH is on the short arm of
chromosome 11.
PTHrP, like PTH, activates PTH receptors in kidney and bone cells
and increases urinary cyclic adenosine monophosphate and renal production of 1,25(OH)2D3. It is produced in almost every type of cell of
the body, including every tissue of the embryo at some stage of development. PTHrP is critical for normal fetal development. Inactivating variants of the receptor for PTH/PTHrP results in a lethal bone
disorder characterized by short limbs and markedly advanced bone
maturation known as Blomstrand chondrodysplasia (see Fig. 610.1).
PTHrP appears to have a paracrine or autocrine role because serum
levels are low except in a few clinical situations. Cord blood contains
levels of PTHrP that are threefold higher than in serum from adults; it
is produced by the fetal parathyroid glands and appears to be the main
agent stimulating maternal-­fetal calcium transfer. PTHrP appears to be
essential for normal skeletal maturation of the fetus, which requires 30
g of calcium during a normal gestation. During pregnancy, maternal
absorption of calcium increases from about 150 mg daily to 400 mg
during the second trimester.
PTHrP levels are increased during lactation and in patients with
benign breast hypertrophy. Breast milk and pasteurized bovine milk
have levels of PTHrP that are 10,000 times higher than those of normal
plasma. Most instances of the hormonal hypercalcemia syndrome of
malignancy are caused by elevated concentrations of PTHrP.

VITAMIN D

See Chapter 69.

CALCITONIN

Calcitonin is a 32–amino acid polypeptide. Its gene is on chromosome 11p and is tightly linked to that of PTH. The gene for calcitonin
encodes three peptides: calcitonin, a 21–amino acid carboxyterminal
flanking peptide (katacalcin), and a calcitonin gene–related peptide.
Katacalcin and calcitonin are cosecreted in equimolar amounts by the
parafollicular cells (C cells) of the thyroid gland. Calcitonin appears to
be of little consequence in children and adults because very high levels
in patients with medullary carcinoma of the thyroid (a tumor arising
from the C cells) do not cause hypercalcemia. In the fetus, circulating
levels are high and appear to augment bone metabolism and skeletal
growth; these high levels are probably stimulated by the normally high
fetal calcium levels. Unlike the high levels in cord blood and circulating
concentrations in young children, levels in older children and adults
are low. Infants and children with congenital hypothyroidism (and presumed deficiency of C cells) have lower levels of calcitonin than normal
children.
Its action appears to be independent of PTH and vitamin D. Its
main biologic effect appears to be the inhibition of bone resorption
by decreasing the number and activity of bone-­resorbing osteoclasts.
This action of calcitonin is the rationale for its use in treatment of Paget
disease. Calcitonin is synthesized in other organs, such as the gastrointestinal tract, pancreas, brain, and pituitary. In these organs, calcitonin
is thought to behave as a neurotransmitter to impose a local inhibitory
effect on cell function.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3434 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Fig. 610.1 Schematic representation of some of

the components involved in calcium homeostasis. Alterations in extracellular calcium are detected by the
calcium-­sensing receptor (CaSR), which is a 1078−
amino acid, G protein−coupled receptor. The parathyroid hormone (PTH)/parathyroid hormone-related
peptide (PTHrP) receptor, which mediates the actions
of and PTHrP, is also a G protein−coupled receptor.
Thus Ca2+, PTH, and PTHrP involve G protein−coupled
signaling pathways, and interaction with their specific
receptors can lead to activation of Gs, Gi, and Gq,
respectively. Gs stimulates adenylcyclase (AC), which
catalyzes the formation of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) from adenosine triphosphate (ATP). Gi
inhibits AC activity. cAMP stimulates protein kinase A
(PKA), which phosphorylates cell-­
specific substrates.
Activation of Gq stimulates phospholipase C (PLC),
which catalyzes the hydrolysis of the phosphoinositide
(PIP2) to inositol triphosphate (IP3), which then increases intracellular calcium, and diacylglycerol (DAG),
activating protein kinase C (PKC). These proximal signals modulate downstream pathways, which results in
specific physiologic effects. Loss of function in several
genes, shown with their respective sites of action on
the right, has been identified in specific disorders of
calcium homeostasis. ADH, autosomal dominant hypocalcemia; APECED, autoimmune polyendocrinopathy candidiasis ectodermal dystrophy; FBHH, familial
benign hypocalciuric hypercalcemia; FHH, familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia; HDR, hypoparathyroidism,
sensorineural deafness, and renal anomaly; HPT-JT, hyperparathyroidism-jaw tumor syndrome; KSS, KearnsSayre syndrome; MELAS, Mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis, and stroke-like episodes;
MEN, multiple endocrine neoplasia; MTPD, mitochondrial trifunctional protein deficiency; NSHPT, neonatal
severe hyperparathyroidism. TBCE, tubulin-specific
chaperone E. (From Thakkerf RV. The parathyroid
glands, hypercalcemia and hypocalcemia. In: Goldman
L, Schafer AI, eds. Goldman-­Cecil Medicine, 25th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Fig. 245.2, p. 1651.)

Ca2+
CaSR

Loss of function
FHH1, NSHPT

Gain of function
ADH1

FHH2

ADH2, hypoparathyroidism

Parathyroid cell

PLC

Gi

Gq/11

AC

AP2σ

ATP

PIP2

MELAS, KSS MTPD5

cAMP

DAG + IP3

TBCE

[Ca2+]i
PKC
Proto-oncogenes and
tumor-suppressor genes
PTH

PTHrP

Kenny-Caffey type 1
Sanjad-Sakati
Parathyroid tumors (e.g., MEN 1,
HPT-JT, CCND1, Rb, CDC73)

Transcription factors (e.g.,
GATA3, GCM2, AIRE, FAM 111A)

Target cell
(e.g., kidney,
bone,
cartilage)

FHH3

Hypoparathyroidism
DiGeorge syndrome,
HDR, hypoparathyroidism,
APECED, Kenny-Caffey type 2

PTH

PTH/PTHrP
receptor

Gs

Gq/11

Blomstrand’s lethal
chondrodysplasia

Jansen’s metaphyseal
chondrodysplasia

Pseudohypoparathyroidism

McCune-Albright
syndrome

AC

PLC
PIP2
IP3 + DAG

ATP
cAMP

Gq/11

ADH2, hypoparathyroidism
FBHH, NSHPT

ADH1

CaSR

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 611

Hypoparathyroidism
Patrick C. Hanley and Daniel A. Doyle
Hypocalcemia is common in neonates between 12 and 72 hours of life,
especially in premature infants, in infants with asphyxia, and in infants of
diabetic mothers (early neonatal hypocalcemia; see Chapter 121.4; Table
611.1 and Fig. 611.1). After the second to third day and during the first
week of life, the type of feeding also is a determinant of the level of serum
calcium (late neonatal hypocalcemia). The role played by the parathyroid glands in these hypocalcemic infants is unclear, although functional
immaturity of the parathyroid glands is invoked as one pathogenetic factor.
In a group of infants with transient idiopathic hypocalcemia (1-­8 weeks
of age), serum levels of parathyroid hormone (PTH) are significantly lower
than those in unaffected infants. It is possible that the functional immaturity is a manifestation of a delay in development of the enzymes that convert glandular PTH to secreted PTH; other mechanisms are possible.

APLASIA OR HYPOPLASIA OF THE PARATHYROID
GLANDS

Aplasia or hypoplasia of the parathyroid glands is often associated
with DiGeorge/velocardiofacial syndrome. This syndrome occurs
in 1 in 4,000 newborns. In 90% of patients, the condition is caused
by a deletion of chromosome 22q11.2 with involvement of the TBX1
gene. Approximately 25% of these patients inherit the chromosomal
abnormality from a parent. Neonatal hypocalcemia occurs in 60%
of affected patients, but it is transitory in the majority; hypocalcemia may recur or can have its onset later in life. Associated abnormalities of the third and fourth pharyngeal pouches are common;
these include conotruncal defects of the heart in 25%, velopharyngeal insufficiency in 32%, cleft palate in 9%, renal anomalies
in 35%, and aplasia of the thymus with severe immunodeficiency
in 1%. This syndrome has also been reported in a small number
of patients with a deletion of chromosome 10p13 thought to affect
the NEBL gene, in infants of diabetic mothers, and in infants born
to mothers treated with retinoic acid for acne early in pregnancy.
Loss-­of-­function pathogenic variants in the GCM2 gene, which is
a key regulator of parathyroid gland development, leads to isolated
parathyroid aplasia and hypoparathyroidism.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 611 u Hypoparathyroidism

3435

Table 611.1  Causes of Hypocalcemia
I. NEONATAL
A. Maternal Disorders
1.	Diabetes mellitus
2.	Toxemia of pregnancy
3.	Vitamin D deficiency
4.	High intake of alkali or magnesium sulfate
5.	Use of anticonvulsants
6.	Hyperparathyroidism
B. Neonatal Disorders
1.	Low birthweight: prematurity, intrauterine growth restriction
2.	Peripartum asphyxia, sepsis, critical illness
3.	Hyperbilirubinemia, phototherapy, exchange transfusion
4.	Hypomagnesemia, hypermagnesemia
5.	Acute/chronic renal failure
6.	Nutrients/medications: high phosphate intake, fatty acids,
phytates, bicarbonate infusion, citrated blood, anticonvulsants,
aminoglycosides
7.	Hypoparathyroidism
8.	Vitamin D deficiency or resistance
9.	Osteopetrosis type II
II. HYPOPARATHYROIDISM
A. Congenital
1.	Transient neonatal
2.	Congenital hypoparathyroidism
a.	Familial isolated hypoparathyroidism
(i)	Autosomal recessive hypoparathyroidism (GMC2, PTH)
(ii)	Autosomal dominant hypoparathyroidism (CASR, GNA11)
(iii)	X-­linked hypoparathyroidism (SOX3)
b.	DiGeorge syndrome types 1 and 2 (TBX1, NEBL)
c.	Sanjad-­Sakati syndrome (short stature, retardation,
dysmorphism; HRD) (TBCE)
d.	Kenny-­Caffey syndrome type 1 (short stature, medullary
stenosis, retardation) (TBCE)
e.	Kenny-­Caffey syndrome type 2 (short stature, medullary
stenosis) (FAM111A)
f.	Barakat syndrome (sensorineural deafness, renal dysplasia;
HDR) (GATA3)
g.	Lymphedema-­Hypoparathyroidism syndrome (nephropathy,
mitral valve prolapse and brachytelephalangy).
h.	Mitochondrial disorders (Kearns-­Sayre, Pearson, MELAS,
trifunctional protein deficiency)
3.	Insensitivity to PTH
a.	Blomstrand chondrodysplasia (PTHR1)
b.	Pseudohypoparathyroidism type IA (GNAS)
(i)	Pseudohypoparathyroidism type IB (STX16, GNAS-­A1)
(ii)	Pseudohypoparathyroidism type IC (GNAS)
(iii)	Pseudohypoparathyroidism type II
(iv)	Pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism
c.	Acrodysostosis with hormone resistance (PRKAR1A)
d.	Hypomagnesemia
4.	CaSR-­activating mutation
a.	Sporadic
b.	Autosomal dominant (G protein subunit α11 mutation)

II. HYPOPARATHYROIDISM—cont’d
B. Acquired
1.	Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type I (AIRE gene mutation)
2.	Activating antibodies to the CaSR
3.	Postsurgical, radiation destruction
4.	Infiltrative—excessive iron (hemochromatosis, thalassemia) or
copper (Wilson disease) deposition; granulomatous inflammation,
neoplastic invasion; amyloidosis, sarcoidosis
5.	Hypomagnesemia/hypermagnesemia
III. VITAMIN D DEFICIENCY
IV. OTHER CAUSES OF HYPOCALCEMIA
A. Calcium Deficiency
1.	Nutritional deprivation
2.	Hypercalciuria
B. Disorders of Magnesium Homeostasis
1.	Congenital hypomagnesemia
2.	Acquired
a.	Acute renal failure
b.	Chronic inflammatory bowel disease, intestinal resection
c.	Diuretics
C. Hyperphosphatemia
1.	Renal failure
2.	Phosphate administration (intravenous, oral, rectal)
3.	Tumor cell lysis
4.	Muscle injuries (crush, rhabdomyolysis)
D. Miscellaneous
1.	Hypoproteinemia
2.	Hyperventilation
3.	Drugs: furosemide, aminoglycosides, bisphosphonates, calcitonin,
anticonvulsants, ketoconazole, antineoplastic agents (plicamycin,
asparaginase, cisplatinum, cytosine arabinoside, doxorubicin),
citrated blood products
4.	Hungry bone syndrome
5.	Acute and critical illness: sepsis, acute pancreatitis, toxic shock
a.	Organic acidemia: propionic, methylmalonic, isovaleric

CaSR, Ca2-­sensing receptor; HDR, hypoparathyroidism, sensorineural deafness, and renal anomaly; HRD, hypoparathyroidism, retardation, dysmorphism; MELAS, mitochondrial
encephalomyopathy with lactic acidosis and strokelike episode; PTH, parathyroid hormone.
Modified from Root AW, Diamond Jr FB. Disorders of mineral homeostasis in children and adolescents. In: Sperling MA. Pediatric Endocrinology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2014:
Table 18.2A.

X-­LINKED RECESSIVE HYPOPARATHYROIDISM

Familial clusters of hypoparathyroidism with various patterns of transmission have been described. In two large North American pedigrees,
this disorder appears to be transmitted by an X-­linked recessive gene
located on Xq26-­q27, which has a key role in the development of the
parathyroid glands. In these families, the onset of afebrile hypocalcemic
seizures characteristically occurs in infants from 2 weeks to 6 months
of age. The absence of parathyroid tissue after detailed examination of a
male with this condition suggests a defect in embryogenesis.

AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE HYPOPARATHYROIDISM
WITH DYSMORPHIC FEATURES

Autosomal recessive hypoparathyroidism with dysmorphic features
has been described in Middle Eastern children. Parental consanguinity

occurred for most of several dozen affected patients. Profound hypocalcemia occurs early in life, and dysmorphic features include microcephaly, deep-­set eyes, beaked nose, micrognathia, and large floppy
ears. Intrauterine and postnatal growth restriction are severe, and cognitive impairment is common. The putative gene (TBCE) is on chromosome 1q42-­43. In a few patients with autosomal recessive inheritance
of isolated hypoparathyroidism, pathologic variants of the PTH gene
have been found.

HYPOPARATHYROIDISM, SENSORINEURAL
DEAFNESS, AND RENAL ANOMALY SYNDROME

Hypoparathyroidism, sensorineural deafness, and renal anomaly
(HDR) occur owing to pathologic variants of the GATA3 gene. The
protein encoded by this gene is essential in the development of the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3436 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Hypocalcemia

Confirm with repeat measurement / ionized Ca

Low

Assess vitamin D status with 25hydroxy vitamin D measurement

Intact PTH level

Serum Mg

Normal

Elevated

Low/inappropriately
normal

Vitamin D sufficiency
confirmed (25-hydroxy
vitamin D >20 ng/mL)

Vitamin D
deficiency
confirmed

Evaluate for etiologies of secondary
hyperparathyroidism:
Malabsorption
Vitamin D deficiency
Pseudohypoparathyroidism types 1, 2
Vitamin D–dependent rickets types 1, 2

Evaluate for etiologies of
hypomagnesemia:
Gastrointestinal losses
(vomiting, diarrhea,
malabsorption)
Renal wasting
Alcoholism
Malnutrition
Drug-induced
Perform 24 hr urine and
further testing as appropriate

Evaluate for hypoparathyroidism
Complete medical history, family history, past surgical history for prior
parathyroid, thyroid, or neck surgery
Physical examination (neck scar, candidiasis, signs of tetany, cataracts, short
stature, mental retardation)
Family history: mental retardation, features of autoimmune disorders
(Addison disease, autoimmune thyroid disease), deafness, renal anomalies,
thalassemia, or iron overload
Further lab testing, genetic screening, and testing of family members as
appropriate (activating CaSR mutation; PTH mutation; AIRE, GCMB, or
GATA3 mutational analysis)
Assessment of autoantibodies (21-hydroxylase abs, antiparathyroid abs)
Hearing test, renal imaging (as appropriate)

Evaluate for
gastrointestinal
losses, low dietary
intake, low
sunlight exposure

Replete
vitamin D

Fig. 611.1 Algorithm for the evaluation of hypocalcemia. Abs, autoantibodies; CaSR, Ca2-­sensing receptor; PTH, parathyroid hormone. (From
Bilezikian JP, Khan A, Potts Jr JT, et al. Hypoparathyroidism in the adult: epidemiology, diagnosis, pathophysiology, target-­organ involvement, treatment, and challenges for future research. J Bone Miner Res. 2011;26:2317–2337, Fig. 1.)

parathyroids, auditory system, and kidneys. The GATA3 gene is located
at chromosome 10p14 and is nonoverlapping with the DiGeorge critical region at 10p13 (see Fig. 610.1). Congenital ichthyosis and HDR
have also been reported.

protein–­deficiency syndrome are associated with hypoparathyroidism. A
diagnosis of mitochondrial cytopathy should be considered in patients
with unexplained symptoms, such as ophthalmoplegia, sensorineural
hearing loss, cardiac conduction disturbances, and tetany (see Fig. 610.1).

SUPPRESSION OF NEONATAL PARATHYROID
HORMONE SECRETION BECAUSE OF MATERNAL
HYPERPARATHYROIDISM OR MATERNAL FAMILIAL
HYPOCALCIURIC HYPERCALCEMIA

SURGICAL OR INFILTRATIVE
HYPOPARATHYROIDISM

Neonatal PTH secretion can be suppressed by maternal hyperparathyroidism, resulting in transient hypocalcemia in the newborn infant.
It appears that neonatal hypocalcemia results from suppression of
the fetal parathyroid glands by exposure to elevated levels of calcium
in maternal and hence fetal serum. Tetany usually develops within 3
weeks but may be delayed by 1 month or more if the infant is breastfed.
Seizures may occur within 1 week with familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia (FHH1) because of maternal Ca2-­sensing receptor (CaSR) loss-­
of-­function pathogenic variants. Hypocalcemia can persist for weeks
or months. When the cause of hypocalcemia in an infant is unknown,
measurements of calcium, phosphorus, and PTH should be obtained
from the mother. Most affected mothers are asymptomatic, and the
cause of their hyperparathyroidism is usually a parathyroid adenoma.

AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT HYPOPARATHYROIDISM

Patients with autosomal dominant hypoparathyroidism have an activating (gain-of-­function) pathogenic variant of the Ca2+-­sensing
receptor, forcing the receptor to an on state with subsequent depression
of PTH secretion even during hypocalcemia. The patients have hypercalciuria. The hypocalcemia is usually mild and might not require
treatment beyond childhood (see Fig. 610.1).

HYPOPARATHYROIDISM ASSOCIATED WITH
MITOCHONDRIAL DISORDERS

Mitochondrial DNA pathogenic variants in Kearns-­
Sayre syndrome, MELAS (mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis,
and strokelike episodes) syndrome, and mitochondrial trifunctional

Removal or damage of the parathyroid glands can complicate thyroidectomy. Hypoparathyroidism has developed even when the parathyroid glands have been identified and left undisturbed at the time of
operation. This may be the result of interference with the blood supply
or of postoperative edema and fibrosis. Symptoms of tetany can occur
abruptly postoperatively and may be temporary or permanent. In
some instances, symptoms develop insidiously and go undetected until
months after thyroidectomy. Occasionally, the first evidence of surgical
hypoparathyroidism may be the development of cataract. The status
of parathyroid function should be carefully monitored in all patients
undergoing thyroidectomy.
Deposition of iron pigment or of copper in the parathyroid glands
(thalassemia, Wilson disease) can also produce hypoparathyroidism.

AUTOIMMUNE HYPOPARATHYROIDISM

An autoimmune mechanism for hypoparathyroidism is strongly
suggested by the finding of parathyroid antibodies and by its frequent association with other autoimmune disorders or organ-­
specific antibodies. Autoimmune hypoparathyroidism is often
associated with Addison disease and chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis. The association of at least two of these three conditions has
been classified as autoimmune polyglandular disease type I (see
Chapter 608). It is also known as autoimmune polyendocrinopathy,
candidiasis, and ectodermal dystrophy (APECED). This syndrome
is inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion and is not related to
any single human leukocyte antigen–associated haplotype. Approximately one third of pediatric patients with this syndrome have all
three components; 66% have only two of three conditions. The candidiasis almost always precedes the other disorders (70% of cases

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 611 u Hypoparathyroidism

3437

occur in children younger than 5 years of age); the hypoparathyroidism (90% of cases occur after 3 years of age) usually occurs before
Addison disease (90% of cases occur after 6 years of age). A variety
of other disorders, including alopecia areata or totalis, malabsorption disorder, asplenia, pernicious anemia, gonadal failure, autoimmune hepatitis, vitiligo, dental enamel hypoplasia, nail dystrophy,
keratoconjunctivitis, and insulin-­dependent diabetes, occur at various times. Some of these associations might not appear until adult
life. Autoimmune thyroid disease is a rare concomitant finding in
pediatric patients.
Affected siblings can have the same or different constellations of
disorders (hypoparathyroidism, Addison disease). The disorder is
exceptionally prevalent among Finns and Iranian Jews. The gene
for this disorder is designated AIRE (autoimmune regulator); it is
located on chromosome 21q22. It appears to be a transcription factor that plays an essential role in the development of immunologic
tolerance. Patients with Addison disease as part of polyendocrinopathy syndrome type I have demonstrated adrenal-­specific autoantibody reactivity directed against the side-­chain cleavage enzyme.

adequacy but also are low. The serum level of alkaline phosphatase is
normal or low, and the level of 1,25(OH)2D3 is usually low, but high
levels have been found in some children with severe hypocalcemia.
The level of magnesium is normal but should always be checked in
hypocalcemic patients. Levels of PTH are low relative to the calcium
level when measured by immunometric assay. Radiographs of the
bones occasionally reveal an increased density limited to the metaphyses, suggesting heavy metal poisoning, or an increased density of the
lamina dura. Radiographs or CT scans of the skull can reveal calcifications in the basal ganglia. There is a prolongation of the QT interval
on the electrocardiogram, which disappears when the hypocalcemia
is corrected. The electroencephalogram usually reveals widespread
slow activity; the tracing returns to normal after the serum calcium
concentration has been within the normal range for a few weeks,
unless irreversible brain damage has occurred or unless the parathyroid insufficiency is associated with epilepsy. When hypoparathyroidism occurs concurrently with Addison disease, the serum level
of calcium may be normal, but hypocalcemia appears after effective
treatment of the adrenal insufficiency.

IDIOPATHIC HYPOPARATHYROIDISM

Treatment

The term idiopathic hypoparathyroidism should be reserved for the
small residuum of children with hypoparathyroidism for whom no
causative mechanism can be defined. Most children in whom onset
of hypoparathyroidism occurs after the first few years of life have
an autoimmune condition. Autoantibodies to the extracellular
domain of the Ca2-­sensing receptor have been identified in some
patients with acquired hypoparathyroidism. One should always
consider incomplete forms of DiGeorge syndrome or an activating Ca2-­
sensing receptor pathogenic variant in the differential
diagnosis.

Clinical Manifestations

There is a spectrum of parathyroid deficiencies with clinical manifestations varying from no symptoms to those of complete and
long-­standing deficiency. Mild deficiency may be revealed only by
appropriate laboratory studies. Muscular pain and cramps are early
manifestations; they progress to numbness, stiffness, and tingling of
the hands and feet. There may be only a positive Chvostek or Trousseau sign or laryngeal and carpopedal spasms. Seizures with or
without loss of consciousness can occur at intervals of days, weeks,
or months. These episodes can begin with abdominal pain, followed
by tonic rigidity, retraction of the head, and cyanosis. Hypoparathyroidism is often mistaken for epilepsy. Headache, vomiting, increased
intracranial pressure, and papilledema may be associated with seizures
and might suggest a brain tumor.
In patients with long-­standing hypocalcemia, the teeth erupt late
and irregularly. Enamel formation is irregular, and the teeth may be
unusually soft. The skin may be dry and scaly, and the nails might
have horizontal lines. Mucocutaneous candidiasis, when present,
antedates the development of hypoparathyroidism; the candidal
infection most often involves the nails, the oral mucosa, the angles
of the mouth, and less often, the skin; it is difficult to treat.
Cataracts in patients with long-­
standing untreated disease
are a direct consequence of hypoparathyroidism; other autoimmune ocular disorders such as keratoconjunctivitis can also
occur. Manifestations of Addison disease, lymphocytic thyroiditis,
pernicious anemia, alopecia areata or totalis, hepatitis, and primary gonadal insufficiency may also be associated with those of
hypoparathyroidism.
Permanent physical and mental deterioration occurs if initiation of
treatment is long delayed.

Laboratory Findings

The serum calcium level is low (5-­7 mg/dL), and the phosphorus
level is elevated (7-­12 mg/dL). Blood levels of ionized calcium (usually approximately 45% of the total) more nearly reflect physiologic

Emergency treatment of neonatal tetany consists of intravenous injections of 5-­10 mL or 1-­3 mg/kg of a 10% solution of
calcium gluconate (elemental calcium 9.3 mg/mL) at the rate
of 0.5-­1.0 mL/min while the heart rate is monitored and a total
dose not to exceed 20 mg of elemental calcium/kg. Additionally, 1,25-­
dihydroxycholecalciferol (calcitriol) should be given.
The initial dosage is 0.25 μg/24 hr; the maintenance dosage
ranges from 0.01-­0.10 g/kg/24 hr to a maximum of 1-­2 μg/24 hr.
Calcitriol has a short half-­life and should be given in two equally
divided doses; it has the advantages of rapid onset of effect (1-­4
days) and rapid reversal of hypercalcemia after discontinuation in
the event of overdosage (calcium levels begin to fall in 3-­4 days).
Calcitriol is supplied as an oral solution.
An adequate intake of calcium should be ensured. Supplemental
calcium can be given in the form of calcium gluconate or calcium
glubionate to provide 800 mg of elemental calcium daily or 25-­
50 mg/kg day dosing of elemental calcium as needed. Foods with
high phosphorus content such as milk, eggs, and cheese should be
reduced in the diet. Other therapies used for some children with
hypoparathyroidism in studies include hormone replacement with
recombinant PTH 1-­34 or recombinant PTH 1-­84 given via a pump
or subcutaneous injections in adult patients who do not respond to
conventional therapy.
Clinical evaluation of the patient and frequent determinations of the
serum calcium levels are indicated in the early stages of treatment to
determine the requirement for calcitriol, calcium supplementation, or
vitamin D2. If hypercalcemia occurs, therapy should be discontinued
and resumed at a lower dose after the serum calcium level has returned
to normal. In long-­standing cases of hypercalcemia, repair of cerebral
and dental changes is not likely. Pigmentation, lowering of blood pressure, or weight loss can indicate adrenal insufficiency, which requires
specific treatment. Patients with autosomal dominant hypocalcemic
hypercalciuria can develop nephrocalcinosis and renal impairment if
treated with vitamin D.

Differential Diagnosis

Magnesium deficiency must be considered in patients with unexplained hypocalcemia. Concentrations of serum magnesium <1.5 mg/
dL (1.2 mEq/L) are usually abnormal (Table 611.2). Administration of
calcium is ineffective, but administration of magnesium promptly corrects both calcium and magnesium levels. Oral supplements of magnesium are necessary to maintain levels of magnesium in the normal
range.
Hypomagnesemia also occurs in malabsorption syndromes such as
Crohn disease and cystic fibrosis. Patients with autoimmune polyglandular disease type I and hypoparathyroidism can also have concurrent

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3438 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 611.2  Genetic Causes of Hypomagnesemia
CATEGORIES/NAMES OF
­DISORDERS*

GENE

INHERITANCE

DISTINCTIVE FINDINGS OTHER THAN
­HYPOMAGNESEMIA†
Hypercalciuria, nephrocalcinosis

HYPERCALCIURIC HYPOMAGENESEMIAS
FHHNC type 1

CLDN16

R

Polyuria/polydipsia, elevated serum iPTH, renal failure

FHHNC type 2

CLDN19

R

Same as FHHNC type 1, plus ocular abnormalities

ADHH Bartter syndrome type 5

CASR

D

Hypocalcemia with normal or low PTH

Bartter syndrome, type 3
(classical type)

CLCNKB

R

Gitelman-­like phenotype possible, rarely nephrocalcinosis
Hypocalciuria, hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis

GITELMAN-­LIKE HYPOMAGNESEMIAS
Gitelman syndrome

SLC12A3

R

Chondrocalcinosis at older age

Bartter syndrome, type 4

BSND

R

Prenatal complications, renal failure early in life possible

EAST syndrome

KCNJ10

R

Sensorineural deafness, seizures, ataxia

IDH

FXYD2

D

ADTKD/RCAD

HNF1B

D

Renal, genital, and pancreatic abnormalities and MODY5
in highly variable combination and presentation

HPABH4D/RCAD-­like

PCBD1

R

MODY5-­like
Variable

MITOCHONDRIAL HYPOMAGNESEMIAS
HHH

MT-­TI

Mt

Hypertension and hypercholesterolemia

HUPRAS

SARS2

R

Hyperuricemia, pulmonary hypertension, renal failure,
and alkalosis

KSS

Mitochondrial deletion

Mt

External ophthalmoplegia, retinopathy and cardiac
conduction defects

HSH

TRPM6

R

Neonatal presentation with severe hypomagnesemia

IRH

EGF

R

Intellectual disability

NISBD2

EGFR

R

Severe inflammation of skin and bowel from birth

HSMR

CNNM2

D/R

Intellectual disability, seizures

ADH/EA1

KCNA1

D

Episodic myokymia

KCS2

FAM111A

D

Impaired skeletal development and hypocalcemic
hypoparathyroidism

Variable

OTHER HYPOMAGNESEMIAS

*ADH, Autosomal dominant hypomagnesemia; ADHH, autosomal dominant hypocalcemia with hypocalciuria; ADTKD, autosomal dominant tubulointerstitial kidney disease;
EA1, episodic ataxia type 1; EAST, epilepsy, ataxia, sensorineural deafness and tubulopathy; FHHNC, familial hypomagnesemia with hypocalcemia and nephrocalcinosis;
HHH, hypertension, hypercholesterolemia and hypomagnesemia; HPABH4D, hyperphenylalaninemia BH4-­deficient; HSH, hypomagnesemia with secondary hypocalcemia;
HSMR, hypomagnesemia with seizures and mental retardation; HUPRAS, hyperuricemia, pulmonary hypertension, renal failure and alkalotic syndrome; IDH, isolated dominant
hypomagnesemia; IRH, isolated recessive hypomagnesemia; KCS2, Kenny-­Chaffey syndrome type 2; KSS, Kearns-­Sayre syndrome; NISBD2, neonatal inflammatory skin and bowel
disease type 2; RCAD, renal cysts and diabetes.
†iPTH, Intact parathyroid hormone; MODY5, maturity onset diabetes of the young type 5.
Modified from Viering DHHM, de Baaij JHF, Walsh SB. et al. Genetic causes of hypomagnesemia, a clinical overview. Pediatr Nephrol. 2017;32:1123–1135.

steatorrhea and low magnesium levels. Therapy with aminoglycosides
causes hypomagnesemia by increasing urinary losses.
It is not clear how low levels of magnesium lead to hypocalcemia.
Evidence suggests that hypomagnesemia impairs release of PTH and
induces resistance to the effects of the hormone, but other mechanisms
also may be operative.
Poisoning with inorganic phosphate leads to hypocalcemia and tetany. Infants administered large doses of inorganic phosphates, either
as laxatives or as sodium phosphate enemas, have had sudden onset of
tetany, with serum calcium levels <5 mg/dL and markedly elevated levels of phosphate. Symptoms are quickly relieved by intravenous administration of calcium. The mechanism of the hypocalcemia is not clear
(see Chapter 73.6).

Hypocalcemia can occur early in treatment of acute lymphoblastic
leukemia. Hypocalcemia is usually associated with hyperphosphatemia
resulting from destruction of lymphoblasts.
Episodic symptomatic hypocalcemia occurs in Kenny-­Caffey syndrome, which is characterized by medullary stenosis of the long bones,
short stature, delayed closure of the fontanel, delayed bone age, and
eye abnormalities. Idiopathic hypoparathyroidism and abnormal PTH
levels have been found. Autosomal dominant and autosomal recessive
modes of inheritance have been reported. Pathogenic variants of the
TBCE gene (1q43-­44) perturb microtubule organization in diseased
cells in Kenny-­Caffey syndrome type 1.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 612 u Pseudohypoparathyroidism

Chapter 612

Pseudohypoparathyroidism
Patrick C. Hanley and Daniel A. Doyle
In pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP, also known as Albright hereditary
osteodystrophy), the parathyroid glands are normal or hyperplastic, and
they can synthesize and secrete parathyroid hormone (PTH). Serum
levels of immunoreactive PTH are elevated even when the patient is
hypocalcemic and may be elevated when the patient is normocalcemic.
Neither endogenous nor administered PTH raises the serum levels of
calcium or lowers the levels of phosphorus. The genetic defects in the
hormone receptor adenylate cyclase system are classified into various
types depending on the phenotypic and biochemical findings (Table
612.1).

TYPE Ia

Type Ia accounts for the majority of patients with PHP. Affected
patients have a genetic defect of the α subunit of the stimulatory guanine nucleotide-­binding protein (Gsα). This coupling factor is required
for PTH bound to cell surface receptors to activate cyclic adenosine
monophosphate (cAMP). Heterogeneous pathogenic variants of the
Gsα gene have been documented; the gene is located on chromosome
20q13.2. Deficiency of the Gsα subunit is a generalized cellular defect
and accounts for the association of other endocrine disorders with type
Ia PHP. The defect is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait, and
the paucity of father-­to-­son transmissions is thought to be a result of
decreased fertility in males.

3439

Tetany is often the presenting sign. Affected children have a
short, stocky build and a round face. Brachydactyly with dimpling
of the dorsum of the hand is usually present. The second metacarpal
is involved least often. As a result, the index finger occasionally is
longer than the middle finger. Likewise, the second metatarsal is
only rarely affected. There may be other skeletal abnormalities such
as short and wide phalanges, bowing, exostoses, and thickening of
the calvaria. These patients often have obesity, calcium deposits,
and metaplastic bone formation subcutaneously. Moderate degrees
of cognitive impairment, calcification of the basal ganglia, and lenticular cataracts are common in patients whose disease is diagnosed
late.
Some members of affected kindreds may have the usual anatomic
stigmata of PHP type Ia, but serum levels of calcium and phosphorus are normal despite reduced Gsα activity; however, PTH levels
may be slightly elevated. Such patients have been labeled as having pseudo­pseudohypoparathyroidism (PPHP). Affected patients
with PPHP have pathologic variants in the GNAS gene inherited
in an autosomal dominant pattern. PPHP patients have inactivating GNAS variants encoding the Gsα subunit that are paternally
inherited. The signs and symptoms of PPHP are similar to those of
patients with PHP type Ia, except patients with PPHP do not have
the characteristic PTH resistance seen in PHP type Ia.
Patients with PHP type Ic also have the usual anatomic stigmata
of PHP along with the laboratory abnormalities associated with
PTH resistance, including elevated phosphorus and PTH in the setting of hypocalcemia. PHP type Ic is differentiated from PHP type
Ia and PPHP in that patients do not have abnormal Gsα activity.
Transition from normocalcemia to hypocalcemia often occurs
with increasing age of the patient. These phenotypically similar but
metabolically dissimilar patients may be in the same family and
have the same pathogenic variants of Gsα protein. It is not known
what other factors cause clinically overt hypocalcemia in some

Table 612.1  Clinical, Biochemical, and Genetic Features of Hypoparathyroid and Pseudohypoparathyroid Disorders
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM
HYPOPARATHYROIDISM

PHP 1a

PPHP

PHP 1b

PHP 1c

PHP 2

AHO
manifestations

No

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

No

Serum calcium

↓

↓

N

↓

↓

↓

Serum PO4

↑

↑

N

↑

↑

↑

Serum PTH

↓

↑

N

↑

↑

↑

Urinary cAMP*
(Chase-­
Auerbach test)

↑

↓

↑

↓

↓

↑

Urinary PO4
(Ellsworth-­
Howard test)

↑

↓

↑

↓

↓

↓

Gsα activity

N

↓

↓

N

N

N

Inheritance

AD, AR, X

AD

AD

AD

AD

Sporadic

?Adenyl cyclase

?cAMP targets

Yes

No

Response to PTH:

Molecular defect

PTH, CaSR, GATA3, Gcm2,
others

GNAS1

GNAS1

GNAS1†

Other hormonal
resistance

No

Yes

No

No

*Plasma cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) responses are similar to those of urinary cAMP.
†Involves deletions that are located upstream of GNAS1.

↓, Decreased; ↑, increased; ?, presumed, but not proved; AD, autosomal dominant; AHO, Albright hereditary osteodystrophy; AR, autosomal recessive; N, normal; PHP,
pseudoparathyroidism; PPHP, pseudopseudoparathyroidism; PTH, parathyroid hormone; X, X-­linked.
From Thakker RV. The parathyroid glands, hypercalcemia and hypocalcemia. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds. Goldman-­Cecil Medicine, 25th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Table
245-­8.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3440 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
affected patients and not in others. There is evidence that the Gsα
variant is paternally transmitted in PPHP and maternally transmitted in patients with type Ia disease. The gene may be imprinted in
a tissue-­specific manner and have different methylation patterns.
In addition to resistance to PTH, resistance to other G protein–coupled receptors for thyroid-­stimulating hormone (TSH),
gonadotropins, growth hormone–releasing hormone (GHRH),
calcitonin, and glucagon can result in various metabolic effects.
Clinical hypothyroidism is uncommon, but basal levels of TSH
are elevated and thyrotropin-­releasing hormone–stimulated TSH
responses are exaggerated. Moderately decreased levels of thyroxine and increased levels of TSH have been demonstrated by newborn thyroid-­screening programs, leading to the detection of type
Ia PHP in infancy. In adults, gonadal dysfunction is common, as
manifested by sexual immaturity, amenorrhea, oligomenorrhea,
and infertility. Each of these abnormalities can be related to deficient synthesis of cAMP secondary to a deficiency of Gsα, but it is
not clear why resistance to other G protein–dependent hormones
(corticotropin, vasopressin) are much less affected.
Serum levels of calcium are low, and those of phosphorus and
alkaline phosphatase are elevated. Clinical diagnosis can be confirmed by demonstration of a markedly attenuated response in
urinary phosphate and cAMP after intravenous infusion of the synthetic 1-­34 fragment of human PTH (teriparatide acetate). Definitive diagnosis is established by demonstration of the pathogenic
variant in the G protein gene.

Type Ia with Precocious Puberty

Two males have been reported with both type Ia PHP and gonadotropin-­
independent precocious puberty (see Chapter 600.7). They were found
to have a temperature-­sensitive variant of the Gs protein. Thus at normal body temperature (37°C), the Gs is degraded, resulting in PHP, but
in the cooler temperature of the testes (33°C) the Gs variant results in
constitutive activation of the luteinizing hormone receptor and precocious puberty.

TYPE Ib

Affected patients have normal levels of G protein activity and a
normal phenotypic appearance. These patients have tissue-­specific
resistance to PTH but not to other hormones. Serum levels of calcium, phosphorus, and immunoreactive PTH are the same as those
in patients with type Ia PHP. These patients also show no rise in
cAMP in response to exogenous administration of PTH. Bioactive
PTH is not increased. The pathophysiology of the disorder in this
group of patients is caused by paternal uniparental isodisomy of
chromosome 20q and resulting GNAS1 methylation. This, along
with the loss of the maternal GNAS1 gene, leads to PTH resistance
in the proximal renal tubules, which leads to impaired mineral ion
homeostasis. Pathologic genetic deletions in the STX16 gene are
also associated with PHP type Ib.

ACRODYSOSTOSIS WITH HORMONE RESISTANCE

Patients with acrodysostosis resemble those with PHP type Ia, but
defects in the Gsα subunit are not present. Instead, in one subgroup of
patients there is a defect in the gene encoding PRKAR1A, the cAMP-­
dependent regulatory subunit of protein kinase A that confers resistance to multiple hormones, including PTH. Another subgroup has a
defect in a phosphodiesterase gene Pde4d. This subgroup also carries
the phenotype of PHP type Ia but rarely exhibits the hormone resistance. Acroscyphodysplasia is a distinctive form of metaphyseal dysplasia characterized by the distal femoral and proximal tibial epiphyses
embedded in cup-­shaped, large metaphyses known as metaphyseal
scypho or cup deformity and is a phenotypic variation of PHP and
acrodysostosis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 613

Hyperparathyroidism
Evan G. Graber and Daniel A. Doyle
Excessive production of parathyroid hormone (PTH) can result from
a primary defect of the parathyroid glands such as an adenoma or
hyperplasia (primary hyperparathyroidism).
More often, the increased production of PTH is compensatory, usually
aimed at correcting hypocalcemic states of diverse origins (secondary
hyperparathyroidism). In vitamin D–deficient rickets and the malabsorption syndromes, intestinal absorption of calcium is deficient, but
hypocalcemia and tetany may be averted by increased activity of the
parathyroid glands. In pseudohypoparathyroidism, PTH levels are
elevated because a pathogenic variant in the Gsα protein interferes with
response to PTH. Early in chronic renal disease, hyperphosphatemia
results in a reciprocal fall in the calcium concentration with a consequent
increase in PTH, but in advanced stages of renal failure, production of
1,25(OH)2D3 is also decreased, leading to worsening hypocalcemia and
further stimulation of PTH. In some instances, if stimulation of the parathyroid glands has been sufficiently intense and protracted, the glands
continue to secrete increased levels of PTH for months or years after kidney transplantation, with resulting hypercalcemia.

ETIOLOGY

Childhood hyperparathyroidism is uncommon. Onset during childhood is usually the result of a single benign adenoma. It usually becomes
manifested after 10 years of age. There have been some kindreds in
which multiple members have hyperparathyroidism transmitted in an
autosomal dominant fashion. Most of the affected family members are
adults, but children have been involved in approximately 30% of the
pedigrees. Some affected patients in these families are asymptomatic,
and disease is detected only by careful study. In other kindreds, hyperparathyroidism occurs as part of the constellation known as the multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) syndromes (see Chapter 609) or of
hyperparathyroidism–jaw tumor syndrome.
Neonatal severe hyperparathyroidism is rare. Symptoms develop
shortly after birth and consist of anorexia, irritability, lethargy, constipation, and failure to thrive. Radiographs reveal subperiosteal bone
resorption, osteoporosis, and pathologic fractures. Symptoms may be
mild, resolving without treatment, or can have a rapidly fatal course
if diagnosis and treatment are delayed. Histologically, the parathyroid
glands show diffuse hyperplasia. Affected siblings have been observed
in some kindreds, and parental consanguinity has been reported in
several kindreds. Most cases have occurred in kindreds with the clinical and biochemical features of familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia.
Infants with neonatal severe hyperparathyroidism may be homozygous
or heterozygous for the pathogenic variant in the Ca2+-­sensing receptor gene, whereas most persons with one copy of this variant exhibit
autosomal dominant familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia.
MEN type 1 (see Chapter 609) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by hyperplasia or neoplasia of the endocrine pancreas (which
secretes gastrin, insulin, pancreatic polypeptide, and occasionally glucagon), the anterior pituitary (which usually secretes prolactin), and the
parathyroid glands. In most kindreds, hyperparathyroidism is usually the
presenting manifestation, with a prevalence approaching 100% by 50 years
of age and occurring only rarely in children younger than 18 years of age.
With genetic testing, it is possible to detect carriers of the gene with 99%
accuracy at birth, avoiding unnecessary biochemical screening programs.
The gene for MEN type 1 is on chromosome 11q13; it appears to
function as a tumor-­suppressor gene and follows the two-­hit hypothesis of tumor development. The first variant (germinal) is inherited and
is recessive to the dominant allele; this does not result in tumor formation. A second variant (somatic) is required to eliminate the normal
allele, which then leads to tumor formation.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 613 u Hyperparathyroidism
Hyperparathyroidism–jaw tumor syndrome is an autosomal dominant (CDC73) disorder characterized by parathyroid adenomas and fibro-­
osseous jaw tumors. Affected patients can also have polycystic kidney
disease, renal hamartomas, and Wilms tumor. Although the condition
affects adults primarily, it has been diagnosed as early as age 10 years. MEN
type 2 may also be associated with hyperparathyroidism (see Chapter 609).
Transient neonatal hyperparathyroidism has occurred in a few
infants born to mothers with hypoparathyroidism (idiopathic or surgical) or with pseudohypoparathyroidism. In each case, the maternal disorder had been undiagnosed or inadequately treated during pregnancy.
The cause of the condition is chronic intrauterine exposure to hypocalcemia with resultant hyperplasia of the fetal parathyroid glands. In
the newborn, manifestations involve the bones primarily, and healing
occurs between 4 and 7 months of age.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

At all ages, the clinical manifestations of hypercalcemia of any cause include
muscle weakness, fatigue, headache, hyporeflexia, anorexia, abdominal
pain, nausea, vomiting, constipation, polydipsia and polyuria (nephrogenic diabetes insipidus), weight loss, and fever. When hypercalcemia
is of long duration, calcium may be deposited in the renal parenchyma
(nephrocalcinosis), with progressively diminished renal function. Renal
calculi can develop and can cause renal colic and hematuria. Osseous
changes can produce pain in the back or extremities, disturbances of gait,
genu valgum, fractures, and tumors. Height can decrease from compression of vertebrae; the patient can become bedridden. Detection of completely asymptomatic patients is increasing with the advent of automated
panel assays that include serum calcium determinations.
Abdominal pain is occasionally prominent and may be associated with
acute pancreatitis. Parathyroid crisis can occur, manifested by serum
calcium levels >15 mg/dL and progressive oliguria, azotemia, stupor,
and coma. In infants, failure to thrive, poor feeding, and hypotonia are
common. Cognitive impairment, convulsions, and blindness can occur
as sequelae of long-­standing hypercalcemia. Psychiatric manifestations
include depression, confusion, dementia, stupor, and psychosis.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

The serum calcium level is elevated; 39 of 45 children with adenomas had
levels >12 mg/dL. The hypercalcemia is more severe in infants with parathyroid hyperplasia; concentrations ranging from 15 to 20 mg/dL are common, and values as high as 30 mg/dL have been reported. Even when the
total serum calcium level is borderline or only slightly elevated, ionized
calcium levels are often increased. The serum phosphorus level is reduced
to approximately 3 mg/dL or less, and the level of serum magnesium is
low. The urine can have a low and fixed specific gravity, and serum levels of
nonprotein nitrogen and uric acid may be elevated. In patients with adenomas who have skeletal involvement, serum phosphatase levels are elevated,
but in infants with hyperplasia, the levels of alkaline phosphatase may be
normal even when there is extensive involvement of bone.
The ECG may demonstrate a prolonged PR interval, short QT interval, widened QRS complex and bradycardia.
Serum levels of intact PTH are elevated, especially in relation to the
level of calcium. Calcitonin levels are normal. Acute hypercalcemia can
stimulate calcitonin release, but with prolonged hypercalcemia, hypercalcitoninemia does not occur.
The most consistent and characteristic radiographic finding is
resorption of subperiosteal bone, best seen along the margins of the
phalanges of the hands. In the skull, there may be gross trabeculation
or a granular appearance resulting from focal rarefaction; the lamina
dura may be absent. In more advanced disease, there may be generalized rarefaction, cysts, tumors, fractures, and deformities. Approximately 10% of patients have radiographic signs of rickets. Radiographs
of the abdomen can reveal renal calculi or nephrocalcinosis.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Other causes of hypercalcemia can result in a similar clinical pattern and
must be differentiated from hyperparathyroidism (Table 613.1 and Fig.
613.1). A low serum phosphorus level with hypercalcemia is characteristic of primary hyperparathyroidism; elevated levels of PTH are also diagnostic. With hypercalcemia of any cause except hyperparathyroidism and

3441

familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia, PTH levels are suppressed. Pharmacologic doses of corticosteroids lower the serum calcium level to normal in
patients with hypercalcemia from other causes but generally do not affect
the calcium level in patients with hyperparathyroidism.

TREATMENT

When hyperparathyroidism is clearly established, imaging and possibly surgical exploration are indicated. All glands should be carefully
inspected and if an adenoma is discovered, it should be removed. Very
few instances of carcinoma are known in children. Most neonates with
severe hypercalcemia require total parathyroidectomy; less severe hypercalcemia remits spontaneously in others. Still others have been treated
successfully with bisphosphonates and calcimimetics. The patient should
be carefully observed postoperatively for the development of hypocalcemia and tetany; intravenous administration of calcium gluconate may be
required for a few days. The serum calcium level then gradually returns
to normal, and, under ordinary circumstances, a diet high in calcium and
phosphorus must be maintained for only several months after operation.
CT, real-­time ultrasonography, and subtraction scintigraphy using
sestamibi/technetium-­pertechnetate alone and in combination have
proved effective in localizing a single adenoma versus diffuse hyperplasia in 50–90% of adults. Parathyroid surgeons often rely on intraoperative selective venous sampling with intraoperative assay of PTH for
localizing and removing the source of increased PTH secretion.

PROGNOSIS

The prognosis is good if the disease is recognized early and there is appropriate surgical treatment. When extensive osseous lesions are present,
deformities may be permanent. A search for other affected family members is indicated.

613.1 Other Causes of Hypercalcemia
Evan G. Graber and Daniel A. Doyle

FAMILIAL HYPOCALCIURIC HYPERCALCEMIA
(FAMILIAL BENIGN HYPERCALCEMIA)

Patients with familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia are usually asymptomatic, and the hypercalcemia is identified by chance during routine
investigation for other conditions. Adults may have recurrent pancreatitis,
chondrocalcinosis, or premature vascular calcification. The parathyroid
glands are normal, PTH levels are inappropriately normal, and subtotal
parathyroidectomy does not correct the hypercalcemia. Serum levels of
magnesium are high-­normal or mildly elevated. The ratio of calcium-­to-­
creatinine clearance is usually decreased despite hypercalcemia.
The disorder is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner and is
caused by a pathogenic variant (CASR) on chromosome 3q2 in ∼65% of
patients (type 1). In type 2, there is a pathogenic variant in GNA11, and
in type 3, the variant is on AP2S1. The disorder can be diagnosed early
in childhood by serum and urinary calcium concentrations. Detection
of other affected family members is important to avoid inappropriate
parathyroid surgery. The defect in type 1 is an inactivating mutation in
the Ca2+-­sensing receptor gene. This G-­protein–coupled receptor senses
the level of free Ca2+ in the blood and triggers the pathway to increase
extracellular Ca2+ in the face of hypocalcemia. This receptor functions in
the parathyroid and kidney to regulate calcium homeostasis; inactivating mutations lead to an increased set point with respect to serum Ca2+,
resulting in mild to moderate hypercalcemia in heterozygotes.

GRANULOMATOUS DISEASES

Hypercalcemia occurs in 30–50% of children with sarcoidosis and less
often in patients with other granulomatous diseases such as tuberculosis. Levels of PTH are suppressed, and levels of 1,25(OH)2D3 are elevated. The source of ectopic 1,25(OH)2D3 is the activated macrophage,
through stimulation by interferon-­α from T lymphocytes, which are
present in abundance in granulomatous lesions. Unlike renal tubular
cells, the 1α-­hydroxylase in macrophages is unresponsive to homeostatic regulation. Oral administration of prednisone lowers serum levels of 1,25(OH)2D3 to normal and corrects the hypercalcemia.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3442 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 613.1  Causes of Hypercalcemia
I. NEONATE/INFANT
A.	Maternal Disorders
1.	Excessive vitamin D ingestion, hypoparathyroidism,
pseudohypoparathyroidism
B.	Neonate/Infant
1.	Iatrogenic: excessive intake of calcium, vitamin D, vitamin A
2.	Phosphate depletion
3.	Subcutaneous fat necrosis
4. Williams syndrome (del7q11.23/WBSCR1)
5.	Neonatal severe hyperparathyroidism (CaSR)
6.	Metaphyseal chondrodysplasia, Murk-­Jansen type (PTH1R)
7.	Idiopathic infantile hypercalcemia (CYP24A1)
(25-­hydroxyvitamin D 24-­hydroxylase)
8.	Persistent parathyroid hormone–related protein
9.	Lactase/disaccharidase deficiency (LCT)
10.	Infantile hypophosphatasia (TNSALP)
11.	Mucolipidosis type II (GNPTAB)
12.	Blue diaper syndrome
13.	Antenatal Bartter syndrome types 1 and 2 (SLC12A1, KCNJ1)
14.	Distal renal tubular acidosis
15.	IMAGe syndrome (CDKN1C)
16.	Post bone marrow transplantation for osteopetrosis
17.	Endocrinopathies: primary adrenal insufficiency, severe
congenital hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism
II. HYPERPARATHYROIDISM
A.	Sporadic
1.	Parathyroid hyperplasia, adenoma, carcinoma
B.	Familial
1.	Neonatal severe hyperparathyroidism (CaSR)
2.	Multiple endocrine neoplasia, type 1 (MEN1)
3.	Multiple endocrine neoplasia, type 2A (RET)
4.	Multiple endocrine neoplasia, type 2B (RET)
5.	Multiple endocrine neoplasia, type 4 (CDKN1B)
6.	McCune-­Albright syndrome (GNAS)
7.	Familial isolated hyperparathyroidism 1 (CDC73)
8.	Familial isolated hyperparathyroidism 2 (jaw tumor syndrome)
(CDC73)
9.	Familial isolated hyperparathyroidism 3
10.	Jansen metaphyseal dysplasia (PTH1R)
C.	Secondary/tertiary
1.	Postrenal transplantation
2.	Chronic hyperphosphatemia
D.	Hypercalcemia of malignancy
1.	Ectopic production of parathyroid hormone–related peptide
2.	Metastatic dissolution of bone

III. FAMILIAL HYPOCALCIURIC HYPERCALCEMIA
A.	Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia I (CaSR)
1.	Loss-­of-­function mutations in CaSR
• Monoallelic: familial benign hypercalcemia
• Biallelic: neonatal severe hyperparathyroidism
B.	Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia II (GNA11)
C.	Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia III, Oklahoma variant (AP2S1)
D.	CaSR-­blocking autoantibodies
IV. EXCESSIVE CALCIUM OR VITAMIN D
A.	Milk-­alkali syndrome
B.	Exogenous ingestion of calcium or vitamin D or topical
application of vitamin D (calcitriol or analog)
C.	Ectopic production of calcitriol associated with granulomatous
diseases (sarcoidosis, cat scratch fever; tuberculosis,
histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis, cryptococcosis, leprosy;
human immunodeficiency virus; cytomegalovirus; chronic
inflammatory bowel disease, Blau syndrome, granulomatosis with
polyangiitis)
D.	Neoplasia
1.	Primary bone tumors
2.	Metastatic tumors with osteolysis
3.	Lymphoma, leukemia
4.	Dysgerminoma
5.	Pheochromocytoma
6.	Langerhans cell histiocytosis
7.	Tumors secreting parathyroid hormone–related peptide,
growth factors, cytokines, prostaglandins, and osteoclast-­
activating factors
E. Williams-­Beuren syndrome (del7q11.23)
V. IMMOBILIZATION
VI. OTHER CAUSES
A.	Drugs: thiazides, lithium, vitamin A and analogs, calcium, alkali,
antiestrogens, aminophylline, teriparatide, abaloparatide
B.	Total parenteral nutrition
C.	Endocrinopathies: hyperthyroidism, congenital hypothyroidism,
Addison disease, pheochromocytoma
D.	Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide–secreting tumor
E.	Acute or chronic renal failure/administration of aluminum
F.	Hypophosphatasia
G.	Juvenile idiopathic arthritis: cytokine mediated
H.	Late phase of rhabdomyolysis

IMAGe, intrauterine growth restriction, metaphyseal dysplasia, adrenal hypoplasia congenita, genital abnormalities; WBSCR1, Williams-­Beuren syndrome chromosome region 1.
Adapted from Lietman SA, Germain-­Lee EL, Levine MA. Hypercalcemia in children and adolescents. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2010;22:508–515; Benjamin RW, Moats-­Staats BM, Calikoglu
A, et al. Hypercalcemia in children. Pediatr Endocrinol Rev. 2008;5:778–784; Davies JH. A practical approach to the problems of hypercalcaemia. Endocr Dev. 2009;16:93–114.

HYPERCALCEMIA OF MALIGNANCY

Hypercalcemia often occurs in adults with a wide variety of solid tumors
but is identified much less often in children. It has been reported in infants
with malignant rhabdoid tumors of the kidney or congenital mesoblastic
nephroma and in children with neuroblastoma, medulloblastoma, leukemia, Burkitt lymphoma, dysgerminoma, and rhabdomyosarcoma. Serum
levels of PTH are rarely elevated. In most patients, the hypercalcemia
associated with malignancy is caused by elevated levels of parathyroid hormone–related peptide and not PTH. Rarely, tumors produce 1,25(OH)2D3
or PTH ectopically.

MISCELLANEOUS CAUSES OF HYPERCALCEMIA

Hypercalcemia can occur in infants with subcutaneous fat necrosis.
Levels of PTH are normal. In one infant, the level of 1,25(OH)2D3 was
elevated, and biopsy of the skin lesion revealed granulomatous infiltration, suggesting that the mechanism of the hypercalcemia was akin to
that seen in patients with other granulomatous disease. In another infant,
although the level of 1,25(OH)2D3 was normal, PTH was suppressed,
suggesting the hypercalcemia was not related to PTH. Treatment with
prednisone is effective. Bisphosphonate therapy has also been effective
in severe cases.

Hypophosphatasia, especially the severe infantile form, is usually associated with mild to moderate hypercalcemia (see Chapter 747). Serum
levels of phosphorus are normal, and those of alkaline phosphatase are
subnormal. The bones exhibit rachitic-­like lesions on radiographs. Urinary
levels of phosphoethanolamine, inorganic pyrophosphate, and pyridoxal
5′-­phosphate are elevated; each is a natural substrate to a tissue-­nonspecific
(liver, bone, kidney) alkaline phosphatase enzyme. Missense variants of
the tissue-­nonspecific alkaline phosphatase enzyme gene result in an inactive enzyme in this autosomal recessive disorder.
Idiopathic hypercalcemia of infancy is manifested by failure to
thrive and hypercalcemia during the first year of life, followed by spontaneous remission. Serum levels of phosphorus and PTH are normal.
The condition has been defined as resulting from increased absorption of calcium from decreased degradation of 1,25(OH)2D3. Pathogenic variants in the CYP24A1 gene that encodes 25-­hydroxyvitamin
D 24-­hydroxylase, the key enzyme in 1,25(OH)2D3 degradation, cause
excessive levels of the active vitamin D metabolite, which, in turn,
causes hypercalcemia in a subset of infants who receive supplemental
vitamin D. An excessive rise in the level of 1,25(OH)2D3 in response to
PTH administration has been reported years after the hypercalcemic
phase.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 613 u Hyperparathyroidism

3443

Child with hypercalcemiaa

Plasma PTHb
Low

Plasma 25(OH)Dc

Low/normal
Measure 1,25(OH)2Dg

Low/normal

Consider:
• Drugs - vitamin A intoxication, thiazides,
chemotherapy
• Endocrinopathies - hyperthyroidism, Addison
disease, pheochromocytoma, severe
congenital hypothyroidismf
• Inborn errors of metabolismh,i
• Immobilization
• Congenital syndromes - Williams syndromei
Jansen’s metaphyseal chondrodysplasiai
• Malignancy leading to osteolysis or PTHrP
secretion

High/normal

Consider:
• Tertiary hyperparathyroidism due to chronic renal
failure or hypophosphatemic rickets
• Genetic causes of tumors/hyperplasia such as:
FHH1-3d, MEN1d, MEN2d, MEN3d, MEN4d,
NHSPT d,e, HPT-JTd
• Nonsyndromic primary hyperparathyroidism
(nsPHPT), including FIHPe
• Maternal hypocalcemiaf
High
Consider:
• Vitamin D intoxication
• Enriched formulaf
High

Consider:
• Idiopathic infantile hypercalcemia
• Granulomatous diseases
• Malignancy
• Subcutaneous fat necrosis of the
newbornf
• Phosphate depletionf

Fig. 613.1 Algorithm illustrating the clinical approach to investigation of causes of hypercalcemia in a child. aConfirm hypercalcemia, defined as

plasma (or serum) adjusted calcium >10.5 mg/dL (2.60 mmol/L) or ionized calcium >5.25 mg/dL (1.32 mmol/L). bPTH, parathyroid hormone. c25(OH)
D, 25-­hydroxyvitamin D. dFHH1-­3, familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia types 1-­3; MEN1, multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1; MEN2, multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2; MEN3, multiple endocrine neoplasia type 3; MEN4, multiple endocrine neoplasia type 4; NSHPT, neonatal severe primary
hyperparathyroidism; HPT-­JT, hyperparathyroid–jaw tumor syndrome. eFIHP, Familial isolated hyperparathyroidism. fConditions affecting neonates
(shown in italics). g1,25(OH)2D, 1,25-­dihydroxyvitamin D. hInborn errors of metabolism, for example, hypophosphatasia, congenital lactase deficiency (CLD), and blue diaper syndrome. iThese syndromes may be associated with dysmorphic features, for example, Williams syndrome, Jansen
metaphyseal chondrodysplasia, and hypophosphatasia. PTHrP, parathyroid hormone-related peptide. (From Stokes VJ, Nielsen MF, Hannan FM,
Thaller RV. Hypercalcemic disorders in children. J Bone Miner Res. 2017;32:2157–2170, Fig. 2.)

Approximately 15% of patients with Williams syndrome may exhibit
hypercalcemia. Hypercalcemia is more common in patients <24 months of
age. It is often transient and usually does not require treatment. The phenotype consists of feeding difficulties, slow growth, elfin facies (small mandible, prominent maxilla, upturned nose), renovascular disorders, and a
gregarious “cocktail party” personality. Cardiac lesions include supravalvular aortic stenosis, peripheral pulmonic stenosis, aortic hypoplasia,
coronary artery stenosis, and atrial or ventricular septal defects. Nephrocalcinosis can develop if hypercalcemia persists. The IQ score of 50-­70 is
curiously accompanied by enhanced quantity and quality of vocabulary,
auditory memory, and social use of language. A contiguous gene deletion syndrome with a submicroscopic deletion at chromosome 7q11.23,
which includes deletion of one elastin allele, occurs in 90% of patients and
seems to account for the vascular problems. Definitive diagnosis can be
established by specific fluorescence in situ hybridization. The hypercalcemia and central nervous system symptoms may be caused by deletion of
adjacent genes. Hypercalcemia has been successfully controlled with either
prednisone or calcitonin.
Hypervitaminosis D resulting in hypercalcemia from drinking
milk that has been incorrectly fortified with excessive amounts of

vitamin D has been reported. Not all patients with hypervitaminosis D develop hypercalcemia. Affected infants can manifest failure
to thrive, nephrolithiasis, poor renal function, and osteosclerosis.
Serum levels of 25(OH)D are a better indicator of hypervitaminosis D than levels of 1,25(OH)2D3 because 25(OH)D has a longer
half-­life.
Prolonged immobilization can lead to hypercalcemia and occasionally
to decreased renal function, hypertension, and encephalopathy. Children
who have hypophosphatemic rickets and undergo surgery with subsequent
long-­term immobilization are at risk for hypercalcemia and should therefore have their vitamin D supplementation decreased or discontinued.
Jansen-­type metaphyseal chondrodysplasia is a rare genetic disorder
characterized by short-­limbed dwarfism and severe but asymptomatic
hypercalcemia (see Chapter 735). Circulating levels of PTH and parathyroid hormone–related peptide are undetectable. These patients have an
activating PTH–parathyroid hormone–related peptide receptor mutation that results in aberrant calcium homeostasis and abnormalities of the
growth plate.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3444 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System

Section 4

Disorders of the
Adrenal Gland
Chapter 614

Physiology of the Adrenal
Gland
614.1 Histology and Embryology
Perrin C. White
The adrenal gland is composed of two endocrine tissues: the medulla
and the cortex. The chromaffin cells of the adrenal medulla are derived
from neuroectoderm, whereas the cells of the adrenal cortex are derived
from mesoderm. Mesodermal cells also contribute to the development
of the gonads. The adrenal glands and gonads have certain common
enzymes involved in steroid synthesis; an inborn error in steroidogenesis in one tissue can also be present in the other.
The adrenal cortex of the older child or adult consists of three zones:
the zona glomerulosa, the outermost zone located immediately beneath
the capsule; the zona fasciculata, the middle zone; and the zona reticularis, the innermost zone, lying next to the adrenal medulla. The zona
fasciculata is the largest zone, constituting approximately 75% of the
cortex; the zona glomerulosa constitutes approximately 15%; and the
zona reticularis approximately 10%. Glomerulosa cells are small, with a
lower cytoplasmic:nuclear ratio, an intermediate number of lipid inclusions, and smaller nuclei containing more condensed chromatin than
the cells of the other two zones. The cells of the zona fasciculata are
large, with a high cytoplasmic:nuclear ratio and many lipid inclusions
that give the cytoplasm a foamy, vacuolated appearance. The cells are
arranged in radial cords. The cells of the zona reticularis are arranged
in irregular anastomosing cords. The cytoplasmic:nuclear ratio is intermediate, and the compact cytoplasm has relatively little lipid content.
The zona glomerulosa synthesizes aldosterone, the most potent
natural mineralocorticoid in humans. The zona fasciculata produces
cortisol, the most potent natural glucocorticoid in humans, and the
zona fasciculata and zona reticularis synthesize the adrenal androgens.
The adrenal medulla consists mainly of neuroendocrine (chromaffin) cells and glial (sustentacular) cells with some connective tissue
and vascular cells. Neuroendocrine cells are polyhedral, with abundant cytoplasm and small, pale-­staining nuclei. Under the electron
microscope, the cytoplasm contains many large secretory granules that
contain catecholamines. Glial cells have less cytoplasm and more basophilic nuclei.
The adrenogonadal primordium differentiates from the coelomic
mesothelium at 4 weeks of gestation at the urogenital ridge, just cephalad to the developing mesonephros. At 5-­6 weeks, it develops into the
steroidogenic cells of the gonads and adrenal cortex; the adrenal and
gonadal cells separate, the adrenal cells migrate retroperitoneally, and
the gonadal cells migrate caudad. At 6-­8 weeks of gestation, the gland
rapidly enlarges, the cells of the inner cortex differentiate to form the
fetal zone, and the outer subcapsular rim remains as the definitive
zone. The primordium of the adrenal cortex is invaded at this time by
sympathetic neural elements of ectodermal origin that differentiate
into the chromaffin cells capable of synthesizing and storing catecholamines. Catechol O-­methyltransferase, which converts norepinephrine
to epinephrine, is expressed later in gestation. By the end of the eighth

week of gestation, the encapsulated adrenal gland is associated with the
upper pole of the kidney. By 8-­10 weeks of gestation, the cells of the
fetal zone are capable of active steroidogenesis.
In the full-­term infant, the combined weight of both adrenal glands
is 7-­9 g. At birth, the inner fetal zone of the cortex makes up approximately 80% of the gland and the outer definitive zone 20%. Within a
few days the fetal cortex begins to involute, undergoing a 50% reduction by 1 month of age. Conversely, the adrenal medulla is relatively
small at birth and undergoes a proportionate increase in size over the
first 6 months after birth. By 1 year, the adrenal glands each weigh <1
g. Adrenal growth thereafter results in adult adrenal glands reaching
a combined weight of 8 g. The zonae fasciculata and glomerulosa are
fully differentiated by about 3 years of age. The zona reticularis is not
fully developed until puberty.
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) is essential for fetal adrenal growth and maturation; feedback regulation of ACTH by cortisol
is apparently established by 8-­10 weeks of gestation. Additional factors
important in fetal growth and steroidogenesis include placental chorionic gonadotropins and a number of peptide growth factors produced
by the placenta and fetus.
Many transcription factors are critical for the development of the
adrenal glands. At least four, EMX2, LHX1 (also termed LIM1), WT1,
and WNT4, are required for development of the adrenogonadal primordium. WT1 upregulates expression of steroidogenic factor-­
1
(SF-­1, encoded by the NR5A1 gene). NR5A1 is one of at least three
transcription factors associated with adrenal hypoplasia in humans;
the others are NR0B1 (dosage-­sensitive sex reversal, adrenal hypoplasia congenita, X chromosome; DAX1), and the GLI3 oncogene. Disruption of NR5A1, encoded on chromosome 9q33, results in gonadal
and often adrenal agenesis, absence of pituitary gonadotropes, and an
underdeveloped ventral medial hypothalamus. In-­frame deletions and
frameshift and missense pathogenic variants of this gene are associated
with 46,XX ovarian insufficiency and 46,XY gonadal dysgenesis.
Pathogenic variants in the NR0B1 gene, encoded on Xp21, result in
adrenal hypoplasia congenita and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (see Chapter 615.1). Pathogenic variants in GLI3 on chromosome
7p13 cause Pallister-­Hall syndrome, other features of which include
hypothalamic hamartoblastoma, hypopituitarism, imperforate anus,
and postaxial polydactyly.
The postnatal adrenal cortex is not static but is continually regenerated from a population of stem or progenitor cells under the adrenal
capsule. These cells move radially inward (i.e., centripetally) and can
differentiate into zona glomerulosa or fasciculata cells as needed in
response to the appropriate trophic stimuli (see Chapter 614.3). Several signaling pathways, including sonic hedgehog (SHH) and WNT,
regulate this process. SHH expression is restricted to the peripheral
cortical cells that do not express high levels of steroidogenic genes but
give rise to the underlying differentiated cells of the cortex. Wnt/β-­
catenin signaling maintains the undifferentiated state and adrenal fate
of adrenocortical stem/progenitor cells, in part through induction of
its target genes DAX1 and inhibin-­α, respectively. Adrenal tumors can
result from constitutive activation of the WNT signaling pathway (see
Chapter 617).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

614.2 Adrenal Steroid Biosynthesis
Perrin C. White
Cholesterol is the starting substrate for all steroid biosynthesis (Fig.
614.1). Although adrenal cortex cells can synthesize cholesterol de
novo from acetate, circulating plasma lipoproteins provide most of
the cholesterol for adrenal cortex hormone formation. Receptors for
both low-­density lipoprotein and high-­density lipoprotein cholesterol
are expressed on the surface of adrenocortical cells; the receptor for
high-­density lipoprotein is termed scavenger receptor class B, type I
(SR-­BI). Patients with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 614 u Physiology of the Adrenal Gland

FETAL ADRENAL

CHOLESTEROL

StAR+
CYP11A1

HSD3B2

CYP21A2

PROGESTERONE

PREGNENOLONE

CYP17A1

3445

CYP21A2

HSD3B2

17-OH PREGNENOLONE

CYP11B2

DEOXYCORTICOSTERONE

CORTISOL

11-DEOXYCORTISOL

17-OH PROGESTERONE

ALDOSTERONE

CYP11B1

SRD5A1
5α-PREGNAN-17α-OL-3,20-DIONE PROGESTERONE

ANDROSTERONE

HSD17B5

AKR1C2/4
17-OH ALLOPREGNANOLONE

ANDROSTANEDIOL

HSD17B6
CYP17A1

FETAL LIVER
16α-OH
DEHYDROEPIANDROSTERONE
SULFATE

DEHYDROEPIANDROSTERONE

16α-OH DEHYDROEPIANDROSTERONE

HSD3B1

16α-OH-ESTRONE

HSD17B1
ESTRIOL

TESTOSTERONE

SRD5A2
DIHYDROTESTOSTERONE

GENITAL
SKIN

DEHYDROEPIANDROSTERONE
SULFATE

ARSC1
DEHYDROEPIANDROSTERONE

HSD3B1

16α-OH-ANDROSTENEDIONE

CYP19A1

HSD17B5

ANDROSTENEDIONE

SULT2A1

CYP3A7

ARSC1

HSD3B2

CYP19A1

CYP19A1

HSD11B2

ANDROSTENEDIONE

HSD17B1

CYP19A1
ESTRONE

ESTRONE

HSD17B1
ESTRADIOL

ESTRADIOL

CORTISONE

PLACENTA

Fig. 614.1 Steroid biosynthesis and metabolism during gestation. Conversions within the fetal adrenal cortex, fetal liver (brown rectangle), male

(i.e., testosterone-­exposed) genital skin (purple rectangle), and placenta (green rectangle) are denoted by arrows; the enzyme mediating each
conversion is also shown. Enzymatic conversions in the adrenal cortex are the same postnatally as prenatally, but cortisol and aldosterone biosynthesis (denoted by yellow and turquoise boxes, respectively) are more prominent, and normally little testosterone is synthesized (pink rectangle). A “backdoor pathway” (lavender rectangle) to convert 17-­hydroxyprogesterone to dihydrotestosterone is active in the fetal adrenal and
may assume particular importance in congenital adrenal hyperplasia (see Chapter 616). Many of the involved enzymes are cytochromes P450
(CYPs). The first step in all steroid biosynthesis is importation of cholesterol into mitochondria (white rectangle) mediated by the steroidogenic
acute regulatory (StAR) protein. Adrenal enzymes include CYP11A1, cholesterol side-­chain cleavage enzyme (P450scc in older terminology); HSD3B2, 3β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase/Δ5,Δ4 isomerase type 2; CYP17A1, 17β-­hydroxylase/17,20-­lyase (P450c17); CYP21A2, 21-­hydroxylase
(P450c21); CYP11B1, 11β-­hydroxylase (P450c11); CYP11B2, aldosterone synthase (P450aldo; this enzyme mediates successive 11β-­hydroxylase,
18-­hydroxylase, and 18-­oxidase reactions in the zona glomerulosa for the conversion of deoxycorticosterone to aldosterone); and AKR1C2/4,
aldo-­ketoreductases 1C2 and 1C4. Other enzymes important in the fetoplacental unit include ARSC1, arylsulfatase; CYP19, aromatase (P450arom);
HSD3B1, 3β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase/Δ5,Δ4 isomerase type 1; HSD11B2, 11β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2; HSD17B1, HSD17B5,
and HSD17B6 are three different 17-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase enzymes; SRD5A1 and SRD5A2, steroid 5α-­reductase types 1 and 2, respectively; and SULT2A1, steroid sulfotransferase.

who lack low-­density lipoprotein receptors have only mildly impaired
adrenal steroidogenesis, suggesting that high-­density lipoprotein is the
more important source of cholesterol. Cholesterol is stored as cholesteryl esters in vesicles and subsequently hydrolyzed by cholesteryl ester
hydrolases to liberate free cholesterol for steroid hormone synthesis.
The rate-­limiting step of adrenal steroidogenesis is importation of
cholesterol across the mitochondrial outer and inner membrane. This
requires several proteins, particularly the steroidogenic acute regulatory
(StAR) protein. The StAR protein has a very short half-­life, and its synthesis is rapidly induced by trophic factors (corticotropin); it is the main
short-­term (minutes to hours) regulator of steroid hormone biosynthesis.
At the mitochondrial inner membrane, the side chain of cholesterol
is cleaved to yield pregnenolone. This is catalyzed by the cholesterol
side-­chain cleavage enzyme (cholesterol desmolase, side-­chain cleavage enzyme, P450scc, CYP11A1—the last term is the current systematic nomenclature), a cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzyme. Like other CYP
enzymes, this is a membrane-­bound hemoprotein with a molecular
mass of approximately 50 kDa. It accepts electrons from a reduced
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate–dependent mitochondrial electron transport system consisting of two accessory proteins:
adrenodoxin reductase (also called ferredoxin reductase, a flavoprotein)
and adrenodoxin (or ferredoxin; a small protein containing nonheme

iron). CYP enzymes use electrons and O2 to hydroxylate the substrate
and form H2O. In the case of cholesterol side-­chain cleavage, three successive oxidative reactions are performed to cleave the C20,22 carbon
bond. Pregnenolone then diffuses out of mitochondria and enters the
endoplasmic reticulum. The subsequent reactions that occur depend
on the zone of the adrenal cortex.

ZONA GLOMERULOSA

In the zona glomerulosa, pregnenolone is converted to progesterone
by 3β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2, an oxidized nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide–dependent enzyme of the short-­chain dehydrogenase type. Progesterone is converted to 11-­deoxycorticosterone by
steroid 21-­hydroxylase (CYP21A2, P450c21), which is another CYP
enzyme. Like other such enzymes in the endoplasmic reticulum, it uses
an electron transport system with only one accessory protein: P450
oxidoreductase.
Deoxycorticosterone then reenters mitochondria and is converted
to aldosterone by aldosterone synthase (CYP11B2, P450aldo), a CYP
enzyme structurally related to cholesterol side-­chain cleavage enzyme.
Aldosterone synthase also carries out three successive oxidations:
11β-­
hydroxylation, 18-­
hydroxylation, and further oxidation of the
18-­methyl carbon to an aldehyde.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3446 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
In the endoplasmic reticulum of the zona fasciculata, pregnenolone and progesterone are converted by 17α-­hydroxylase (CYP17A1,
P450c17) to 17-­
hydroxypregenolone and 17-­
hydroxyprogesterone,
respectively. This enzyme is not expressed in the zona glomerulosa,
which consequently cannot synthesize 17-­
hydroxylated steroids.
17-­Hydroxypregnenolone is converted to 17-­hydroxyprogesterone and
11-­deoxycortisol by the same 3β-­hydroxysteroid and 21-­hydroxylase
enzymes, respectively, as are active in the zona glomerulosa. Thus
inherited disorders in these enzymes affect both aldosterone and cortisol synthesis (see Chapter 616). Finally, 11-­deoxycortisol reenters
mitochondria and is converted to cortisol by steroid 11β-­hydroxylase
CYP11B1 (P450c11). This enzyme is closely related to aldosterone synthase but has low 18-­hydroxylase and nonexistent 18-­oxidase activity.
Thus under normal circumstances the zona fasciculata cannot synthesize aldosterone.

ZONA RETICULARIS

In the zona reticularis and to some extent in the zona fasciculata, the 17-­
hydroxylase (CYP17A1) enzyme has an additional
activity: cleavage of the 17,20 carbon-­carbon bond. This converts
17-­hydroxypregnenolone to dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA). DHEA
is converted to androstenedione by HSD3B2. This may be further converted in other tissues to testosterone and estrogens.

The Alternative or “Backdoor” Pathway to
Dihydrotestosterone

In addition to the classic pathway via DHEA, androstenedione, and testosterone, the most potent endogenous androgen,
5-­dihydrotestosterone (DHT), can also be synthesized via an alternative or “backdoor” pathway, which is physiologically active during
the major period of human sexual differentiation in the 6th to 10th
week of human fetal development and into the second trimester. To
enter the alternative pathway, progesterone or 17-­hydroxyprogesterone
is 5α-­
reduced by steroid 5α-­
reductase type 1 (SRD5A1) to yield
5α-­
dihydroprogesterone
and
17α-­hydroxydihydroprogesterone.
These three ketosteroids are subsequently 3α-­reduced to allopregnanolone and 17α-­
hydroxyallopregnanolone by isoforms of the
AKR1C enzyme family. CYP17A1 converts allopregnanolone to 17α-­
hydroxyallopregnanolone and then to androsterone by its 17,20-­lyase
activity. Androsterone can then be activated to DHT by sequential 17β-­
reduction and 3α-­oxidase reactions.

FETOPLACENTAL UNIT

Steroid synthesis in the fetal adrenal varies during gestation (see Figs.
614.1 and 614.2). Shortly after the fetal adrenal gland forms (weeks
8-­10), it efficiently secretes cortisol, which is able to negatively feed
back on the fetal pituitary and hypothalamus to suppress ACTH secretion. This is a critical time for differentiation of the external genitalia
in both sexes (see Chapter 616.1); to prevent virilization, the female
fetus must not be exposed to high levels of androgens of adrenal origin, and placental aromatase activity must remain low during this time
to minimize conversion of testosterone to estradiol in male fetuses,
which would interfere with masculinization. After week 12, HSD3B
activity in the fetal adrenal gland decreases and steroid sulfokinase
activity increases. Major steroid products of the midgestation fetal
adrenal gland are DHEA and DHEA sulfate (DHEAS) and, by 16α-­
hydroxylation in the liver, 16α-­hydroxy DHEAS. Aromatase activity
increases in the placenta at the same time, and steroid sulfatase activity
is high as well. The placenta uses DHEA and DHEAS as substrates for
estrone and estradiol synthesis and 16α-­OH DHEAS as a substrate for
estriol synthesis. Cortisol activity is low during the second trimester,
which might serve to prevent premature secretion of surfactant by the
developing fetal lungs; surfactant levels can affect the timing of parturition. As term approaches, fetal cortisol concentration increases because
of increased cortisol secretion and decreased conversion of cortisol to
cortisone by 11β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 (HSD11B2).
Low levels of aldosterone are produced in midgestation, but aldosterone secretory capacity increases near term.

nm o 1/1
Secretion

ZONA FASCICULATA

Genital
differentiation

Surfactant
production

Puberty

10,000
1,000
100

DHEAS
Cortisol
10
20
Wk of gestation

10
Birth

20
Age (yr)

Fig. 614.2 Relative levels of cortisol and dehydroepiandrosterone sul-

fate (DHEAS) secretion by the fetal adrenal cortex during gestation and
postnatally. Approximate times of several events are shown. Vertical axis
is logarithmic, but values are approximate. Horizontal axis is not to scale.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

614.3 Regulation of the Adrenal Cortex
Perrin C. White

REGULATION OF CORTISOL SECRETION

Glucocorticoid secretion is regulated mainly by ACTH (corticotropin), a 39–amino acid peptide that is produced in the anterior
pituitary (see Fig. 594.2). It is synthesized as part of a larger-­
molecular-­weight precursor peptide known as pro-opiomelanocortin. This precursor peptide is also the source of β-­lipotropin. ACTH
and β-­lipotropin are cleaved further to yield α-­ and β-­melanocyte–
stimulating hormone, corticotropin-­like intermediate lobe peptide,
γ-­lipotropin, β-­ and γ-­endorphin, and enkephalin (see Chapter
594).
ACTH is released in secretory bursts of varying amplitude throughout the day and night. The normal diurnal rhythm of cortisol secretion
is caused by the varying amplitudes of ACTH pulses. Pulses of ACTH
and cortisol occur every 30-­120 minutes, are highest at about the time
of waking, are low in late afternoon and evening, and reach their lowest
point 1 or 2 hours after sleep begins.
Corticotropin-­releasing hormone (CRH), synthesized by neurons of the parvicellular division of the hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus, is the most important stimulator of ACTH secretion.
Arginine vasopressin (AVP) augments CRH action. Neural stimuli
from the brain cause the release of CRH and AVP (see Chapter 594).
AVP and CRH are secreted in the hypophyseal-­portal circulation in
a pulsatile manner. This pulsatile secretion appears to be responsible for the pulsatile (ultradian) release of ACTH. The circadian
rhythm of ACTH release is probably induced by the corresponding
circadian rhythm of hypothalamic CRH secretion, regulated by the
suprachiasmatic nucleus with input from other areas of the brain.
Cortisol exerts a negative feedback effect on the synthesis and secretion of ACTH, CRH, and AVP. ACTH inhibits its own secretion, a
feedback effect mediated at the level of the hypothalamus. Finally,
the adrenal cortex has intrinsic rhythmicity in its responses to the
ACTH. Thus the secretion of cortisol is a result of the interaction
of the hypothalamus, pituitary, and adrenal glands and other neural
stimuli.
ACTH acts through a specific G protein–coupled receptor (also
termed melanocortin receptor-­2, encoded by the MCR2 gene) to activate adenylate cyclase and increase levels of cyclic adenosine monophosphate. Cyclic adenosine monophosphate has short-­term (minutes
to hours) effects on cholesterol transport into mitochondria by increasing expression of StAR protein. The long-­term effects (hours to days)
of ACTH stimulation are to increase the uptake of cholesterol and
the expression of genes encoding the enzymes required to synthesize
cortisol. These transcriptional effects occur at least in part through
increased activity of protein kinase A, which phosphorylates several
transcriptional regulatory factors. MC2R trafficking and signaling are
dependent on the MC2R accessory protein (MRAP). Pathogenic variants in either MC2R or MRAP can cause familial glucocorticoid deficiency (see Chapter 615).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 614 u Physiology of the Adrenal Gland
REGULATION OF ALDOSTERONE SECRETION

The rate of aldosterone synthesis, which is normally 100-­to 1,000-­fold
less than that of cortisol synthesis, is regulated mainly by the renin-­
angiotensin system and by potassium levels, with ACTH having only a
short-­term effect. In response to decreased intravascular volume, renin
is secreted by the juxtaglomerular apparatus of the kidney. Renin is
a proteolytic enzyme that cleaves angiotensinogen (renin substrate),
an α2-­globulin produced by the liver, to yield the inactive decapeptide
angiotensin I. Angiotensin-­converting enzyme in the lungs and other
tissues rapidly cleaves angiotensin I to the biologically active octapeptide angiotensin II. Cleavage of angiotensin II produces the heptapeptide angiotensin III. Angiotensins II and III are potent stimulators
of aldosterone secretion; angiotensin II is a more potent vasopressor
agent. Angiotensins II and III occupy a G protein–coupled receptor
activating phospholipase C. This protein hydrolyzes phosphatidylinositol bisphosphate to produce inositol triphosphate and diacylglycerol,
which raise intracellular calcium levels and activate protein kinase C
and calmodulin-­activated kinases. Similarly, increased levels of extracellular potassium depolarize the cell membrane and increase calcium
influx through voltage-­gated L-­type calcium channels. Phosphorylation of transcriptional regulatory factors by calmodulin-­activated
kinases increases transcription of the aldosterone synthase (CYP11B2)
enzyme required for aldosterone synthesis.

REGULATION OF ADRENAL ANDROGEN
SECRETION

The mechanisms by which the adrenal androgens DHEA and androstenedione are regulated are not completely understood. Adrenarche
is a maturational process in the adrenal gland that results in increased
adrenal androgen secretion between the ages of 5 and 20 years. The process begins before the earliest signs of puberty and continues throughout the years when puberty is occurring. Histologically, it is associated
with the appearance of the zona reticularis. Whereas ACTH stimulates
adrenal androgen production acutely and clearly is the primary stimulus for cortisol release, additional factors have been implicated in the
stimulation of the adrenal androgens. These include a relative decrease
in expression of HSD3B2 in the zona reticularis and possibly increases
in 17,20-­lyase activity owing to phosphorylation of CYP17 or increased
cytochrome b5 expression.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

614.4 Adrenal Steroid Hormone Actions
Perrin C. White
Steroid hormones act through several distinct receptors corresponding to the known biologic activities of the steroid hormones: glucocorticoid, mineralocorticoid, progestin, estrogen, and androgen. These
receptors belong to a larger superfamily of nuclear transcription factors
that include, among others, thyroid hormone and retinoic acid receptors. They have a common structure that includes a carboxyterminal
ligand-­binding domain and a midregion DNA-­binding domain. The
latter domain contains two zinc fingers, each of which consists of a loop
of amino acids stabilized by four cysteine residues chelating a zinc ion.
Unliganded glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid receptors are
found mainly in the cytosol in complexes with other proteins. Hormone molecules diffuse through the cell membrane and bind receptors, changing their conformation and causing them to release their
cytosolic binding proteins and translocate to the nucleus, where they
bind DNA at specific hormone-­response elements. Bound receptors
can recruit other transcriptional coregulatory factors to DNA.
Whereas different steroids can share bioactivities because of their
ability to bind to the same receptor, a given steroid can exert diverse
biologic effects in different tissues. The diversity of hormonal responses
is determined by the different genes that are regulated by each hormone
in different tissues. Additionally, different combinations of coregulators

3447

are expressed in different tissues, allowing each steroid hormone
to have many different effects. Moreover, enzymes can increase or
decrease the affinity of steroids for their receptors and thus modulate
their activity. 11β-­Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 (HSD11B1)
converts cortisone, which is not a ligand for the glucocorticoid receptor, to cortisol, which is an active glucocorticoid. This increases local
glucocorticoid concentrations in several tissues, especially the liver,
where glucocorticoids maintain hepatic glucose output (see Chapter
615.4). Overexpression of this enzyme in adipose tissue can predispose
to the development of obesity. Conversely, HSD11B2 oxidizes cortisol
to cortisone, particularly in the kidney, preventing mineralocorticoid
receptors from being occupied by high levels of cortisol (see Chapter
615.4).
Although corticosteroid receptors mainly act in the nucleus, some
responses to both glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids begin within
minutes, an interval too short to be accounted for by increased gene
transcription and protein synthesis. Such nongenomic effects can in
some cases be mediated by cell membrane–associated isoforms of the
classic glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid receptors, which can
couple to a variety of rapid intracellular signaling pathways such as G
proteins. Direct interactions with other proteins, such as ion channels,
have been documented as well, particularly in the nervous system.

ACTIONS OF GLUCOCORTICOIDS

Glucocorticoids are essential for survival. The term glucocorticoid
refers to the glucose-­regulating properties of these hormones. However, glucocorticoids have multiple effects on carbohydrate, lipid, and
protein metabolism. They also regulate immune, circulatory, and renal
function. They influence growth, development, bone metabolism, and
central nervous system activity.
In stress situations, glucocorticoid secretion can increase up to 10-­
fold. This increase is believed to enhance survival through increased
cardiac contractility, cardiac output, sensitivity to the pressor effects
of catecholamines and other pressor hormones, work capacity of the
skeletal muscles, and capacity to mobilize energy stores.

METABOLIC EFFECTS

The primary action of the glucocorticoids on carbohydrate metabolism
is to increase glucose production by increasing hepatic gluconeogenesis. Glucocorticoids also increase cellular resistance to insulin, thereby
decreasing entry of glucose into the cell. This inhibition of glucose
uptake occurs in adipocytes, muscle cells, and fibroblasts. In addition
to opposing insulin action, glucocorticoids can work in parallel with
insulin to protect against long-­term starvation by stimulating glycogen
deposition and production in the liver. Both hormones stimulate glycogen synthetase activity and decrease glycogen breakdown. Glucocorticoid excess can cause hyperglycemia, and glucocorticoid deficiency
can cause hypoglycemia.
Glucocorticoids increase free fatty acid levels by enhancing lipolysis,
decreasing cellular glucose uptake, and decreasing glycerol production, which is necessary for reesterification of fatty acids. This increase
in lipolysis is also stimulated through the permissive enhancement of
lipolytic action of other factors such as epinephrine. This action affects
adipocytes differently according to their anatomic locations. In the
patient with glucocorticoid excess, fat is lost in the extremities, but it
is increased in the trunk (centripetal obesity), neck, and face (moon
facies). This may involve effects on adipocyte differentiation.
Glucocorticoids generally exert a catabolic or antianabolic effect on
protein metabolism. Proteolysis in fat, skeletal muscle, bone, lymphoid,
and connective tissue increases amino acid substrates that can be used
in gluconeogenesis. Cardiac muscle and the diaphragm are almost
entirely spared from this catabolic effect.

Circulatory and Renal Effects

Glucocorticoids have a positive inotropic influence on the heart,
increasing the left ventricular work index. They have a permissive effect
on the actions of epinephrine and norepinephrine on both the heart
and the blood vessels. In the absence of glucocorticoids, decreased cardiac output and shock can develop; in states of glucocorticoid excess,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3448 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
hypertension is often observed. This may be a result of activation of the
mineralocorticoid receptor (see Chapter 615.4), which occurs when
renal HSD11B2 is saturated by excessive levels of glucocorticoids.

Growth

In excess, glucocorticoids inhibit linear growth and skeletal maturation in children, apparently through direct effects on the epiphyses.
However, glucocorticoids are also necessary for normal growth and
development. In the fetus and neonate, they accelerate the differentiation and development of various tissues, including the hepatic and
gastrointestinal systems, along with the production of surfactant in
the fetal lung. Glucocorticoids are often given to pregnant women at
risk for delivery of premature infants to accelerate these maturational
processes.

Immunologic Effects

Glucocorticoids play a major role in immune regulation. They inhibit
synthesis of glycolipids and prostaglandin precursors and the actions
of bradykinin. They also block secretion and actions of histamine and
proinflammatory cytokines (tumor necrosis factor-­α, interleukin-­1,
and interleukin-­6), thus diminishing inflammation. High doses of glucocorticoids deplete monocytes, eosinophils, and lymphocytes, especially T cells. They do so at least in part by inducing cell-­cycle arrest
in the G1 phase and by activating apoptosis through glucocorticoid
receptor–mediated effects. The effects on lymphocytes are primarily
exerted on T-­helper 1 cells and hence on cellular immunity, whereas
the T-­helper 2 cells are spared, leading to a predominantly humoral
immune response. Pharmacologic doses of glucocorticoids can also
decrease the size of immunologic tissues (spleen, thymus, and lymph
nodes).
Glucocorticoids increase circulating polymorphonuclear cell counts,
mostly by preventing their egress from the circulation. Glucocorticoids
decrease diapedesis, chemotaxis, and phagocytosis of polymorphonuclear cells. Thus the mobility of these cells is altered such that they do
not arrive at the site of inflammation to mount an appropriate immune
response. High levels of glucocorticoids decrease inflammatory and
cellular immune responses and increase susceptibility to certain bacterial, viral, fungal, and parasitic infections.

Effects on Skin, Bone, and Calcium

Glucocorticoids inhibit fibroblasts, leading to increased bruising and
poor wound healing through cutaneous atrophy. This effect explains
the thinning of the skin and striae that are seen in patients with Cushing syndrome.
Glucocorticoids have the overall effect of decreasing serum calcium
and have been used in emergency therapy for certain types of hypercalcemia. This hypocalcemic effect probably results from a decrease in
the intestinal absorption of calcium and a decrease in the renal reabsorption of calcium and phosphorus. Serum calcium levels, however,
generally do not fall below normal because of a secondary increase in
parathyroid hormone secretion.
The most significant effect of long-­term glucocorticoid excess on
calcium and bone metabolism is osteoporosis. Glucocorticoids inhibit
osteoblastic activity by decreasing the number and activity of osteoblasts. Glucocorticoids also decrease osteoclastic activity but to a lesser
extent, leading to low bone turnover with an overall negative balance.
The tendency of glucocorticoids to lower serum calcium and phosphate
levels causes secondary hyperparathyroidism. These actions decrease
bone accretion and cause a net loss of bone mineral.

Central Nervous System Effects

Glucocorticoids readily penetrate the blood-­brain barrier and have
direct effects on brain metabolism. They decrease certain types of
central nervous system edema and are often used to treat increased
intracranial pressure. In large doses, they stimulate appetite and cause
insomnia with a reduction in rapid eye movement sleep. There is an
increase in irritability and emotional lability, with an impairment
of memory and ability to concentrate. Mild to moderate glucocorticoid excess for a limited period often causes a feeling of euphoria or

well-­being, but glucocorticoid excess and deficiency can both be associated with clinical depression. Glucocorticoid excess produces psychosis
in some patients.
Glucocorticoid effects in the brain are mediated largely through
interactions with both the mineralocorticoid and glucocorticoid
receptors (sometimes referred to in this context as type I and type II
corticosteroid receptors, respectively). Activation of type II receptors
increases sensitivity of hippocampal neurons to the neurotransmitter
serotonin, which might help explain the euphoria associated with high
doses of glucocorticoids. Glucocorticoids suppress release of CRH in
the anterior hypothalamus, but they stimulate it in the central nucleus
of the amygdala and lateral bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, where
it can mediate fear and anxiety states. Glucocorticoids and other steroids might have nongenomic effects by modulating activities of both
γ-­aminobutyric acid and N-­methyl-­d-­aspartate receptors.

ACTIONS OF MINERALOCORTICOIDS

The most important mineralocorticoids are aldosterone and, to a
lesser degree, 11-­deoxycorticosterone; corticosterone and cortisol
are normally not important as mineralocorticoids unless secreted
in excess. Mineralocorticoids have more limited actions than glucocorticoids. Their major function is to maintain intravascular
volume by conserving sodium and eliminating potassium and
hydrogen ions. They exert these actions in the kidney, gut, and
salivary and sweat glands. Aldosterone can have distinct effects in
other tissues. Mineralocorticoid receptors are found in the heart
and vascular endothelium, and aldosterone increases myocardial
fibrosis in heart failure.
Mineralocorticoids have their most important actions in the distal
convoluted tubules and cortical collecting ducts of the kidney, where
they induce reabsorption of sodium and secretion of potassium. In the
medullary collecting duct, they act in a permissive fashion to allow
vasopressin to increase osmotic water flux. Thus patients with mineralocorticoid deficiency can develop weight loss, hypotension, hyponatremia, and hyperkalemia, whereas patients with mineralocorticoid
excess can develop hypertension, hypokalemia, and metabolic alkalosis
(see Chapters 615, 616, and 620).
The mechanisms by which aldosterone affects sodium excretion are
incompletely understood. Most effects of aldosterone are presumably
the result of changes in gene expression mediated by the mineralocorticoid receptor, and indeed levels of subunits of both the Na+, K+-­
adenosine triphosphatase and the epithelial sodium channel increase
in response to aldosterone. Additionally, aldosterone increases expression of the serum-­and glucocorticoid-­regulated kinase, which indirectly reduces turnover of epithelial sodium channel subunits and thus
increases the number of open sodium channels.
The mineralocorticoid receptor has similar affinities in vitro for
cortisol and aldosterone, yet cortisol is a weak mineralocorticoid
in vivo. This discrepancy results from the action of HSD11B2, which
converts cortisol to cortisone. Cortisone is not a ligand for the receptor, whereas aldosterone is not a substrate for the enzyme. Pharmacologic inhibition (as occurs with excessive consumption of licorice) or
genetic deficiency of this enzyme allows cortisol to occupy renal mineralocorticoid receptors and produce sodium retention and hypertension; the genetic condition is termed apparent mineralocorticoid
excess syndrome.

ACTIONS OF THE ADRENAL ANDROGENS

Many actions of adrenal androgens are exerted through their conversion to active androgens or estrogens such as testosterone, dihydrotestosterone, estrone, and estradiol. In males, <2% of the biologically
important androgens are derived from adrenal production, whereas
in females approximately 50% of androgens are of adrenal origin. The
adrenal contribution to circulating estrogen levels is mainly important
in pathologic conditions such as feminizing adrenal tumors. Adrenal
androgens contribute to the physiologic development of pubic and
axillary hair during normal puberty. They also play an important role
in the pathophysiology of congenital adrenal hyperplasia, premature

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 614 u Physiology of the Adrenal Gland
adrenarche, adrenal tumors, and Cushing syndrome (see Chapters
616-­619).
In humans, circulating levels of DHEA and DHEAS, the chief adrenal androgen precursors, reach a peak in early adulthood and then
decline. This has led to speculation that some age-­related physiologic
changes might be reversed by DHEA administration, and beneficial
effects have been suggested (but not proved) on insulin sensitivity,
bone mineral density, muscle mass, cardiovascular risk, obesity, cancer
risk, autoimmunity, and the central nervous system.

3449

614.5 Adrenal Medulla
Perrin C. White

Many synthetic analogs of cortisone and hydrocortisone are available. Prednisone and prednisolone are derivatives with an additional double bond in ring A. Similar to cortisone, prednisone is not
an active steroid, but it is converted to prednisolone by HSD11B1
in the liver. Prednisone and prednisolone are 4-­5 times as potent in
antiinflammatory and carbohydrate activity but have slightly less
effect on retention of water and sodium than cortisol. Halogenated
derivatives have different effects. Betamethasone and dexamethasone have 25-­40 times the glucocorticoid potency of cortisol but
have little mineralocorticoid effect. These analogs are usually used
in pharmacologic doses for their antiinflammatory or immunosuppressive properties. The antiinflammatory activity of fludrocortisone is about 15 times that of hydrocortisone, but fludrocortisone is
more than 125 times as active a mineralocorticoid; it is used to treat
aldosterone deficiency.

The principal hormones of the adrenal medulla are the physiologically active catecholamines: dopamine, norepinephrine, and epinephrine (Fig. 614.3). Catecholamine synthesis also occurs in the brain, in
sympathetic nerve endings, and in chromaffin tissue outside the adrenal medulla. Metabolites of catecholamines are excreted in the urine,
principally 3-­methoxy-­4-­hydroxymandelic acid, metanephrine, and
normetanephrine. Urinary metanephrines and catecholamines are
measured to detect pheochromocytomas of the adrenal medulla and
sympathetic nervous system (see Chapter 621).
The proportions of epinephrine and norepinephrine in the adrenal
gland vary with age. In early fetal stages, there is practically no epinephrine;
at birth, norepinephrine remains predominant. However, in adults, norepinephrine accounts for only 10–30% of the pressor amines in the medulla.
The effects of catecholamines are mediated through a series of G
protein–coupled adrenergic receptors. Both epinephrine and norepinephrine raise the mean arterial blood pressure, but only epinephrine
increases cardiac output. By increasing peripheral vascular resistance,
norepinephrine increases systolic and diastolic blood pressures with
only a slight reduction in the pulse rate. Epinephrine increases the pulse
rate and, by decreasing the peripheral vascular resistance, decreases the
diastolic pressure. The hyperglycemic and calorigenic effects of norepinephrine are much less pronounced than are those of epinephrine.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Synthetic Corticosteroids

Fig. 614.3 Biosynthesis (above dashed line) and me-

tabolism (below dashed line) of the catecholamines
norepinephrine and epinephrine. Enzymes: 1, tyrosine
hydroxylase; 2, dopa decarboxylase; 3, dopamine β-­
oxidase; 4, phenylethanolamine-­
N-­methyltransferase;
5, catechol O-­methyltransferase; 6, monoamine oxidase.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3450 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System

Chapter 615

Adrenocortical
Insufficiency and
Altered Sensitivity to
Corticosteroids
Perrin C. White
In primary adrenal insufficiency, congenital or acquired lesions of
the adrenal cortex prevent production of cortisol and often aldosterone (Table 615.1). Acquired primary adrenal insufficiency is termed
Addison disease. Dysfunction of the anterior pituitary gland or hypothalamus can cause a deficiency of corticotropin (adrenocorticotropic
hormone [ACTH]) and lead to hypofunction of the adrenal cortex,
termed secondary adrenal insufficiency; the term tertiary adrenal insufficiency is sometimes used to denote cases arising from hypothalamic
dysfunction (Tables 615.2 and 615.3).

615.1 Primary Adrenal Insufficiency
Perrin C. White
Primary adrenal insufficiency in children is most frequently caused by
genetic conditions that are often, but not always, manifested in infancy
and, less often, by acquired problems such as autoimmune conditions
(Table 615.4) or syndromes (Table 615.5). Susceptibility to autoimmune conditions often has a genetic basis, and so these distinctions
are not absolute.

INHERITED ETIOLOGIES
Inborn Defects of Steroidogenesis

The most common causes of adrenocortical insufficiency in infancy
are the salt-­losing forms of congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH,
see Chapter 616). Approximately 75% of infants with 21-­hydroxylase
deficiency, almost all infants with lipoid adrenal hyperplasia, and
most infants with a deficiency of 3β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase
manifest salt-­losing symptoms in the newborn period because they
are unable to synthesize either cortisol or aldosterone. Relatively mild
pathogenic variants in STAR (which controls cholesterol importation
into mitochondria) or CYP11A1 (which encodes the cholesterol side-­
chain cleavage enzyme) can cause adrenal insufficiency manifesting in
childhood.
Aside from CAH and autoimmune adrenalitis, a genetic cause can
be identified in >65% of patients with primary adrenal insufficiency
presenting in childhood. These can be grouped into several categories:
(1) ACTH unresponsiveness (familial glucocorticoid deficiency); (2)
adrenal hypoplasia congenita caused by pathogenic variants in orphan
nuclear hormone receptors that affect expression of other genes; (3)
defects in lipid metabolism, particularly adrenoleukodystrophy; (4)
syndromes associated with intrauterine growth restriction, adrenal
hypoplasia, and disorders of sexual development, such as IMAGe and
MIRAGE syndromes (activating variants of CDKN1C and SAMD9,
respectively), and type 2 IMAGe syndrome (POLE1 gene); and (5) deficiency of mitochondrial reactive oxygen species detoxification (NNT
and TXNRD2 genes).

Familial Glucocorticoid Deficiency

Familial glucocorticoid deficiency is a form of chronic adrenal insufficiency characterized by isolated deficiency of glucocorticoids, elevated

levels of ACTH, and generally normal aldosterone production, although
salt-­losing manifestations present in most other forms of adrenal insufficiency occasionally occur. Patients may have hypoglycemia, seizures,
and increased pigmentation during the first decade of life. The disorder
affects both sexes equally and is inherited in an autosomal recessive
manner. There is marked adrenocortical atrophy with relative sparing
of the zona glomerulosa. Pathogenic variants in the gene for the ACTH
receptor (MCR2) have been described in approximately 25% of these
patients, most of which affect trafficking of receptor molecules from
the endoplasmic reticulum to the cell surface. Another 10–20% of cases
are caused by variants in MRAP, which encodes a melanocyte receptor
accessory protein required for this trafficking.
Another syndrome of ACTH resistance occurs in association with
achalasia and alacrima (triple A or Allgrove syndrome). These patients
often have a progressive neurologic disorder that includes autonomic
dysfunction, intellectual disability, motor neuropathy, and occasional
deafness. This syndrome is autosomal recessive; the AAAS gene has
been mapped to chromosome 12q13. The encoded protein, aladin,
might help to regulate nucleocytoplasmic transport of other proteins.

Adrenal Hypoplasia Congenita

Adrenal hypoplasia congenita (AHC) is a relatively frequent cause of
adrenal insufficiency in males, along with CAH, autoimmune disease,
and adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD). AHC is predominantly a failure of
development of the definitive zone of the adrenal cortex; the fetal zone
may be relatively normal. Consequently, adrenal insufficiency generally
becomes evident as the fetal zone involutes postnatally (see Chapter
614), with onset in infancy or in the first 2 years of life but occasionally in later childhood or even adulthood. In some cases, aldosterone
deficiency becomes evident before cortisol deficiency.
The disorder is caused by pathogenic variants of NR0B1 (DAX1),
a member of the nuclear hormone receptor family, located on Xp21.
Males with AHC often do not undergo puberty as a result of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism caused by the same variant of NR0B1.
Cryptorchidism, sometimes noted in these males, is probably an early
manifestation of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, but often testicular
function in infants is normal, with a typical or even an unusually prolonged testosterone surge in the first month of life.
AHC occasionally occurs as part of a contiguous gene deletion syndrome together with Duchenne muscular dystrophy, glycerol kinase
deficiency, cognitive impairment, or a combination of these conditions.
The transcription factor NR5A1 (steroidogenic factor-­1, SF-­1) is
required for adrenal and gonadal development (see Chapter 614).
Males with heterozygous variants in NR5A1 have impaired development of the testes despite the presence of a normal copy of the gene on
the other chromosome and can appear to be female, similar to patients
with lipoid adrenal hyperplasia (see Chapter 616). Rarely, such patients
also have adrenal insufficiency.
Adrenal hypoplasia is also occasionally seen in patients with
Pallister-­Hall syndrome caused by pathogenic variants in GLI3.

Disorders of Lipid Metabolism

In adrenal leukodystrophy (ALD), adrenocortical deficiency is associated with demyelination in the central nervous system (see Chapters
106.2 and 639.3). High levels of very long-­chain fatty acids are found
in tissues and body fluids, resulting from their impaired β-­oxidation in
the peroxisomes.
The most common form of ALD is an X-­linked disorder with various presentations. The most common clinical picture is of a degenerative neurologic disorder appearing in childhood or adolescence and
progressing to severe dementia and deterioration of vision, hearing,
speech, and gait, with death occurring within a few years. Neurologic
symptoms may be subtle at onset, sometimes consisting only of behavioral changes or deteriorating academic performance. Generalized
but incomplete alopecia, resembling that of chemotherapy, is a characteristic but inconsistent finding. A milder form of X-­linked ALD is
adrenomyeloneuropathy, which begins in later adolescence or early
adulthood. Patients may have evidence of adrenal insufficiency before,
at the time of, or after neurologic symptoms develop, often with years

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 615 u Adrenocortical Insufficiency and Altered Sensitivity to Corticosteroids

3451

Table 615.1  Causes of Primary Adrenal Insufficiency
GENE (OMIM*)

ASSOCIATED CLINICAL SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS

HLA-­DR3, DR4, CTLA4,
BACH2, PTPN22, GATA3,
CLEC16, MIC-­A, MIC-­B,
NALP1, and AIRE

Hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism, premature ovarian insufficiency,
vitiligo, type 1 diabetes, pernicious anemia, other organ-­specific
autoimmune features

Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome
type 1

AIRE (240300)

Hypoparathyroidism, chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis, other
autoimmune disorders, lymphomas (rarely)

Immunodeficiency 31C

STAT1 (614162)

Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis, susceptibility to Staphylococcus
aureus and other bacterial, viral, and fungal infections, polyendocrinopathy
(including hypothyroidism and type 1 diabetes), cerebral aneurysms

Peroxisomal Defects
X-­linked adrenoleukodystrophy

ABCD1 (300100)

Progressive neurodegeneration, behavioral changes, cognitive decline,
loss of speech, hearing, and vision, dementia, spasticity, seizures

Refsum disease

PEX7 (266500)

Least severe form of peroxisome biosynthesis defects

Neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy
(autosomal recessive)

PEX1 (601539)

Craniofacial abnormalities, liver dysfunction, absence of peroxisomes

Zellweger syndrome

PEX1 (214100)

Craniofacial abnormalities, hepatomegaly, severe intellectual disability
and growth failure, hypotonia, deafness, blindness, genitourinary
abnormalities, stippled epiphyses

Mitochondrial DNA
deletions (530000)

External ophthalmoplegia, retinal degeneration, cardiac conduction
defects, other endocrinopathies

Hemorrhage

—

Bilateral adrenal hemorrhage of the newborn baby, primary
antiphospholipid syndrome, anticoagulation

Trauma or Surgery

—

Bilateral adrenalectomy

Infection

—

Septic shock, meningococcal sepsis (Waterhouse-­Friderichsen
syndrome), tuberculosis, fungal infections (e.g., histoplasmosis,
cryptococcosis, coccidioidomycosis, and blastomycosis), African
trypanosomiasis, cytomegalovirus, HIV-­1, syphilis

Infiltration

—

Metastatic cancers, primary adrenal lymphoma, amyloidosis, sarcoidosis
(rare), hemochromatosis

DRUGS

—

Ketoconazole, rifampicin, phenytoin, phenobarbital, aminoglutethimide,
mitotane, abiraterone acetate, etomidate, suramin, mifepristone,
nivolumab, pembrolizumab

IMPAIRED STEROIDOGENESIS
Impaired Cholesterol Transport
Steroidogenic acute regulatory
protein (congenital lipoid adrenal
hyperplasia)

StAR (201710)

46,XY DSD, gonadal insufficiency

ADRENAL DESTRUCTION
Autoimmunity
Autoimmune primary adrenal
insufficiency and autoimmune
polyendocrine syndrome type 2

Mitochondrial Defects
Kearns-­Sayre syndrome

Steroidogenic Enzyme or Cofactor Deficiency Causing Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia
3β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase
HSD3B2 (201810)
46,XX and 46,XY DSD, gonadal insufficiency
type 2
21-­hydroxylase

CYP21A2 (201 910)

46,XX DSD, hyperandrogenism

11β-­hydroxylase

CYP11B1 (202 010)

46,XX DSD, arterial hypertension

CYP17A1 deficiency

CYP17A1 (202 110)

46,XY DSD, arterial hypertension, gonadal insufficiency

P450 oxidoreductase

POR (201 750)

46,XX and 46,XY DSD, gonadal insufficiency, bone malformation,
dysfunction of all endoplasmic CYP450 enzymes

Steroidogenic Enzyme Deficiency (Noncongenital Adrenal Hyperplasia)
P450 side-­chain cleavage enzyme
CYP11A1 (118 485)
46,XY DSD, gonadal insufficiency
Aldosterone synthase

CYP11B2 (124 080)

Defects of Cholesterol Synthesis or Metabolism
Wolman disease (lysosomal acid lipase LIPA (278 000)
deficiency, and cholesterol ester
storage disease)

Isolated mineralocorticoid deficiency
Diffuse punctate adrenal calcification, xanthomatous changes in multiple
organs, hypercholesterolemia, steatorrhea, poor prognosis
Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3452 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 615.1  Causes of Primary Adrenal Insufficiency—cont’d
GENE (OMIM*)

ASSOCIATED CLINICAL SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS

Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz disease

DHCR7 (270 400)

Intellectual disability, craniofacial malformations, limb abnormalities,
growth failure

Abetalipoproteinemia

MTP (200 100)

Ataxia, retinopathy, acanthocytosis, fat malabsorption

ADRENAL DYSGENESIS
X-­linked adrenal hypoplasia
congenital

NROB1 (300 200)

Combined primary and secondary hypogonadism, Duchenne muscular
dystrophy in contiguous gene syndrome

Adrenal hypoplasia steroidogenic
factor-­1 deficiency

NR5A1 (184757)

46,XY DSD, gonadal insufficiency

IMAGe syndrome

CDKN1C (300 290)

Intrauterine growth restriction, metaphyseal dysplasia, adrenal
insufficiency, genital anomalies

MIRAGE syndrome

SMAD9 (617 053)

Myelodysplasia, infection, adrenal hypoplasia, growth restriction, genital
anomalies, enteropathy

Pallister-­Hall syndrome

GLI3 (165 240)

Hypothalamic hamartoblastoma, hypopituitarism, imperforate anus,
postaxial polydactyly

Meckel syndrome

MKS1 (249 000)

CNS malformation, polycystic kidneys with fibrotic liver changes,
polydactyly

Pseudotrisomy 13

(264 480)

Holoprosencephaly, severe facial anomalies, postaxial polydactyly,
various other congenital defects, and normal chromosomes

Hydrolethalus syndrome

HYLS1 (236 680)

Severe prenatal-­onset hydrocephalus, polydactyly

Galloway-­Mowat syndrome

WDR73 (251 300)

Early-­onset severe encephalopathy, intractable epilepsy, nephrotic
syndrome, microcephaly, hiatal hernia

ACTH RESISTANCE
Familial glucocorticoid deficiency
type 1

MC2R (202 200)

Tall stature, isolated deficiency of glucocorticoids, generally normal
aldosterone production

MRAP (607398)

Isolated deficiency of glucocorticoids, generally normal aldosterone
production

IMPAIRED REDOX HOMEOSTASIS
Triple A syndrome (Allgrove
syndrome)

AAAS (231550)

Alacrimia, achalasia, neurologic impairment, deafness, intellectual
disability, hyperkeratosis

Mitochondrial deficiency of free
radical detoxification

NNT (614736)
and TRXR2 (606448)

NNT: hypoglycemia, hyperpigmentation, low cortisol concentration,
increased ACTH concentration, isolated deficiency of
glucocorticoids; TRXR2: isolated deficiency of glucocorticoids

MISCELLANEOUS
Defects in DNA repair

MCM4 (609981)

Natural killer cell deficiency, growth failure, increased chromosomal
breakage

Bioinactive ACTH

POMC (201400)

—

Sphingosine-­1-­phosphate lyase 1

SGPL1 (617575)

Steroid-­resistant nephrotic syndrome, ichthyosis, primary hypothyroidism,
cryptorchidism, immunodeficiency, neurologic defects

Familial glucocorticoid deficiency
type 2

*www.omim.org
ACTH, Adrenocorticotropic hormone; DSD, disorder of sex development; OMIM, Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man.
Modified from Husebye ES, Pearce SH, Krone NP, Kämpe O. Adrenal insufficiency. Lancet. 2021;397:613–629, Table 1.

separating their presentation. X-­linked ALD is caused by pathogenic
variants in ABCD1 located on Xq28. The gene encodes a transmembrane transporter involved in the importation of very long-­chain fatty
acids into peroxisomes. Clinical phenotypes can vary even within
families, perhaps owing to modifier genes or other unknown factors.
There is no correlation between the degree of neurologic impairment
and severity of adrenal insufficiency. Prenatal diagnosis by DNA analysis and family screening by very long-­chain fatty acid assays and gene
analysis are available. Females who are heterozygous carriers of the
X-­linked ALD gene can develop neurologic symptoms in midlife or
later; adrenal insufficiency is rare. This condition is part of the newborn screening panel.
Neonatal ALD is a rare autosomal recessive disorder. Infants have
neurologic deterioration and have or acquire evidence of adrenocortical dysfunction. Most patients have severe, progressive cognitive
impairment and die before 5 years of age. This disorder is a subset of

Zellweger (cerebrohepatorenal) syndrome, in which peroxisomes do
not develop at all owing to pathogenic variants in any of several genes
(PEX5, PEX1, PEX10, PEX13, and PEX26) controlling the development
of peroxisomes.
Patients with disorders of cholesterol synthesis or metabolism, including abetalipoproteinemia with deficient lipoprotein B–containing lipoproteins (such as low-­density lipoprotein), and homozygous familial
hypercholesterolemia, with impaired or absent low-­density lipoprotein
receptors, have mildly impaired adrenocortical function. Heterozygous
familial hypercholesterolemia patients have normal adrenocortical function, which is unaffected by treatment with statin (HMG-­CoA reductase
inhibitor) drugs. Adrenal insufficiency has been reported in patients
with Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz syndrome, an autosomal recessive disorder
manifesting with facial anomalies, microcephaly, limb anomalies, and
developmental delay (see Chapter 106.3), caused by pathogenic variants
in the gene coding for sterol Δ7-­reductase on chromosome 11q12-­q13.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 615 u Adrenocortical Insufficiency and Altered Sensitivity to Corticosteroids

3453

Table 615.2  Causes of Secondary Adrenal Insufficiency in the Form of Pituitary Disorders
GENE (OMIM*)

ASSOCIATED CLINICAL SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS

ACQUIRED CAUSES
Steroid withdrawal syndrome

PDGFD

Endogenous glucocorticoid hypersecretion caused by Cushing syndrome and
exogenous glucocorticoid administration for more than 2 wk

Opioids

—

Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism

Tumor

—

Craniopharyngioma, glioma, meningioma, ependymoma, germinoma, intrasellar or
suprasellar metastases, adenoma, carcinoma

Trauma

—

Pituitary stalk lesions, battered child syndrome, vehicular trauma

Pituitary apoplexy (Sheehan
syndrome)

—

High blood loss or hypotension

CONGENITAL CAUSES
Aplasia or Hypoplasia
PROP1 deficiency

PROP1 (262600)

Additional deficiency of growth hormone, prolactin, thyroid-­stimulating hormone,
and luteinizing hormone or follicle-­stimulating hormone, or both

LHX4 deficiency

LHX4 (262700)

Additional deficiency of growth hormone and thyroid-­stimulating hormone

SOX3 deficiency

SOX3 (312000)

Additional deficiencies of pituitary hormones

Isolated ACTH Deficiency
TBX19 deficiency

TBX19 (201400)

Severe neonatal-­onset adrenal insufficiency

Proopiomelanocortin

POMC (609734)

Adrenal insufficiency, early-­onset obesity, red hair pigmentation

Proprotein convertase 1

PCSK1 (600955)

Hypoglycemia, malabsorption, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism

*www.omim.org.
ACTH, Adrenocorticotropic hormone; OMIM, Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man.
From Husebye ES, Pearce SH, Krone NP, Kämpe O. Adrenal insufficiency. Lancet. 2021;397:613–629, Table 2.

Table 615.3  Causes of Tertiary Adrenal Insufficiency
GENE (OMIM*)

ASSOCIATED CLINICAL SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS

ACQUIRED CAUSES
Steroid withdrawal syndrome

PDGFD

Endogenous glucocorticoid hypersecretion caused by Cushing syndrome
and exogenous glucocorticoid administration for more than 2 wk

Opioids

—

Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism

Inflammatory disorders

—

Abscess, meningitis, encephalitis

Trauma

—

—

Radiation therapy

—

Craniospinal irradiation in leukemia and irradiation for tumors outside the
hypothalamic-­pituitary area

Surgery

—

—

Tumor

—

Craniopharyngioma, glioma, meningioma, ependymoma, germinoma,
intrasellar or suprasellar metastases

Infiltrative diseases

—

Sarcoidosis, histiocytosis X, hemochromatosis

CONGENTIAL CAUSES
Septo-­optic dysplasia (de Morsier
syndrome)

HESX1 (182230)

Combined pituitary hormone deficiency, optic nerve hypoplasia, midline
brain defects

—

—

Corticotropin-releasing hormone
deficiency

*www.omim.org.
OMIM, Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man.
From Husebye ES, Pearce SH, Krone NP, Kämpe O. Adrenal insufficiency. Lancet. 2021;397:613–629, Table 3.

This impairs the final step in cholesterol synthesis with marked elevation of 7-­dehydrocholesterol and abnormally low cholesterol. Wolman
disease is a rare autosomal recessive disorder caused by pathogenic variants in the gene encoding human lysosomal acid lipase on chromosome
10q23.2-­23.3. Cholesteryl esters accumulate in lysosomes in most organ
systems, leading to organ failure. Infants during the first or second month
of life have hepatosplenomegaly, steatorrhea, abdominal distention, and
failure to thrive. Adrenal insufficiency and bilateral adrenal calcification
are present, and death usually occurs in the first year of life.

Multisystem Syndromes Associated with Growth
Restriction

Pathogenic variants in genes that affect DNA replication may be associated with primordial dwarfism, immune deficiency, and adrenal
insufficiency. Minichromosome maintenance-­
deficient 4 homolog
(MCM4) functions to integrate several protein kinase signals that
regulate progression of DNA replication through the S phase. Homozygous deficiency of MCM4 causes a primary immunodeficiency syndrome characterized by severe intrauterine and extrauterine growth

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3454 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 615.4  Frequencies of Etiologies of Primary Adrenal Insufficiency
ETIOLOGY

%

AGE AT DIAGNOSIS

Congenital adrenal hyperplasia

59

Infancy

Autoimmune

16

Childhood to adolescence

APECED (autoimmune polyendocrinopathy–
candidiasis–ectodermal dystrophy)

6

Childhood to adolescence

Adrenoleukodystrophy

4

Childhood to adolescence

Other genetic causes

14*

Hemorrhage

1

Infancy

*See Table 615.5.
Data from Perry R, Kecha O, Paquette J, et al. Primary adrenal insufficiency in children: twenty years’ experience at the Sainte-­Justine Hospital, Montreal. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
2005;90:3243–3250; Hsieh S, White PC. Presentation of primary adrenal insufficiency in childhood. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011;96:E925–E928.

Table 615.5  Other Genetic Etiologies for Primary Adrenal Insufficiency
GENE

FUNCTION

SYNDROME

FREQUENCY* %

MC2R

Melanocortin (ACTH) receptor

Familial glucocorticoid deficiency type 1

22

MRAP

Melanocortin receptor accessory protein

Familial glucocorticoid deficiency type 2

4

NROB1

DAX1 orphan nuclear receptor

X-­linked adrenal hypoplasia congenita

6†

NR5A1

SF-­1 orphan nuclear receptor

Gonadal dysgenesis

<1

STAR

Steroidogenic acute regulatory protein

Nonclassic lipoid adrenal hyperplasia

8

CYP11A1

Cholesterol side-­chain cleavage enzyme

Nonclassic lipoid adrenal hyperplasia

8

NNT

Nicotinamide nucleotide transhydrogenase

Familial glucocorticoid deficiency type 4

8

AAAS

Aladin (nuclear transport protein)

Triple A syndrome

5

SAMD9

Factor inhibiting cell proliferation

MIRAGE syndrome

3

CDKN1C

Cyclin-­dependent kinase inhibitor

IMAGE syndrome

1

POLE

Subunit of DNA polymerase

IMAGE syndrome type 2

rare

*Frequencies are from 95 Turkish and 155 United Kingdom patients in whom congenital adrenal hyperplasia, autoimmune etiologies, and metabolic disorders (e.g.,
adrenoleukodystrophy) had been excluded.
†Many cases of X-­linked adrenal hypoplasia congenita had already been identified, so this frequency is an underestimate.

restriction, microcephaly, decreased numbers of natural killer (NK)
cells, recurrent viral infections, and adrenal insufficiency. It is relatively
frequent (1 in 2,506) in the Irish Traveller population.
MIRAGE syndrome is a form of syndromic adrenal hypoplasia,
characterized by myelodysplasia, infections, restriction of growth,
adrenal hypoplasia, genital abnormalities, and enteropathy. It is often
fatal within the first decade of life, usually because of invasive infection. It is caused by pathogenic variants in SAMD9 on chromosome
7q21, which encodes a protein that inhibits cell proliferation. Disease-­
causing variants are heterozygous and usually arise de novo. When
expressed in cultured cells, the abnormal proteins strongly inhibit cell
proliferation. There is a risk that affected cells will attempt to escape
growth inhibition by selectively losing chromosome 7 carrying the
variant causing haploinsufficiency of SAMD9. This can cause myelodysplastic syndrome.
IMAGE syndrome consists of intrauterine growth restriction,
metaphyseal dysplasia, adrenal hypoplasia, and genital anomalies.
Two forms have been identified: an autosomal dominant form caused
by pathogenic variants in CDKN1C and an autosomal recessive form
caused by variants in POLE. Adrenal insufficiency in cases associated
with CDKN1C variants tends to present in early infancy, whereas in
cases caused by POLE variants, it is manifested during early childhood.
The recessive form is also associated with immunodeficiency and is
therefore sometimes termed IMAGEI syndrome.
The CDKN1C gene product, also called p57(KIP2), binds G1 cyclin/
CDK complexes and thus inhibits cell proliferation. It is located in the
imprinted region of chromosome 11p15 and is preferentially expressed

from the maternal allele. Inactivating variants in this gene cause some
cases of Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome (see Chapter 113), which is
associated with macrosomia and tumor risk. Variants that interfere
with binding of CDKN1C to DNA polymerase delta auxiliary protein
enhance the growth inhibitory effect of CDKN1C (gain of function)
and cause IMAGE syndrome when maternally inherited. Thus both
genes involved in IMAGE syndrome have roles in DNA replication
and repair.

Deficiency of Mitochondrial Reactive Oxygen Species
Detoxification

Nicotinamide nucleotide transhydrogenase (NNT) is a mitochondrial
protein that catalyzes transfer of a hydride ion between nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide, NAD(H), and oxidized nicotinamide dinucleotide phosphate, NADP(H). Its deficiency manifests generally in infancy
or early childhood, and most patients have both mineralocorticoid and
glucocorticoid deficiencies. A pathogenic variant in TXNRD2 has been
identified in a single kindred with glucocorticoid deficiency.

Type 1 Autoimmune Polyendocrinopathy Syndrome

Although autoimmune Addison disease most often occurs sporadically, it can occur as a component of two syndromes, each consisting
of a constellation of autoimmune disorders (see Chapter 608). Type
1 autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndrome (APS-­1), also known
as autoimmune polyendocrinopathy–candidiasis–ectodermal dystrophy
(APECED) syndrome, is inherited in a mendelian autosomal recessive
manner, whereas APS-­2 has complex inheritance. Patients with APS-­1

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 615 u Adrenocortical Insufficiency and Altered Sensitivity to Corticosteroids
may have autoantibodies to the adrenal cytochrome P450 enzymes
CYP21A2, CYP17A1, and CYP11A1. The presence of such antibodies
indicates a high likelihood of the development of Addison disease or,
in female patients, ovarian failure. Adrenal failure can evolve rapidly
in APS-­1; death in patients with a previous diagnosis and unexplained
deaths in siblings of patients with APS-­1 have been reported, indicating the need to closely monitor patients with APS-­1 (or any child with
unexplained hypoparathyroidism) and to thoroughly evaluate apparently unaffected siblings of patients with this disorder.

Corticosteroid-­Binding Globulin Deficiency and
Decreased Cortisol-­Binding Affinity

Corticosteroid-­binding globulin deficiency (SERPINA6 pathogenic variant) and decreased cortisol-­binding affinity result in low levels of plasma
cortisol but normal urinary free cortisol and normal plasma ACTH levels.
A high prevalence of hypotension and fatigue has been reported in some
adults with abnormalities of corticosteroid-­binding globulin deficiency.

ACQUIRED ETIOLOGIES
Autoimmune Addison Disease

The most common cause of Addison disease is autoimmune destruction of the glands. The glands may be so small that they are not visible at
autopsy, and only remnants of tissue are found in microscopic sections.
Usually, the medulla is not destroyed, and there is marked lymphocytic
infiltration in the area of the former cortex. In advanced disease, all
adrenocortical function is lost, but early in the clinical course, isolated
cortisol deficiency can occur. Most patients have antiadrenal cytoplasmic antibodies in their plasma; 21-­hydroxylase (CYP21A2) is the
most commonly occurring biochemically defined autoantigen.
Addison disease can occur as a component of two autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndromes. Type 1 (APS-­1) was discussed previously.
Type 2 autoimmune polyendocrinopathy (APS-­2) consists of Addison disease associated with autoimmune thyroid disease (Schmidt syndrome) or type 1 diabetes (Carpenter syndrome) (see Chapter 608).
Frequencies of the human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-­D3 and HLA-­D4
alleles are increased in these patients and appear to confer an increased
risk for development of this disease; particular alleles at the major histocompatibility complex class I chain–related genes A and B (MICA
and MICB) also are associated with this disorder. Polymorphisms in
genes involved in other autoimmune disorders have been inconsistently associated with primary adrenal insufficiency, and their contribution to its pathogenesis must be regarded as uncertain. These include
the class II, major histocompatibility complex, transactivator (CIITA),
C-­type lectin domain family 16, member A (CLEC16A), and protein
tyrosine phosphatase, nonreceptor type 22 (PTPN22). The disorder is
most common in middle-­age females and can occur in many generations of the same family. Antiadrenal antibodies, specifically antibodies
to the CYP21A2, CYP17A1, and CYP11A1 enzymes, are also found in
these patients. Autoimmune adrenal insufficiency may also be seen in
patients with celiac disease and mitochondrial gene mutations.
Adrenal insufficiency remains a risk among patients previously treated
with a prolonged course of steroids when stressed with an infection or
trauma. Despite being “tapered or weaned” from the steroids, subclinical
adrenal insufficiency may develop weeks to months later if stressed (see
Chapter 615.2).

3455

of adrenocortical carcinoma and refractory Cushing syndrome (see
Chapters 617 and 619), is cytotoxic to the adrenal cortex and can also
alter extraadrenal cortisol metabolism. Signs of adrenal insufficiency
occur in a substantial percentage of patients treated with mitotane.
Etomidate, used in the induction and maintenance of general anesthesia,
inhibits 11β-­hydroxylase (CYP11B1), and a single induction dose can
block cortisol synthesis for 4-­8 hours or longer. This may be problematic in severely stressed patients, particularly if repeated doses are used
in a critical care setting. Abiraterone acetate, an androgen biosynthesis
inhibitor that is used to treat metastatic prostate carcinoma, inhibits
cortisol biosynthesis but leaves corticosterone biosynthesis unimpaired.
This drug is not currently encountered in pediatric practice. Immune
checkpoint inhibitors may rarely cause primary adrenal insufficiency.
Although not themselves a cause of adrenal insufficiency, rifampicin and
anticonvulsive drugs such as phenytoin and phenobarbital reduce the
effectiveness and bioavailability of corticosteroid replacement therapy by
inducing steroid-­metabolizing enzymes in the liver.

Hemorrhage into Adrenal Glands

Hemorrhage into adrenal glands can occur in the neonatal period as a
result of a difficult labor (especially breech presentation), or its etiology
might not be apparent (Fig. 615.1). An incidence rate of 3 in 100,000
live births has been suggested. The hemorrhage may be sufficiently
extensive to result in death from exsanguination or hypoadrenalism.
An abdominal mass, anemia, unexplained jaundice, or scrotal hematoma may be the presenting sign. Often, the hemorrhage is asymptomatic initially and is identified later by calcification of the adrenal gland.
Fetal adrenal hemorrhage has also been reported. Postnatally, adrenal
hemorrhage most often occurs in patients being treated with anticoagulants. It can also occur as a result of child abuse.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Primary adrenal insufficiency leads to cortisol and often aldosterone
deficiencies. The signs and symptoms of adrenal insufficiency are most
easily understood in the context of the normal actions of these hormones (see Chapter 614; Table 615.6).

Infection

Tuberculosis was a common cause of adrenal destruction in the past but
is currently much less prevalent. The most common infectious etiology for
adrenal insufficiency is meningococcemia (see Chapter 237); adrenal crisis from this cause is referred to as Waterhouse-­Friderichsen syndrome.
Patients with AIDS can have a variety of subclinical abnormalities in the
hypothalamic-­pituitary-­adrenal (HPA) axis, but frank adrenal insufficiency is rare. However, drugs used in the treatment of AIDS can affect
adrenal hormone homeostasis.

Drugs

Fig. 615.1 Contrast-­enhanced coronal CT confirming intraadrenal lo-

Ketoconazole, an antifungal drug, can cause adrenal insufficiency by
inhibiting adrenal enzymes. Mitotane (o,p′-­DDD), used in the treatment

calization of a round hyperdense lesion compatible with a large calcification. (From Llano JP, Beaufils E, Nicolino M. Uncommon cause of large
paravertebral calcification in a child. J Pediatr. 2013;162:881, Fig. 2.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3456 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 615.6  Clinical Manifestations and Biochemical Findings in Adrenal Insufficiency
PATHOPHYSIOLOGIC MECHANISM

PREVALENCE (%)*

SYMPTOMS
Fatigue

Glucocorticoid deficiency

90

Anorexia, weight loss

Glucocorticoid deficiency

90

Nausea, vomiting

Glucocorticoid deficiency, mineralocorticoid deficiency

90

Salt craving (primary adrenal insufficiency
only)

Mineralocorticoid deficiency

20

Myalgia or joint pain

Glucocorticoid deficiency

SIGNS
Low blood pressure, orthostatic hypotension

Mineralocorticoid deficiency, glucocorticoid deficiency

70-­100

Excess of proopiomelanocortin-­derived peptides

70

Mineralocorticoid deficiency, glucocorticoid deficiency
(leading to decreased free water excretion)

90

Hyperkalemia (primary adrenal insufficiency
only)

Mineralocorticoid deficiency

50

Hypoglycemia

Glucocorticoid deficiency

30

Ketosis

Glucocorticoid deficiency

30

Low random cortisol level

Glucocorticoid deficiency

80

Eosinophilia, lymphocytosis

Glucocorticoid deficiency

High ACTH level (primary adrenal
insufficiency only)

Glucocorticoid deficiency

100

High plasma renin activity (primary adrenal
insufficiency only)

Mineralocorticoid deficiency

100

Skin or mucosal hyperpigmentation (primary
adrenal insufficiency only)
LABORATORY FINDINGS
Hyponatremia

*Prevalence data are for primary insufficiency only. Blanks indicate that no pediatric prevalence data are available.
Data from Hsieh S, White PC. Presentation of primary adrenal insufficiency in childhood J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011;96:E925–E928.

Cortisol deficiency decreases cardiac output and vascular tone;
moreover, catecholamines such as epinephrine have decreased inotropic and pressor effects in the absence of cortisol. These problems are
initially manifested as orthostatic hypotension in older children and
can progress to frank shock in patients of any age. They are exacerbated by aldosterone deficiency, which causes hypovolemia owing to
decreased resorption of sodium in the distal nephron.
Hypotension and decreased cardiac output decrease glomerular filtration and thus decrease the ability of the kidney to excrete free water.
Vasopressin (AVP) is secreted by the posterior pituitary in response
to hypotension and as a direct consequence of lack of inhibition by
cortisol. These factors decrease plasma osmolality and lead to hyponatremia. Hyponatremia is also caused by aldosterone deficiency and
may be much worse when both cortisol and aldosterone are deficient.
In addition to hypovolemia and hyponatremia, aldosterone deficiency causes hyperkalemia by decreasing potassium excretion in the
distal nephron. Cortisol deficiency alone does not cause hyperkalemia.
Cortisol deficiency decreases negative feedback on the hypothalamus and pituitary, leading to increased secretion of ACTH. Hyperpigmentation is caused by ACTH and other peptide hormones
(γ-­melanocyte–stimulating hormone) arising from the ACTH precursor, proopiomelanocortin. In patients with a fair complexion, the skin
can have a bronze cast. Pigmentation may be more prominent in skin
creases, mucosa, and scars. In dark-­skinned patients, it may be most
readily appreciated in the gingival and buccal mucosa.
Hypoglycemia is a feature of adrenal insufficiency. It is often accompanied by ketosis as the body attempts to use fatty acids as an alternative energy source. Ketosis may cause or be aggravated by anorexia,
nausea, and vomiting, all of which occur frequently.
The clinical presentation of adrenal insufficiency depends on the
age of the patient, whether both cortisol and aldosterone secretion
are affected, and to some extent on the underlying etiology. The most

common causes in early infancy are inborn errors of steroid biosynthesis, sepsis, AHC, and adrenal hemorrhage. Infants have a relatively
greater requirement for aldosterone than do older children, possibly
owing to immaturity of the kidney and to the low sodium content of
human breast milk and infant formula. Hyperkalemia, hyponatremia,
and hypoglycemia are prominent presenting signs of adrenal insufficiency in infants. Ketosis is not consistently present because infants
generate ketones less well than do older children. Hyperpigmentation
is not usually seen because this takes weeks or months to develop, and
orthostatic hypotension is obviously difficult to demonstrate in infants.
Infants can become ill very quickly. There may be only a few days
of decreased activity, anorexia, and vomiting before critical electrolyte
abnormalities develop.
In older children with Addison disease, symptoms include muscle
weakness, malaise, anorexia, vomiting, weight loss, and orthostatic
hypotension. These may be of insidious onset. It is not unusual to elicit,
in retrospect, an episodic history spanning years with symptoms being
noticeable only during intercurrent illnesses. Such patients can present
with acute decompensation (adrenal crisis) during relatively minor
infectious illnesses. Some of these patients have been initially misdiagnosed
with chronic fatigue syndrome, postmononucleosis syndrome, chronic
Lyme disease, or psychiatric disorders (depression or anorexia nervosa).
Hyperpigmentation is often, but not necessarily, present. Hyponatremia is present at diagnosis in almost 90% of patients. Hyperkalemia
tends to occur later in the course of the disease in older children than
in infants and is present in only half of patients at diagnosis. Normal
potassium levels must never be presumed to rule out primary adrenal
insufficiency.
Hypoglycemia and ketosis are common. The clinical presentation can
be easily confused with gastroenteritis or other acute infections. Chronicity of symptoms can alert the clinician to the possibility of Addison disease, but this diagnosis should be considered in any child with

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 615 u Adrenocortical Insufficiency and Altered Sensitivity to Corticosteroids
orthostatic hypotension, hyponatremia, hypoglycemia, and ketosis. Salt
craving is seen in primary adrenal insufficiency with mineralocorticoid
deficiency. Fatigue, myalgias, fever, eosinophilia, lymphocytosis, hypercalcemia, and anemia may be noted with glucocorticoid deficiency.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Hypoglycemia, ketosis, hyponatremia, and hyperkalemia have been
discussed. An electrocardiogram is useful for quickly detecting hyperkalemia in a critically ill child. Acidosis is often present, and the blood
urea nitrogen level is elevated if the patient is dehydrated.
Cortisol levels are sometimes at the low end of the normal range but
are invariably low when the patient’s degree of illness is considered.
ACTH levels are high in primary adrenal insufficiency but can take
time to be reported by the laboratory. Similarly, aldosterone levels may
be within the normal range but inappropriately low considering the
patient’s hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, and hypovolemia. Plasma renin
activity is elevated. Blood eosinophils may be increased in number, but
this is rarely useful diagnostically.
Urinary excretion of sodium and chloride is increased and urinary
potassium is decreased, but these are difficult to assess in random urine
samples. Accurate interpretation of urinary electrolytes requires more
prolonged (24 hours) urine collections and knowledge of the patient’s
sodium and potassium intake.
The most definitive test for adrenal insufficiency is measurement of
serum levels of cortisol before and after administration of ACTH; resting levels are low and do not increase normally after administration of
ACTH. Occasionally, normal resting levels that do not increase after
administration of ACTH indicate an absence of adrenocortical reserve.
A low initial level followed by a significant response to ACTH can indicate secondary adrenal insufficiency. Traditionally, this test has been
performed by measuring cortisol levels before and 30 or 60 minutes
after giving 0.250 mg of cosyntropin (ACTH 1-­24) by rapid intravenous infusion. Aldosterone will transiently increase in response to this
dose of ACTH and may also be measured. A low-­dose test (1 μg ACTH
1-­24/1.73 m2) is a more sensitive test of pituitary-­adrenal reserve but
has somewhat lower specificity (more false-­positive tests).

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Upon presentation, Addison disease often needs to be distinguished
from more acute illnesses such as gastroenteritis with dehydration

3457

or sepsis. Additional testing is directed at identifying the specific
cause for adrenal insufficiency. When CAH is suspected, serum levels of cortisol precursors (17-­hydroxyprogesterone) should be measured along with cortisol in an ACTH stimulation test (see Chapter
616) (Fig. 615.2). Elevated levels of very long-­chain fatty acids are
diagnostic of ALD (see Chapter 639.3). Many genetic etiologies for
primary adrenal insufficiency may be identified by direct genetic
testing, but it can take weeks for results to become available. The
presence of antiadrenal antibodies suggests an autoimmune pathogenesis. Patients with autoimmune Addison disease must be closely
observed for the development of other autoimmune disorders. In
children, hypoparathyroidism is a commonly associated disorder,
and it is suspected if hypocalcemia and elevated phosphate levels are
present.
Ultrasonography, CT, or MRI can help to define the size of the adrenal glands, but this is not usually necessary.

TREATMENT

Treatment of acute adrenal insufficiency must be immediate and vigorous. If the diagnosis of adrenal insufficiency has not been established,
a blood sample should be obtained before therapy to determine electrolytes, glucose, ACTH, cortisol, aldosterone, and plasma renin activity. If the patient’s condition permits, an ACTH stimulation test can be
performed while initial fluid resuscitation is underway. An intravenous
solution of 5% glucose in 0.9% saline should be administered to correct hypoglycemia, hypovolemia, and hyponatremia. Hypotonic fluids
(e.g., 5% glucose in water or 0.2% saline) must be avoided because they
can precipitate or exacerbate hyponatremia. If hyperkalemia is severe,
it can require treatment with intravenous calcium and/or bicarbonate,
intrarectal potassium-­binding resin (sodium polystyrene sulfonate,
Kayexalate), or intravenous infusion of glucose and insulin. A water-­
soluble form of hydrocortisone, such as hydrocortisone sodium succinate, should be given intravenously. As much as 10 mg for infants,
25 mg for toddlers, 50 mg for older children, and 100 mg for adolescents should be administered as a bolus and a similar total amount then
given in divided doses at 6-­hour intervals for the first 24 hours. These
doses may be reduced during the next 24 hours if progress is satisfactory. Adequate fluid and sodium repletion is achieved by intravenous
saline administration, aided by the mineralocorticoid effect of high
doses of hydrocortisone.

Primary Adrenal Insufficiency
Infants, selected
children and adults

All > 6 months age

17-OH-Progesterone

21-OH-Antibody
(-)b

(-)
(+)a

(-)

CT Adrenals
(-)

Genetic Syndromes
(Rare CAH, AHC)
CAH

(-)
Idiopathic PAI

(+)

(+)

(+)

Infiltrative Disease
Adrenal Hemorrhage
Infections
Malignant Tumors

VLCFA (Males)

Autoimmune AI
Consider APS-1,
APS-2

Adrenoleukodystrophy

Fig. 615.2 Algorithm for the diagnostic approach to the patient with primary adrenal insufficiency (PAI). The most common causes of PAI are auto-

immune destruction of the adrenal cortex in adults and congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) in children. These etiologies can be screened for using
21-­hydroxylase antibodies and a baseline serum 17-­hydroxyprogesterone level, respectively. Males with negative 21-­hydroxylase antibodies should
be tested for adrenoleukodystrophy with plasma VLCFAs. If these diagnoses are excluded, a CT scan of the adrenals may reveal evidence of adrenal
infiltrative processes or metastases, but this is of low yield in children and adolescents. The individual’s clinical picture and family history may render
some steps in the algorithm redundant or suggest specific genetic syndromes. The latter includes subtypes of autoimmune polyglandular syndromes
or specific rare genetic disorders where adrenal failure is part of a broader phenotype. AHC, Adrenal hypoplasia congenita; AI, adrenal insufficiency;
APS-1, type 1 autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndrome; VLCFA, very long-­chain fatty acid. a17-­OH-­progesterone >1,000 ng/dL is diagnostic for
21-­OH deficiency. bVLCFA should be measured in the initial evaluation of preadolescent boys. (Adapted from Husebye ES, Allolio B, Arlt W, et al.
Consensus statement on the diagnosis, treatment, and follow-­up of patients with primary adrenal insufficiency. J Intern Med. 2014;275:104–115.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3458 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Caution should be exercised in the rare patient with concomitant
adrenal insufficiency and hypothyroidism, because thyroxine can
increase cortisol clearance. Thus an adrenal crisis may be precipitated
if hypothyroidism is treated without first ensuring adequate glucocorticoid replacement.
After the acute manifestations are under control, most patients
require chronic replacement therapy for their cortisol and aldosterone
deficiencies. Hydrocortisone (cortisol) may be given orally in daily
doses of 10 mg/m2/24 hr in three divided doses; some patients require
15 mg/m2/24 hr to minimize fatigue, especially in the morning. Dividing the hydrocortisone into four doses daily may yield more physiologic drug profiles, but adherence to such frequent dosing may be
problematic. Timed-­release preparations of hydrocortisone are available in Europe and are undergoing clinical trials in the United States as
of 2021. Subcutaneous infusion of hydrocortisone with a pump has also
been examined in clinical trials; although this has the advantage that
it can very closely mimic normal diurnal variation in cortisol secretion, it is expensive and has not yet entered routine clinical practice.
Equivalent doses (20–25% of the hydrocortisone dose) of prednisone
or prednisolone may be divided and given twice daily. ACTH levels
may be used to monitor adequacy of glucocorticoid replacement in
primary adrenal insufficiency; in CAH, levels of precursor hormones
are used instead. Blood samples for monitoring should be obtained at
a consistent time of day and in a consistent relation to (i.e., before or
after) the hydrocortisone dose. Normalizing ACTH levels is unnecessary and can require excessive doses of hydrocortisone; in general,
morning ACTH levels high in the normal range to 3-­4 times normal
are satisfactory. Because untreated or severely undertreated patients
can acutely decompensate during relatively minor illnesses, assessment
of symptoms (or lack thereof) should not be used as a substitute for
biochemical monitoring. During situations of stress, such as periods
of infection or minor operative procedures, the dose of hydrocortisone
should be increased twofold to threefold. Major surgery under general
inhalation anesthesia requires high intravenous doses of hydrocortisone similar to those used for acute adrenal insufficiency.
If aldosterone deficiency is present, fludrocortisone, a synthetic mineralocorticoid, is given orally in doses of 0.05-­0.2 mg daily. Measurements
of plasma renin activity are useful in monitoring the adequacy of mineralocorticoid replacement. Chronic overdosage with glucocorticoids
leads to obesity, short stature, and osteoporosis, whereas overdosage with
fludrocortisone results in hypertension and occasionally hypokalemia.
Replacement of dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) in adults remains
controversial; prepubertal children do not normally secrete large
amounts of DHEA. Many adults with Addison disease complain of
having decreased energy, and replacing DHEA can improve this problem, particularly in women in whom adrenal androgens represent
approximately 50% of total androgen secretion.
Additional therapy might need to be directed at the underlying
cause of the adrenal insufficiency regarding infections and certain
metabolic defects. Previous therapeutic approaches to ALD included
administration of glycerol trioleate and glycerol trierucate (Lorenzo’s
oil), bone marrow transplantation, and lovastatin (see Chapter 639.3).
Introducing a normal ABCD1 gene into autologous stem cells with a
lentiviral vector (officially termed elivaldogene autotemcel) has shown
excellent results in preventing neurologic progression, but it remains
investigational as of 2021.

potent glucocorticoid and that agent is suddenly withdrawn or the dose
is tapered too quickly. Patients at risk for this problem include those
with leukemia, asthma (particularly when patients are transitioned
from oral to inhaled corticosteroids), and collagen vascular disease or
other autoimmune conditions and those who have undergone tissue
transplants or neurosurgical procedures. The maximal duration and
dosage of glucocorticoid that can be administered before encountering
this problem is not known, but it is assumed that high-­dose glucocorticoids (the equivalent of >10 times physiologic cortisol secretion) can
be administered for less than 1 week without requiring a subsequent
taper of dose. On the other hand, when high doses of dexamethasone
are given to children with leukemia, it can take 6 months or longer after
therapy is stopped before tests of adrenal function return to normal.
Signs and symptoms of adrenal insufficiency are most likely in patients
who are subsequently subjected to stresses such as severe infections or
additional surgical procedures.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Aldosterone secretion is unaffected in secondary adrenal insufficiency
because the adrenal gland is, by definition, intact and the renin-­
angiotensin system is not involved. Thus signs and symptoms are those
of cortisol deficiency. Newborns often have hypoglycemia. Older children can have orthostatic hypotension or weakness. Hyponatremia
may be present.
When secondary adrenal insufficiency is the consequence of an
inborn or acquired anatomic defect involving the pituitary, there may be
signs of associated deficiencies of other pituitary hormones. The penis
may be small in male infants if gonadotropins are also deficient. Infants
with secondary hypothyroidism are often jaundiced. Children with associated growth hormone deficiency grow poorly after the first year of life.

615.2 Secondary and Tertiary Adrenal
Insufficiency
Perrin C. White

ABRUPT CESSATION OF ADMINISTRATION OF
CORTICOSTEROIDS

Secondary adrenal insufficiency most commonly occurs when the
HPA axis is suppressed by prolonged administration of high doses of a

Corticotropin (Adrenocorticotropic Hormone)
Deficiency

Pituitary or hypothalamic dysfunction can cause corticotropin deficiency (see Chapter 595), usually associated with deficiencies of other
pituitary hormones such as growth hormone and thyrotropin. Destructive lesions in the area of the pituitary, such as craniopharyngioma and
germinoma, are the most common causes of corticotropin deficiency.
In many cases the pituitary or hypothalamus is further damaged during surgical removal or radiotherapy of tumors in the midline of the
brain. Traumatic brain injury (see Chapter 750) frequently causes pituitary dysfunction, especially in the first days after the injury. However,
corticotropin deficiency is difficult to detect in that period owing to
frequent use of high doses of dexamethasone to minimize brain swelling, and permanent corticotropin deficiency is unusual after traumatic
brain injury. In rare instances, autoimmune hypophysitis is the cause
of corticotropin deficiency.
Congenital lesions of the pituitary also occur. The pituitary alone
may be affected, or additional midline structures may be involved, such
as the optic nerves or septum pellucidum. The latter type of abnormality is termed septo-­optic dysplasia, or de Morsier syndrome (see Chapter 631.9). More severe developmental anomalies of the brain, such as
anencephaly and holoprosencephaly, can also affect the pituitary. These
disorders are usually sporadic, although a few cases of autosomal recessive inheritance have occurred. Isolated deficiency of corticotropin has
been reported, including in several sets of siblings. Patients with multiple pituitary hormone deficiencies caused by pathogenic variants in
the PROP1 gene may develop progressive ACTH/cortisol deficiency.
Isolated deficiency of corticotropin-­releasing hormone has been documented in an Arab kindred as an autosomal recessive trait.
Up to 60% of children with Prader-­Willi syndrome (see Chapter
99.8) have some degree of secondary adrenal insufficiency as assessed
by provocative testing with metyrapone, although diurnal cortisol levels are normal. The clinical significance of this finding is uncertain, but
it might contribute to the relatively high incidence of sudden death
with infectious illness that occurs in this population. Although it is not
yet a standard of care, some endocrinologists advocate treating patients
who have Prader-­Willi syndrome with hydrocortisone during febrile
illness.

CLINICAL PRESENTATION

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 615 u Adrenocortical Insufficiency and Altered Sensitivity to Corticosteroids
Some children with pituitary abnormalities have hypoplasia of
the midface. Children with optic nerve hypoplasia can have obvious visual impairment. They usually have a characteristic wandering nystagmus, but this is often not apparent until several months
of age.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Because the adrenal glands themselves are not directly affected, the
diagnosis of secondary adrenal insufficiency is sometimes challenging. The most commonly used test to diagnose secondary adrenal
insufficiency is low-­dose ACTH stimulation testing (1 μg/1.73 m2 of
cosyntropin given intravenously), the rationale being that there will
be some degree of atrophy of the adrenal cortex if normal physiologic
ACTH stimulation is lacking. Thus this test may be falsely negative in
cases of acute compromise of the pituitary (e.g., injury or surgery).
Such circumstances rarely pose a diagnostic dilemma; in general, this
test provides excellent sensitivity and specificity. Although assays vary
somewhat, a threshold cortisol level of 18-­20 μg/dL 30 minutes after
cosyntropin administration may be used to dichotomize normal and
abnormal responses.
There seems to be little reason to use stimulation with corticotropin-­
releasing hormone instead of ACTH; although the corticotropin-­
releasing hormone test has the theoretical advantage of testing the
ability of the anterior pituitary to respond to this stimulus by secreting ACTH (thus distinguishing secondary and tertiary adrenal insufficiency), in practice it does not provide improved sensitivity and
specificity, and the agent is not as widely available.

TREATMENT

Iatrogenic secondary adrenal insufficiency (caused by chronic glucocorticoid administration) is best avoided by use of the smallest
effective doses of systemic glucocorticoids for the shortest period.
When a patient is thought to be at risk, tapering the dose rapidly
to a level equivalent to or slightly less than the physiologic replacement (∼10 mg/m2/24 hr of hydrocortisone) and further tapering
over several weeks can allow the adrenal cortex to recover without
the patient developing signs of adrenal insufficiency. Patients with
anatomic lesions of the pituitary should be treated indefinitely with
glucocorticoids. Mineralocorticoid replacement is not required.
In patients with panhypopituitarism, treating cortisol deficiency
can increase free water excretion, thus unmasking central diabetes
insipidus. Electrolytes must be monitored carefully when initiating
cortisol therapy in panhypopituitary patients.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

615.3 Adrenal Insufficiency in the Critical
Care Setting
Perrin C. White
Critical illness–related corticosteroid insufficiency (CIRCI)
is encountered in up to 20–50% of critically ill pediatric patients,
often as a transient condition. In many cases, it is considered functional or relative in nature, meaning that cortisol levels are within
normal limits but cannot increase sufficiently to meet the demands
of critical illness. The causes are heterogeneous (see Chapter
615.1). They include adrenal hypoperfusion from shock, particularly septic shock, as is often seen in meningococcemia. Inflammatory mediators during septic shock, particularly interleukin-­6, can
suppress ACTH secretion, directly suppress cortisol secretion, or
both. Etomidate, used as sedation for intubation, inhibits steroid
11β-­hydroxylase and thus blocks cortisol biosynthesis. Neurosurgical patients with closed head trauma or with tumors that involve
the hypothalamus or pituitary might have ACTH deficiency in the
context of panhypopituitarism. Some children have been previously
treated with systemic corticosteroids (e.g., children with leukemia) and have suppression of the HPA axis for that reason. In the

3459

intensive care nursery, premature infants have not yet developed
normal cortisol biosynthetic capacity and thus may not be able to
secrete adequate amounts of this hormone when ill.
Additionally, plasma clearance of cortisol is markedly reduced during critical illness, owing to decreased activity of cortisol-­metabolizing
enzymes in the liver and kidney. Although this may help defend
plasma levels of cortisol in the context of decreased cortisol secretion,
the inflammation associated with sepsis may increase glucocorticoid
resistance through activation of mitogen-­
activated protein kinases
(MAPKs) and decreased activity of their regulators, dual-­specific phosphatases (DUSPs).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Cortisol is required for catecholamines to have their normal pressor
effects on the cardiovascular system (see Chapters 614.4 and 614.5).
Accordingly, adrenal insufficiency is often suspected in hypotensive
patients who do not respond to intravenous pressor agents. Patients
may be at increased risk for hypoglycemia or a presentation resembling the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion, but these conditions commonly occur in the context of sepsis,
and the contribution of adrenal insufficiency may be difficult to
distinguish.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Although low random cortisol levels in severely stressed patients are
certainly abnormal, very high levels are also associated with a poor
outcome in such patients; the latter situation presumably reflects
a maximally stimulated adrenal cortex with diminished reserve.
ACTH (cosyntropin) stimulation testing is generally considered
the best way to diagnose adrenal insufficiency in this setting (see
Chapter 615.1); evidence suggests that the low-­dose (1 μg/1.73 m2)
test may be superior to the 250-­μg standard dose test, although this
remains controversial. In general, a peak cortisol level <18 μg/dL
or an increment of <9 μg/dL from baseline is considered suggestive
for adrenal insufficiency in this context. In evaluating cortisol levels, cortisol in the circulation is mostly bound to cortisol-­binding
globulin; in hypoproteinemic states, total cortisol levels may be
decreased, whereas free cortisol levels might be normal. It may be
prudent to measure free cortisol before initiating treatment when
total cortisol is low and albumin is <2.5 g/dL, but such measurements are not readily available in all institutions.

TREATMENT

It is likely that stress doses of hydrocortisone (e.g., 100 mg/m2/
day) improve responses to pressor agents in patients with shock
and documented adrenal insufficiency (Waterhouse-­Friderichsen
syndrome). In adults with sepsis, corticosteroids probably reduce
intensive care unit (ICU) and hospital length of stay and 28-­day and
hospital mortality, but there are limited data regarding treatment
efficacy in critically ill children. The Surviving Sepsis Guidelines
suggest using IV hydrocortisone (or not using it) to treat pediatric septic shock only if fluids and vasopressor therapy are unable
to restore hemodynamic stability. This is a weak recommendation
with low-­quality evidence.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

615.4 Altered End-­Organ Sensitivity to
Corticosteroids
Perrin C. White
Diseases can result from altered actions of hormones at their
physiologic targets. These may be caused by abnormal metabolism
of hormones, mutations in hormone receptors, or defects in cellular effectors (such as ion channels) that are targets of hormone
action.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3460 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
GENERALIZED GLUCOCORTICOID RESISTANCE

Patients with generalized glucocorticoid resistance have target-­tissue
insensitivity to glucocorticoids. The condition is usually inherited in
an autosomal dominant manner, but sporadic cases occur. Impairment
of normal negative feedback of cortisol at the levels of the hypothalamus and pituitary activates the HPA axis, with consequent increases in
ACTH and cortisol concentrations. Generalized glucocorticoid resistance is caused by pathogenic variants in the glucocorticoid receptor
(NR3C1). Most variants are heterozygous; glucocorticoid receptors
usually bind DNA as dimers, and three out of four dimers will contain
at least one abnormal receptor molecule when a heterozygous variant
is present.

Clinical Manifestations

The excess ACTH secretion causes adrenal hyperplasia with
increased production of adrenal steroids with mineralocorticoid
activity, including cortisol, deoxycorticosterone, and corticosterone, and also androgens and precursors, including androstenedione, DHEA, and DHEA sulfate. The high cortisol concentrations do
not cause Cushing syndrome (see Chapter 619) because of the insensitivity to glucocorticoids; conversely, most signs and symptoms of
adrenal insufficiency are absent except for the frequent occurrence
of chronic fatigue and occasional anxiety (neonatal hypoglycemia was reported in one very unusual patient with a homozygous
null variant). The mineralocorticoid and androgen receptors are
normally sensitive to their ligands. Signs of mineralocorticoid
excess, such as hypertension and hypokalemic alkalosis, are frequently noted. The increased concentrations of adrenal androgens
may cause ambiguous genitalia in females and gonadotropin-­
independent precocious puberty in children of either gender; acne,
hirsutism, and infertility in both sexes; menstrual irregularities in
females; and oligospermia in males. Testicular adrenal rest tumors
and ACTH-­secreting pituitary adenomas occasionally occur.

Laboratory Findings

The diagnosis of generalized glucocorticoid resistance is suggested
by elevated serum cortisol concentrations and increased 24-­hour
urinary free cortisol excretion in the absence of Cushing syndrome.
Levels of other adrenal steroids are also increased. Plasma concentrations of ACTH may be normal or high. The circadian pattern
of ACTH and cortisol secretion is preserved, although at higher-­
than-­normal concentrations, and there is resistance of the HPA axis
to dexamethasone suppression. Sequencing of the NR3C1 gene can
confirm the diagnosis.

Differential Diagnosis

Generalized glucocorticoid resistance should be distinguished from
relatively mild cases of Cushing syndrome (whether caused by a
pituitary adenoma or adrenal tumor, see Chapter 619); the latter
is more likely to be associated with excessive weight gain or poor
linear growth. Adrenocortical tumors may secrete mineralocorticoids such as deoxycorticosterone and also androgens, but ACTH
levels are often suppressed and, of course, the tumor can usually
be visualized with appropriate imaging techniques. CAH (see
Chapter 616), particularly 11β-­hydroxylase deficiency, may present with hypertension and signs of androgen excess, but in that
condition cortisol levels are low and levels of cortisol precursors
(17-­
hydroxyprogesterone, 11-­
deoxycortisol) are elevated. Obese
patients may be hypertensive and have hyperandrogenism, but cortisol secretion should be readily suppressed by dexamethasone.

Treatment

The goal of treatment is to suppress the excess secretion of ACTH,
thereby suppressing the increased production of adrenal steroids
with mineralocorticoid and androgenic activity. This requires administration of high doses of a pure glucocorticoid agonist such as dexamethasone (typically ∼20-­40 μg/kg/day) with careful titration to
suppress endogenous corticosteroid secretion without causing signs

of glucocorticoid excess such as excessive weight gain or suppression
of linear growth.

CORTISONE REDUCTASE DEFICIENCY

Levels of active glucocorticoids in target tissues are modulated by two
isozymes of 11β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase. The HSD11B2 isozyme converts cortisol to an inactive metabolite, cortisone; the two steroids differ in the presence of an 11β-­hydroxyl versus an 11-­oxo group,
respectively. Pathogenic variants in this enzyme cause the syndrome
of apparent mineralocorticoid excess. Conversely, the HSD11B1 isozyme converts cortisone to cortisol, and so it is sometimes referred to
as cortisone reductase. This isozyme is expressed at high levels in glucocorticoid target tissues, particularly the liver, where it ensures adequate levels of active glucocorticoids (cortisol and corticosterone) to
meet metabolic demands without requiring excessive adrenal cortisol
secretion.
The HSD11B1 isozyme is located in the endoplasmic reticulum (i.e.,
it is a microsomal enzyme) and functions as a dimer. It accepts electrons from reduced nicotine–adenine dinucleotide phosphate, which
is generated within the endoplasmic reticulum by hexose-­6-­phosphate
dehydrogenase, an enzyme distinct from cytoplasmic glucose-­
6-­
phosphate dehydrogenase.
Apparent cortisone reductase deficiency is caused by homozygous
pathogenic variants in hexose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase that prevent generation of reduced nicotine–adenine dinucleotide phosphate
within the endoplasmic reticulum and thus starve HSD11B1 of its
essential cofactor for the reductase reaction. Very rare patients have
been reported to have heterozygous variants in HSD11B1 itself and
thus have “true” cortisone reductase deficiency; because the enzyme
functions as a homodimer, heterozygous variants are able to impair
three fourths of all dimers.

Clinical Manifestations

Because circulating cortisone is not converted to cortisol, the circulating half-­life of cortisol is decreased, and the adrenal cortex must
secrete additional cortisol to compensate. This leads to adrenocortical overactivity analogous to, but generally much milder than, that
seen in generalized glucocorticoid resistance. This is usually not
severe enough to cause hypertension, presenting instead with mild
to moderate signs of androgen excess such as hirsutism, oligomenorrhea or amenorrhea, and infertility in females and precocious pseudopuberty (axillary and pubic hair and penile enlargement, but not
testicular enlargement) in males.

Laboratory Findings

The ratio of cortisol to cortisone in blood is lower than usual. The same
is true of urinary metabolites, typically measured as a ratio of the sum
of the tetrahydrocortisol and allotetrahydrocortisol excretion to that
of tetrahydrocortisone. These determinations are best accomplished by
gas chromatography followed by mass spectrometry and are available
in specialized reference laboratories. Absolute levels of cortisol and
ACTH are within normal limits.

Differential Diagnosis

Cortisone reductase deficiency should be distinguished from and
is much less common than other causes of androgen excess such as
polycystic ovarian syndrome and nonclassical CAH as a result of
21-­hydroxylase deficiency.

Treatment

Treatment is aimed at decreasing adrenal overactivity and thus reducing secretion of androgens. This can be accomplished by administration of hydrocortisone.

ALTERED END-­ORGAN SENSITIVITY TO
MINERALOCORTICOIDS
Pseudohypoaldosteronism

Pseudohypoaldosteronism type 1 (PHA1) is a monogenic disease
in which aldosterone action is deficient and patients are thus unable

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 615 u Adrenocortical Insufficiency and Altered Sensitivity to Corticosteroids
to resorb urinary sodium or excrete potassium properly. There are
two forms. A relatively mild autosomal dominant form is caused by
pathogenic variants in NR3C2 encoding the human mineralocorticoid receptor. A heterozygous variant is sufficient to cause disease
because the mineralocorticoid receptor interacts with DNA as a
dimer, and three fourths of the dimers are defective in individuals
carrying heterozygous variants (assuming mutant protein is synthesized). A more severe autosomal recessive form is usually the result
of homozygous pathogenic variants in the α (SCNN1A), β (SCNN1B),
or γ (SCNN1G) subunits of the epithelial Na+ channel; one reported
case of severe autosomal recessive disease was caused by homozygous
variants in NR3C2.
PHA1 should not be confused with pseudohypoaldosteronism
type 2, a rare mendelian syndrome characterized by hyperkalemia and,
in contrast to PHA1, by hypertension from excessive renal sodium
reabsorption. This disorder is caused by variants in the renal regulatory
kinases WNK1 and WNK4 or components of an E3 ubiquitin ligase
complex, Kelch-­like 3 (KLHL3) and Cullin 3 (CUL3).
Transient or “secondary” (nongenetic) pseudohypoaldosteronism
can occur in infants, mainly male, with urinary tract malformations
and/or urinary tract infections.

Clinical Manifestations

Infants with PHA1 present with hyperkalemia, hyponatremia,
hypovolemia, hypotension, and failure to thrive. In more severe
(usually autosomal recessive) cases, salt loss is not confined to the
kidney, but instead occurs from most epithelia. Mothers may report
that the skin of their affected infants tastes salty. Some infants suffer from cystic fibrosis–like pulmonary symptoms. It is often difficult
to control electrolyte abnormalities in patients with the autosomal
recessive form, leading to frequent hospitalizations and a need for
close clinical monitoring.
It is noteworthy that signs and symptoms of aldosterone deficiency tend to remit as the patients get older, particularly in the
autosomal dominant form. This is similar to what is seen in actual
aldosterone deficiency, as occurs in the salt-­losing forms of CAH
or aldosterone synthase deficiency. The kidney matures after early
infancy to become more efficient at excreting potassium, and
although breast milk and infant formula are low in sodium, the
normal adult Western diet is relatively high in sodium, thus compensating for the renal salt wasting.

Laboratory Findings

Infants have marked hyperkalemia and hyponatremia. Both plasma
renin and aldosterone are markedly elevated. Levels of cortisol and
ACTH are normal. If hypovolemia is severe, patients may develop
prerenal azotemia. With severe hyperkalemia, the electrocardiogram may include tall-­peaked T waves or ventricular tachycardia.

3461

may be accomplished by mixing the formula with polystyrene
resin (Kayexalate) and then decanting the formula before feeding.
Fludrocortisone, a synthetic mineralocorticoid, may be efficacious
in milder autosomal dominant cases if administered in high doses
(titrating up to ∼0.5 mg daily). Significant electrolyte abnormalities require treatment with IV normal saline and rectal polystyrene
resin. Severe hyperkalemia may require glucose and insulin infusions to keep it under control.
Secondary PHA owing to urinary tract infections or malformations
generally resolves when the underlying condition is treated.

ACTIVATING PATHOGENIC VARIANTS IN THE
MINERALOCORTICOID RECEPTOR

In contrast to PHA1, the S810L (serine-­810 to leucine) variant of
NR3C2 causes autosomal dominant, severe, early-­onset hypertension. This variant alters the ligand specificity of the mineralocorticoid
receptor so that it is activated by cortisone and so HSD11B2 cannot
protect it. It is also activated by progesterone, and consequently the
hypertension is exacerbated by pregnancy. Conversely, the glucocorticoid and progesterone receptor antagonist mifepristone (RU-­486)
antagonizes the mutant receptor and might be useful therapeutically
in nonpregnant individuals.

APPARENT MINERALOCORTICOID EXCESS

The syndrome of apparent mineralocorticoid excess is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by pathogenic variants in HSD11B2
encoding the type 2 isozyme of 11β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase.
The mineralocorticoid receptor has nearly identical affinities for
aldosterone (the main mineralocorticoid hormone) and cortisol,
yet cortisol is normally only a weak mineralocorticoid in vivo. This
is because HSD11B2 is expressed along with the mineralocorticoid
receptor in most target tissues such as the renal cortical collecting
duct epithelium. It converts cortisol to cortisone, which is not an
active steroid, thus preventing it from occupying the mineralocorticoid receptor. In contrast, aldosterone is not a substrate for the
enzyme because its 11β-­hydroxyl group forms a hemiketal with
the 18-­aldehyde group of the steroid and is thus not accessible to
the enzyme. Thus in the absence of HSD11B2, cortisol efficiently
occupies the mineralocorticoid receptor, and because cortisol concentrations are normally far higher than those of aldosterone, this
results in signs and symptoms of mineralocorticoid excess.
A similar clinical picture occurs with excessive consumption of licorice or licorice-­flavored chewing tobacco; licorice contains compounds,
including glycyrrhetinic and glycyrrhizic acids, that inhibit HSD11B2.
Carbenoxolone, an antihypertensive drug that is not marketed in the
United States, has similar effects.

Clinical Manifestations

PHA in infants should be distinguished from other causes of hyperkalemia and hyponatremia. These include renal failure of any cause,
CAH, aldosterone synthase deficiency, and other causes of adrenocortical insufficiency such as AHC. Patients with renal failure will
have elevated blood urea nitrogen and creatinine, but these may also
be seen in severely dehydrated patients with PHA or adrenal insufficiency. Patients with any form of adrenal insufficiency in this clinical
context will have low or low-­normal aldosterone levels (with elevated
plasma renin), in contrast to the elevated aldosterone levels seen in
PHA. Patients with CAH have elevated levels of steroid precursors
such as 17-­hydroxyprogesterone (in patients with 21-­hydroxylase
deficiency), and patients with most forms of adrenal insufficiency
have elevated ACTH levels.

Affected infants often have some degree of intrauterine growth
restriction, with birthweights of 2 kg typical for term infants.
Infants and children often fail to thrive. Severe hypertension (to
∼200/120 mm Hg) is almost always present. In some patients, the
hypertension tends to be labile or paroxysmal with severe emotional stress as a precipitating factor. Complications of hypertension have included cerebrovascular accidents. Several patients have
died during infancy or adolescence, either from electrolyte imbalances leading to cardiac arrhythmias or from vascular sequelae of
hypertension. Hypokalemic alkalosis can eventually cause nephrocalcinosis (often visible on renal ultrasound) and nephrogenic
diabetes insipidus leading to polyuria and polydipsia. Deleterious
effects on muscle range from elevations in serum creatine phosphokinase to rhabdomyolysis. Electrocardiograms show left ventricular
hypertrophy.

Treatment

Laboratory Findings

Differential Diagnosis

Infants must be given sodium supplementation (initially IV and
then oral or enteral), typically approximately 8 mEq/kg/day. Potassium levels in the infant formula often need to be reduced, which

Hypokalemia and alkalosis are common but not consistently present. Sodium levels are generally in the upper part of the reference range. Aldosterone and renin levels are very low because the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3462 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
hypertension and hypervolemia are independent of aldosterone
concentrations. Serum cortisol and ACTH levels are generally
within normal limits. The serum half-­life of cortisol is increased,
but the test for this requires a radioactive tracer and is not clinically
available. Total urinary excretion of cortisol metabolites is markedly decreased. The urinary ratio of free cortisol to free cortisone is
elevated, as is the ratio of urinary tetrahydrocortisol plus allotetrahydrocortisol to tetrahydrocortisone.

Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis includes other forms of severe childhood
hypertension such as renal artery anomalies, but relatively few conditions present with suppressed renin and aldosterone levels. Liddle syndrome has a similar presentation but no abnormalities in
the steroid profile, typically has an autosomal dominant mode of
inheritance, and does not respond to treatment with mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists. Hypertensive forms of CAH (see Chapter 616) also have suppressed renin and aldosterone levels, but they
present with signs of androgen excess (11β-­hydroxylase deficiency)
or androgen deficiency (17α-­hydroxylase deficiency); the latter can
be difficult to appreciate in young children. The steroid profiles in
CAH differ from those seen in apparent mineralocorticoid excess
syndrome.
Patients with severe Cushing syndrome may have high enough
cortisol levels to overwhelm renal HSD11B2, leading to severe
hypertension with alterations in urinary cortisol-­
to-­
cortisone
ratios. This occurs most often in patients with ectopic ACTH
syndrome. This generally does not present a diagnostic dilemma
because other signs of Cushing syndrome are present, including
high cortisol levels.

Treatment

Treatment includes a low-­salt diet, potassium supplementation, and
mineralocorticoid receptor blockade with spironolactone or eplerenone; a sodium channel blocker, such as amiloride or triamterene, may
work at least as well. In principle, suppression of cortisol secretion with
dexamethasone (which does not bind the mineralocorticoid receptor)
should work, but in practice it is much less effective than mineralocorticoid receptor blockade.

Chapter 616

Congenital Adrenal
Hyperplasia and Related
Disorders
Perrin C. White and Ming Yang
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is a family of autosomal recessive disorders of cortisol biosynthesis (normal adrenal steroidogenesis
is discussed in Chapter 614). Cortisol deficiency increases secretion of
corticotropin (adrenocorticotropic hormone [ACTH]), which, in turn,
leads to adrenocortical hyperplasia and overproduction of intermediate metabolites. Depending on the enzymatic step that is deficient, there
may be signs, symptoms, and laboratory findings of mineralocorticoid
deficiency or excess; incomplete virilization or precocious puberty in
affected males; and virilization or sexual infantilism in affected females
(Figs. 616.1 and 616.2, Table 616.1).

616.1 Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia
Caused by 21-­Hydroxylase Deficiency
Perrin C. White and Ming Yang
More than 90% of CAH cases are caused by 21-­hydroxylase deficiency. This P450 enzyme (CYP21A2, P450c21) hydroxylates progesterone and 17-­hydroxyprogesterone to yield 11-­deoxycorticosterone
and 11-­deoxycortisol, respectively (see Fig. 614.1 in Chapter 614).
These conversions are required for synthesis of aldosterone and cortisol, respectively. Both hormones are deficient in the most severe,

LIDDLE SYNDROME

Liddle syndrome is a form of hypertension and hypokalemia that
is clinically similar to the syndrome of apparent mineralocorticoid
excess, but it is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. It is
caused by an activating pathogenic variant in the β (SCNN1B) or
γ (SCNN1G) subunits of the epithelial sodium channel. Most of
these mutations prevent the channel subunits from being ligated to
ubiquitin and targeted to the proteasome for degradation, a process
that is normally regulated indirectly by aldosterone. The net effect
is to increase the number of open channels at the apical surface of
epithelial cells of the renal collecting duct, thus facilitating sodium
resorption and potassium excretion.

Clinical Manifestations, Laboratory Findings, and
Differential Diagnosis

Liddle syndrome is characterized by severe early-­onset hypertension
and by hypokalemia, which may not be persistent. Aldosterone and
renin levels are suppressed, but all steroid hormone levels are normal.
The differential diagnosis is the same as that for apparent mineralocorticoid excess.

Treatment

The mainstays of treatment are a low-­salt diet, potassium supplementation, and a sodium channel blocker such as amiloride or triamterene.
Mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists such as spironolactone are
ineffective.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

A

B

C

Fig. 616.1 A, A 6-­yr-­old female with congenital virilizing adrenal hy-

perplasia. The height age was 8.5 yr, and the bone age was 13 yr. B, Notice the clitoral enlargement and labial fusion. C, Her 5-­yr-­old brother
was not considered to be abnormal by the parents. The height age was
8 yr, and the bone age was 12.5 yr.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 616 u Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia and Related Disorders

A

B

3463

C

Fig. 616.2 Three virilized females with untreated congenital adrenal hyperplasia. All were erroneously assigned male sex at birth, and each had

a normal female sex-­chromosome complement. Infants A and B had the salt-­wasting form and received the diagnosis early in infancy. Infant C was
referred at 1 yr of age because of bilateral cryptorchidism. Notice the completely penile urethra; such complete masculinization in females with
adrenal hyperplasia is rare; most of these infants have the salt-­wasting form.

salt-­wasting form of the disease. Slightly less severely affected patients
are able to synthesize adequate amounts of aldosterone but have
elevated levels of androgens of adrenal origin; this is termed simple
virilizing disease. These two forms are collectively termed classic
21-­hydroxylase deficiency. Patients with nonclassic disease have relatively mildly elevated levels of androgens and may be asymptomatic or
have signs of androgen excess at any time after birth. Clinical presentation is dependent, in part, on the genotype (Table 616.2).

less severely affected than the other), in which case the severity of disease expression is largely determined by the activity of the less severely
affected of the two alleles.
Closely adjacent to, but on the opposite DNA strand from, CYP21 is
the tenascin-­X (TNX) gene, which encodes a connective tissue protein.
Rarely, deletions of CYP21 extend into TNX. Such patients may have a
contiguous gene syndrome (see Chapter 99.1) consisting of CAH and
Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome (see Chapter 744).

EPIDEMIOLOGY

PATHOGENESIS AND CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Aldosterone and Cortisol Deficiency

Classic 21-­hydroxylase deficiency occurs in approximately 1 in 14,000-­
18,000 births in most populations. Approximately 70% of affected
infants have the salt-­losing form, whereas 30% have the simple virilizing form of the disorder. In the United States, CAH is less common
in African Americans compared with White children (1:42,000 vs
1:15,500). Nonclassic disease has a prevalence of approximately 1 in
1,000 in the general population but occurs more frequently in specific
ethnic groups such as Ashkenazi Jews and Hispanics.

GENETICS

There are two steroid 21-­hydroxylase genes—CYP21P (CYP21A1P,
CYP21A) and CYP21 (CYP21A2, CYP21B)—which alternate in tandem with two genes for the fourth component of complement (C4A
and C4B) in the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) major histocompatibility complex on chromosome 6p21.3 between the HLA-­B and HLA­DR loci. Many other genes are in this cluster. CYP21 is the active gene;
CYP21P is 98% identical in DNA sequence to CYP21 but is a pseudogene because of at least 10 different pathogenic variants. Although
almost 300 variants have been reported, more than 90% of abnormal
alleles causing 21-­hydroxylase deficiency are the result of recombinations between CYP21 and CYP21P. Approximately 20% are deletions
generated by unequal meiotic crossing-­
over between CYP21 and
CYP21P, whereas the remainder are nonreciprocal transfers of deleterious variants from CYP21P to CYP21, a phenomenon termed gene
conversion.
The deleterious variants in CYP21P have different effects on enzymatic activity when transferred to CYP21. Several variants completely
prevent synthesis of a functional protein, whereas others are missense
variants that yield enzymes with 1–50% of normal activity. Disease
severity correlates well with the variants carried by an affected individual; patients with salt-­wasting disease usually carry variants on both
alleles that result in no enzymatic activity. Patients are frequently compound heterozygotes for different types of variants (i.e., one allele is

Because both cortisol and aldosterone require 21-­hydroxylation for
their synthesis, both hormones are deficient in the most severe, salt-­
wasting form of the disease. This form constitutes approximately 70%
of cases of classic 21-­hydroxylase deficiency. The signs and symptoms
of cortisol and aldosterone deficiency, and the pathophysiology underlying them, are essentially those described in adrenal insufficiency
(see Chapter 615). These include progressive weight loss, anorexia,
vomiting, dehydration, weakness, hypotension, hypoglycemia, hyponatremia, and hyperkalemia. These problems typically first develop in
affected infants at approximately 10-­14 days of age. Without treatment,
shock, cardiac arrhythmias, and death may occur within days or weeks.
CAH differs from other causes of primary adrenal insufficiency in that
precursor steroids accumulate proximal to the blocked enzymatic conversion. Because cortisol is not synthesized efficiently, ACTH levels are high,
leading to hyperplasia of the adrenal cortex and levels of precursor steroids that may be hundreds of times normal. In the case of 21-­hydroxylase
deficiency, these precursors include 17-­hydroxyprogesterone and progesterone. Progesterone and perhaps other metabolites act as antagonists
of the mineralocorticoid receptor and thus may exacerbate the effects of
aldosterone deficiency in untreated patients.
It is not unusual for children with classic CAH to require hospitalization for intercurrent illnesses during childhood. This is most likely
to occur in the first 2 years of life and to be precipitated by gastroenteritis, because such illnesses may cause fluid and electrolyte losses, and
vomiting may interfere with medication dosing. Children requiring
high fludrocortisone doses are most likely to be hospitalized, presumably because those patients have the greatest propensity to salt wasting.

Prenatal Androgen Excess

The most important problem caused by accumulation of steroid precursors is that 17-­hydroxyprogesterone is shunted into the pathway for
androgen biosynthesis, leading to high levels of androstenedione that

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3464 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 616.1  Diagnosis and Treatment of Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia
DISORDER

AFFECTED GENE
AND CHROMOSOME

SIGNS AND
SYMPTOMS

LABORATORY FINDINGS

THERAPEUTIC MEASURES

21-­Hydroxylase
deficiency, classic form

CYP21
6p21.3

Glucocorticoid
deficiency

↓ Cortisol, ↑ACTH
↑↑ Baseline and ACTH-­
stimulated 17-­hydroxy-­
progesterone

Glucocorticoid (hydrocortisone)
replacement

Mineralocorticoid
deficiency (salt-­
wasting crisis)

Hyponatremia, hyperkalemia
↑ Plasma renin

Mineralocorticoid
(fludrocortisone)
replacement; sodium chloride
supplementation

Ambiguous genitalia
in females

↑ Serum androgens

Vaginoplasty and clitoral
recession

Postnatal virilization in
males and females

↑ Serum androgens

Suppression with
glucocorticoids

21-­Hydroxylase
deficiency, nonclassic
form

CYP21
6p21.3

May be asymptomatic;
precocious
adrenarche,
hirsutism, acne,
menstrual
irregularity, infertility

↑ Baseline and ACTH-­stimulated
17-­hydroxyprogesterone
↑ Serum androgens

Suppression with
glucocorticoids

11β-­Hydroxylase
deficiency

CYP11B1
8q24.3

Glucocorticoid
deficiency

↓ Cortisol,
↑ ACTH

Glucocorticoid (hydrocortisone)
replacement

↑↑ Baseline and ACTH-­
stimulated 11-­deoxycortisol
and deoxycorticosterone

3β-­Hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase
deficiency, classic form

17α-­Hydroxylase/17,20-­
lyase deficiency

HSD3B2
1p13.1

CYP17
10q24.3

Ambiguous genitalia
in females

↑ Serum androgens

Vaginoplasty and clitoral
recession

Postnatal virilization in
males and females

↑ Serum androgens

Suppression with
glucocorticoids

Hypertension

↓ Plasma renin, hypokalemia

Suppression with
glucocorticoids

Glucocorticoid
deficiency

↓ Cortisol,
↑ ACTH
↑↑ Baseline and ACTH-­
stimulated Δ5 steroids
(pregnenolone, 17-­hydroxy-­
pregnenolone, DHEA)

Glucocorticoid (hydrocortisone)
replacement

Mineralocorticoid
deficiency (salt-­
wasting crisis)

Hyponatremia, hyperkalemia
↑ Plasma renin

Mineralocorticoid
(fludrocortisone)
replacement; sodium chloride
supplementation

Ambiguous genitalia
in females and males

↑ DHEA, ↓ androstenedione,
testosterone, and estradiol

Surgical correction of genitals
and sex hormone replacement
as necessary, consonant with
sex of rearing

Precocious
adrenarche,
disordered puberty

↑ DHEA, ↓ androstenedione,
testosterone, and estradiol

Suppression with
glucocorticoids

Cortisol deficiency
(corticosterone
is an adequate
glucocorticoid)

↓ Cortisol, ↑ ACTH
↑ DOC, corticosterone
Low 17α-­hydroxylated steroids;
poor response to ACTH

Glucocorticoid (hydrocortisone)
administration

Ambiguous genitalia
in males

↓ Serum androgens; poor
response to hCG

Orchidopexy or removal
of intraabdominal testes;
sex hormone replacement
consonant with sex of rearing

Sexual infantilism

↓ Serum androgens or estrogens

Sex hormone replacement
consonant with sex of rearing

Hypertension

↓ Plasma renin; hypokalemia

Suppression with
glucocorticoids

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 616 u Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia and Related Disorders

3465

Table 616.1  Diagnosis and Treatment of Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia—cont’d
DISORDER

AFFECTED GENE
AND CHROMOSOME

SIGNS AND
SYMPTOMS

LABORATORY FINDINGS

THERAPEUTIC MEASURES

Congenital lipoid
adrenal hyperplasia

STAR
8p11.2

Glucocorticoid
deficiency

↑ ACTH
Low levels of all steroid
hormones, with decreased or
absent response to ACTH

Glucocorticoid (hydrocortisone)
replacement

Mineralocorticoid
deficiency (salt-­
wasting crisis)

Hyponatremia, hyperkalemia
↓ Aldosterone, ↑ plasma renin

Mineralocorticoid
(fludrocortisone)
replacement; sodium chloride
supplementation

Ambiguous genitalia
in males

Decreased or absent response
to hCG in males

Orchidopexy or removal
of intraabdominal testes;
sex hormone replacement
consonant with sex of rearing

Poor pubertal
development or
premature ovarian
failure in females

↑ FSH, ↑ LH, ↓ estradiol (after
puberty)

Estrogen replacement

Glucocorticoid
deficiency

↓ Cortisol, ↑ ACTH
↑ Pregnenolone, ↑ progesterone

Glucocorticoid (hydrocortisone)
replacement

Ambiguous genitalia
in males and females

↑ Serum androgens prenatally,
↓ androgens and estrogens at
puberty

Surgical correction of genitals
and sex hormone replacement
as necessary, consonant with
sex of rearing

Maternal virilization
Antley-­Bixler
syndrome

Decreased ratio of estrogens to
androgens

P450 oxidoreductase
deficiency

POR
7q11.3

↓, Decreased; ↑, increased; ↑↑, markedly increased; ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone; DHEA, dehydroepiandrosterone; DOC, 11-­deoxycorticosterone; FSH, follicle-­stimulating
hormone; hCG, human chorionic gonadotropin; LH, luteinizing hormone.

Table 616.2  Genotype-­Phenotype Correlations in Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia Owing to 21-­Hydroxylase Deficiency
VARIANT GROUP

A

B

C

Enzymatic activity, % normal

Nil

1–2%

20–50%

CYP21 variants (phenotype
generally corresponds to the
least affected allele)

Gene deletion
Exon 3 del 8 bp
Exon 6 cluster
Q318X
R356W

I172N

P30L
V281L
P453S

Intron 2 splice*
Severity

Salt wasting

Simple virilizing

Nonclassic

Aldosterone synthesis

Low

Normal

Normal

Age at diagnosis (without
newborn screening)

Infancy

Infancy (females)
Childhood (males)

Childhood to adulthood, or
asymptomatic

Virilization

Severe

Moderate to severe

None to mild

Incidence

1/20,000

1/50,000

1/500

*This variant is associated with both salt-­wasting and simple virilizing disease.

are converted outside the adrenal gland to testosterone. This problem
begins in affected fetuses by 8-­10 weeks of gestation and leads to abnormal genital development in females (see Figs. 616.1 and 616.2).
The external genitalia of males and females normally appear identical
early in gestation (see Chapter 622). Affected females who are exposed
in utero to high levels of androgens of adrenal origin have masculinized external genitalia (see Figs. 616.1 and 616.2). This is manifested
by enlargement of the clitoris and by partial or complete labial fusion.
The vagina usually has a common opening with the urethra (urogenital
sinus). The clitoris may be so enlarged that it resembles a penis; because
the urethra opens below this organ, some affected females may be mistakenly presumed to be males with hypospadias and cryptorchidism.

The severity of virilization is usually greatest in females with the salt-­
losing form of 21-­hydroxylase deficiency (see Table 616.2). The internal genital organs are normal because affected females have normal
ovaries and not testes and thus do not secrete antimüllerian hormone.
Prenatal exposure of the brain to high levels of androgens may influence subsequent sexually dimorphic behaviors in affected females.
Females may demonstrate aggressive play behavior, tend to be interested in masculine toys such as cars and trucks, and often show
decreased interest in playing with dolls. Women may have decreased
interest in maternal roles. There is an increased frequency of homosexuality in affected females. Nonetheless, most function heterosexually
and do not have gender identity confusion or dysphoria. It is unusual

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3466 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
for affected females to assign themselves a male role except in some
with the severest degree of virilization.
Male infants appear normal at birth. The diagnosis may not be made
in males until signs of adrenal insufficiency develop. Because patients
with this condition can deteriorate quickly, infant males are more likely
to die than infant females. For this reason, all 50 American states and
many countries have instituted newborn screening for this condition
(see Chapter 616.2).

Postnatal Androgen Excess

Untreated or inadequately treated children of both sexes develop additional signs of androgen excess after birth. Males with the simple virilizing form of 21-­hydroxylase deficiency often have a delayed diagnosis
because they appear normal and rarely develop adrenal insufficiency.
Signs of androgen excess include rapid somatic growth and accelerated skeletal maturation. Affected patients are tall in childhood,
but premature closure of the epiphyses causes growth to stop relatively
early, and adult stature is stunted (see Fig. 616.1). Muscular development may be excessive. Pubic and axillary hair may appear, and acne
and a deep voice may develop. The penis, scrotum, and prostate may
become enlarged in affected males; however, the testes are usually
prepubertal in size so that they appear small relative to the enlarged
penis. Occasionally, ectopic adrenocortical cells in the testes of patients
become hyperplastic similarly to the adrenal glands, producing testicular adrenal rest tumors (see Chapter 624). The clitoris may become
further enlarged in affected females (see Fig. 616.1). Although the
internal genital structures are female, breast development and menstruation may not occur unless the excessive production of androgens
is suppressed by adequate treatment.
Similar but usually milder signs of androgen excess may occur in
nonclassic 21-­hydroxylase deficiency (see Table 616.2). In this attenuated form, cortisol and aldosterone levels are normal and affected
females have normal genitals at birth. Males and females may present with precocious pubarche and early development of pubic and
axillary hair. Hirsutism, acne, menstrual disorders, and infertility
may develop later in life, but many females and males are completely
asymptomatic.

Adrenomedullary Dysfunction

Development of the adrenal medulla requires exposure to the extremely
high cortisol levels normally present within the adrenal gland. Thus
patients with classic CAH have abnormal adrenomedullary function, as
evidenced by blunted epinephrine responses, decreased blood glucose,
and lower heart rates with exercise. Ability to exercise is unimpaired,
and the clinical significance of these findings is uncertain. Adrenomedullary dysfunction may exacerbate the cardiovascular effects of cortisol
deficiency in untreated or undertreated patients.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

See Table 616.1.
Patients with salt-­losing disease have typical laboratory findings
associated with cortisol and aldosterone deficiency, including hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, metabolic acidosis, and, often, hypoglycemia,
but these abnormalities can take 10-­14 days or longer to develop after
birth. Blood levels of 17-­hydroxyprogesterone are markedly elevated.
However, levels of this hormone are high during the first 2-­3 days of
life even in unaffected infants and especially if they are ill or premature. After infancy, once the circadian rhythm of cortisol is established,
17-­hydroxyprogesterone levels vary in the same circadian pattern,
being highest in the morning and lowest at night. Blood levels of cortisol are usually low in patients with the salt-­losing type of disease. They
are often normal in patients with simple virilizing disease but inappropriately low in relation to the ACTH and 17-­hydroxyprogesterone
levels. In addition to 17-­hydroxyprogesterone, levels of androstenedione and testosterone are elevated in affected females; testosterone is
not elevated in affected males because normal infant males have high
testosterone levels compared with those seen later in childhood. Levels of urinary 17-­ketosteroids and pregnanetriol are elevated but are
now rarely used clinically because blood samples are easier to obtain

than 24-­hour urine collections. ACTH levels are elevated but have no
diagnostic utility over 17-­hydroxyprogesterone levels. Plasma levels of
renin are elevated, and serum aldosterone is inappropriately low for the
renin level. However, renin levels are high in normal infants in the first
few weeks of life.
Diagnosis of 21-­hydroxylase deficiency is most reliably established
by measuring 17-­hydroxyprogesterone before and 30 or 60 minutes
after an intravenous bolus of 0.125-­0.25 mg of cosyntropin (ACTH
1-­24). Nomograms exist that readily distinguish between unaffected
individuals and patients with nonclassic and classic 21-­hydroxylase
deficiency. Heterozygous carriers of this autosomal recessive disorder
tend to have higher ACTH-­stimulated 17-­hydroxyprogesterone levels
than genetically unaffected individuals, but there is significant overlap between subjects in these two categories. However, in infants with
frank electrolyte abnormalities or circulatory instability, it may not be
possible or necessary to delay treatment to perform this test, as levels
of precursors will be sufficiently elevated on a random blood sample to
make the diagnosis.
Genotyping is clinically available and may help to confirm the diagnosis. Because the gene conversions that generate most pathogenic
alleles may transfer more than one variant, at least one parent should
also be genotyped to determine which variants are on each allele.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Disorders of sexual development are discussed more generally in
Chapter 628. The initial step in evaluating an infant with ambiguous
genitalia is a thorough physical examination to define the anatomy of
the genitals, locate the urethral meatus, palpate the scrotum or labia
and the inguinal regions for testes (palpable gonads usually indicate
the presence of testicular tissue and that the infant is a genetic male),
and look for any other anatomic abnormalities. Ultrasonography is
helpful in demonstrating the presence or absence of a uterus and can
often locate the gonads. A rapid karyotype (such as fluorescence in
situ hybridization of interphase nuclei for X and Y chromosomes) can
quickly determine the genetic sex of the infant. These results are all
likely to be available before the results of hormonal testing and together
allow the clinical team to advise the parents as to the genetic sex of the
infant and the anatomy of internal reproductive structures. Injection of
contrast medium into the urogenital sinus of a virilized female demonstrates a vagina and uterus; surgeons use this information to formulate
a plan for surgical management.

PRENATAL DIAGNOSIS

Prenatal diagnosis of 21-­hydroxylase is possible late in the first trimester by analysis of DNA obtained by chorionic villus sampling or during
the second trimester by amniocentesis. This is usually done because the
parents already have an affected child. Most often, the CYP21A2 gene
is analyzed for frequently occurring pathogenic variants; less common
variants may be detected by DNA sequencing. Cell-­free fetal DNA may
be an adjunctive noninvasive testing method to help guide decision-­
making for possible prenatal treatment with dexamethasone, given that
prenatal sex typing can be performed as early as 6-­9 weeks. As of 2021,
cell-­free fetal DNA testing for this disorder is not yet available as part
of routine clinical care.

NEWBORN SCREENING

Because 21-­hydroxylase deficiency is often undiagnosed in affected
males until they have severe adrenal insufficiency, all states in the
United States and many other countries have instituted newborn
screening programs. These programs analyze 17-­hydroxyprogesterone
levels in dried blood obtained by heelstick and absorbed on filter paper
cards; the same cards are screened in parallel for other congenital
conditions, such as hypothyroidism and phenylketonuria. Potentially
affected infants are typically quickly recalled for additional testing
(electrolytes and repeat 17-­
hydroxyprogesterone determination) at
approximately 2 weeks of age. Infants with salt-­wasting disease often
have abnormal electrolytes by this age but are usually not severely ill.
Screening programs are effective in preventing many cases of adrenal crisis in affected males. The nonclassic form of the disease is not

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 616 u Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia and Related Disorders
reliably detected by newborn screening, but this is of little clinical significance because adrenal insufficiency does not occur in this type of
21-­hydroxylase deficiency.
The main difficulty with current newborn screening programs is that
to reliably detect all affected infants, the cutoff 17-­hydroxyprogesterone
levels for first-­tier screening are set so low that there is a very high
frequency of false-­positive results (i.e., the test has a low positive predictive value of as little as 1%). This problem is worst in premature
infants. Positive predictive value can be improved by using cutoff levels
based on gestational age and by using more specific second-­tier screening methods such as liquid chromatography followed by tandem mass
spectrometry.

TREATMENT
Glucocorticoid Replacement

Cortisol deficiency is treated with glucocorticoids. Treatment also suppresses excessive production of androgens by the adrenal cortex and
thus minimizes problems such as excessive growth and skeletal maturation and virilization. This often requires larger glucocorticoid doses
than are needed in other forms of adrenal insufficiency, typically 12-­15
mg/m2/24 hr of hydrocortisone daily administered orally in 3 divided
doses. Affected infants usually require dosing at the high end of this
range. Double or triple doses are indicated during periods of stress,
such as infection or surgery. Glucocorticoid treatment must be continued indefinitely in all patients with classic 21-­hydroxylase deficiency
but may not be necessary in patients with nonclassic disease unless
signs of androgen excess are present. Therapy must be individualized. It
is desirable to maintain linear growth along percentile lines; crossing to
higher height percentiles may suggest undertreatment, whereas loss of
height percentiles often indicates overtreatment with glucocorticoids.
Overtreatment is also suggested by excessive weight gain. Pubertal
development should be monitored by periodic examination, and skeletal maturation is evaluated by serial radiographs of the hand and wrist
for bone age. Hormone levels, particularly 17-­hydroxyprogesterone
and androstenedione, should be measured early in the morning, before
taking the morning medications, or at a consistent time in relation to
medication dosing. Desirable 17-­hydroxyprogesterone levels are in
the high-­normal range or several times normal; low-­normal levels can
usually be achieved only with excessive glucocorticoid doses. Hydrocortisone is the preferred glucocorticoid in growing children because
its shorter half-­life minimizes adverse side effects such as growth suppression, which is seen with longer half-­life glucocorticoids. It is available as tablets, immediate-­release granules, and a custom-­compounded
suspension. Use of continuous subcutaneous pump infusion devices
to deliver hydrocortisone in a pattern more closely approximating the
normal diurnal rhythm variation in cortisol secretion has been studied but has not entered clinical practice. Clinical trials for delayed-­
release hydrocortisone tablets are currently underway in the pediatric
population.
Menarche occurs at the appropriate age in most females in whom
good control has been achieved; it may be delayed in females with
suboptimal control. Children with simple virilizing disease, particularly males, are frequently not diagnosed until 3-­7 years of age, at
which time skeletal maturation may be 5 years or more in advance of
chronological age. In some children, especially if the bone age is 12
years or more, spontaneous central (i.e., gonadotropin-­dependent)
puberty may occur when treatment is instituted, because therapy with
hydrocortisone suppresses production of adrenal androgens and thus
stimulates release of pituitary gonadotropins if the appropriate level of
hypothalamic maturation is present. This form of superimposed true
precocious puberty may be treated with a gonadotropin hormone–
releasing hormone analog such as leuprolide (see Chapter 600.1).
Males with 21-­hydroxylase deficiency who have had inadequate corticosteroid therapy may develop testicular adrenal rest tumors, which
may regress with increased steroid dosage. Testicular MRI, ultrasonography, and color flow Doppler examination help to define the
character and extent of disease. Testis-­sparing surgery to resect steroid-­
unresponsive tumors may be required in adult men to preserve fertility.

3467

Mineralocorticoid Replacement

Patients with salt-­wasting disease (i.e., aldosterone deficiency) require
mineralocorticoid replacement with fludrocortisone. Infants may have
very high mineralocorticoid requirements in the first few months of
life, usually 0.1-­0.3 mg daily in 2 divided doses, but occasionally up to
0.4 mg daily, and often require sodium supplementation (sodium chloride 8 mmol/kg) in addition to the mineralocorticoid. Older infants
and children are usually maintained with 0.05-­0.1 mg daily of fludrocortisone. In some patients, simple virilizing disease may be easier to
control with a low dose of fludrocortisone in addition to hydrocortisone
even when these patients have normal aldosterone levels in the absence
of mineralocorticoid replacement. Therapy is evaluated by monitoring
of vital signs; tachycardia and hypertension are signs of overtreatment
with mineralocorticoids. Serum electrolytes should be measured frequently in early infancy as therapy is adjusted. Plasma renin activity is
a useful way to determine adequacy of therapy; it should be maintained
in or near the normal range but not suppressed.
Additional approaches to improve outcome have been proposed but
have not yet become the standard of care. These include an antiandrogen such as flutamide to block the effects of excessive androgen levels
and/or an aromatase inhibitor such as anastrozole or letrozole, which
blocks conversion of androgens to estrogen and thus retards skeletal
maturation, a process that is sensitive to estrogens in both males and
females. Aromatase inhibitors generally should not be used in pubertal females, except in combination with a gonadotropin-­
releasing
hormone agonist because this will expose the ovaries to excessive levels of gonadotropins. Growth hormone, with or without gonadotropin–releasing hormone agonists, has been suggested to improve adult
height. Corticotropin-­releasing hormone receptor antagonists such as
crinecerfont and tildacerfont are in phase 2-­3 studies as of 2021; they
may reduce ACTH secretion, thus suppressing secretion of abnormal
steroids at lower glucocorticoid doses than otherwise necessary. This
strategy may reduce the adverse effects of high glucocorticoid doses.
Abiraterone acetate, a CYP17A1 inhibitor that suppresses secretion of
androgens and estrogens and is used for treatment of prostate cancer,
may also permit reductions in glucocorticoid dosing and is in early-­
phase trials for CAH as of 2021.

Surgical Management of Ambiguous Genitals

Significantly virilized females usually undergo surgery between 2 and
6 months of age. If there is severe clitoromegaly, the clitoris is reduced
in size, with partial excision of the corporal bodies and preservation
of the neurovascular bundle; however, moderate clitoromegaly may
become much less noticeable without surgery as the patient grows.
Vaginoplasty and correction of the urogenital sinus usually are performed at the time of clitoral surgery; revision in adolescence is often
necessary.
Risks and benefits of surgery should be fully discussed with parents
of affected females. There is limited long-­term follow-­up of functional
outcomes in patients who have undergone modern surgical procedures. It appears that female sexual dysfunction increases in frequency
and severity in those with the most significant degrees of genital virilization and with the degree of enzymatic impairment (prenatal androgen exposure) caused by each patient’s pathogenic variant (see Table
616.2). Sex assignment of infants with disorders of sexual differentiation (including CAH) is usually based on expected sexual functioning
and fertility in adulthood, with early surgical correction of the external
genitalia to conform with the sex assignment. The majority of females
with CAH identify as female gender and are heterosexual. Gender dysphoria is not common with CAH; it occurs mostly in females with the
salt-­wasting form of the disease and the greatest degree of virilization.
Lay and medical opponents of genital surgery for other disorders of
sexual differentiation raise the concern that it ignores any prenatally
influenced gender role effects from androgen exposure and precludes
the patient from having any decision as to the patient’s own preferred
sexual identity and what surgical correction of the genitals should be
performed. They advocate that treatment should be aimed primarily at
educating the patient, family, and others about the medical condition

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3468 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
and its treatment. They propose that surgery should be delayed until
the patient decides on what, if any, surgery should be performed. There
have not been any studies comparing early with late surgery. Not all lay
groups support delaying surgery, and many agree with appropriate surgery during infancy. Severely virilized genotypic (XX) females raised
as males have generally functioned well in the male gender as adults.
In adolescent and adult females with poorly controlled
21-­hydroxylase deficiency (hirsutism, obesity, amenorrhea), bilateral laparoscopic adrenalectomy (with hormone replacement) may
be an alternative to standard medical hormone replacement therapy,
but because the adrenal glands have been removed, patients treated
in this way may be more susceptible to acute adrenal insufficiency
if treatment is interrupted. Moreover, they may exhibit signs of
elevated ACTH levels such as abnormal pigmentation. There have
also been reports of development of adrenal rest tumors in women
after adrenalectomy, which defeats the purpose of adrenalectomy
and allows the recurrence of androgen excess.

Prenatal Treatment

Besides genetic counseling, the main goal of prenatal diagnosis is to
facilitate prenatal treatment of affected females. Mothers with pregnancies at risk may be given dexamethasone, a steroid that readily crosses the placenta, in an amount of 20 μg/kg pre-­pregnancy
maternal weight daily in 2 or 3 divided doses. This suppresses secretion of steroids by the fetal adrenal, including secretion of adrenal
androgens. If started by 6 weeks of gestation, it ameliorates virilization of the external genitals in affected females. Chorionic villus
biopsy is then performed to determine the sex and genotype of the
fetus; therapy is continued only if the fetus is an affected female.
DNA analysis of fetal cells isolated from maternal plasma for sex
determination and CYP21 gene analysis may permit earlier identification of the affected female fetus. Treatment should be considered
only in affected female fetuses. Children exposed to this therapy
have slightly lower birthweights. Reports of failure to thrive, strokelike events, and midline defects have been observed in treated cases.
Effects on personality or cognition, such as increased shyness, have
been suggested but not consistently observed. At present there is
insufficient information to determine whether the long-­term risks
are acceptable, particularly in the males and unaffected females
who derive no direct benefit from the treatment. Maternal side
effects of prenatal treatment have included edema, excessive weight
gain, hypertension, glucose intolerance, cushingoid facial features,
and severe striae. Consensus statements from professional societies
recommend that prenatal treatment be carried out only under institutional protocols, but it is sometimes offered as an option outside
the research setting by some high-­risk obstetricians.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

11β-­Hydroxylase deficiency accounts for approximately 5% of cases of
adrenal hyperplasia; its incidence in the general population has been
estimated as 1 in 250,000 to 1 in 100,000. The disorder occurs relatively
frequently in Israeli Jews of North African origin (1 in 5,000-­7,000 live
births). In this ethnic group, almost all alleles carry an Arg448 to His
(R448H) variant in CYP11B1, but many other variants have been identified. This disorder presents in a classic, severe form and very rarely in
a nonclassic, milder form.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Although cortisol is not synthesized efficiently, aldosterone synthetic
capacity is normal, and some corticosterone is synthesized from progesterone by the intact aldosterone synthase enzyme. Thus it is unusual
for patients to manifest signs of adrenal insufficiency such as hypotension or hypoglycemia. On the contrary, approximately 65% of patients
become hypertensive, although this can take several years to develop.
Hypertension is probably a consequence of elevated levels of deoxycorticosterone, which has mineralocorticoid activity. Infants may transiently develop signs of mineralocorticoid deficiency after treatment
with hydrocortisone is instituted. This is presumably from sudden suppression of deoxycorticosterone secretion in a patient with atrophy of
the zona glomerulosa caused by chronic suppression of renin activity.
All signs and symptoms of androgen excess that are found in
21-­
hydroxylase deficiency may also occur in 11β-­hydroxylase
deficiency.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Plasma levels of 11-­deoxycortisol and deoxycorticosterone are elevated.
Because deoxycorticosterone and some metabolites have mineralocorticoid activity, plasma renin activity is suppressed. Consequently, aldosterone levels are low even though the ability to synthesize aldosterone
is intact. Hypokalemic alkalosis occasionally occurs.

TREATMENT

Patients are treated with hydrocortisone in doses similar to those used
for 21-­hydroxylase deficiency. Mineralocorticoid replacement is sometimes transiently required in infancy but is rarely necessary otherwise.
Hypertension often resolves with glucocorticoid treatment but may
require additional therapy if it is of long standing. Calcium channel
blockers may be beneficial under these circumstances.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

616.3 Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia
Caused by 3β-­Hydroxysteroid
Dehydrogenase Deficiency
Perrin C. White and Ming Yang

616.2 Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia
Caused by 11β-­Hydroxylase
Deficiency
Perrin C. White and Ming Yang
Deficiency of 11β-­hydroxylase is caused by a pathologic variant in
the CYP11B1 gene located on chromosome 8q21-­
q22. CYP11B1
mediates 11-­hydroxylation of 11-­deoxycortisol to cortisol. Because
11-­deoxycortisol is not converted to cortisol, levels of corticotropin are
high. In consequence, precursors—particularly 11-­deoxycortisol and
deoxycorticosterone—accumulate and are shunted into androgen biosynthesis in the same manner as occurs in 21-­hydroxylase deficiency.
The adjacent CYP11B2 gene encoding aldosterone synthase is generally
unaffected in this disorder, so patients are able to synthesize aldosterone normally.

Deficiency of 3β-­
hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (3β-­HSD)
occurs in less than 2% of patients with adrenal hyperplasia. This
enzyme is required for conversion of Δ5 steroids (pregnenolone,
17-­
hydroxypregnenolone, dehydroepiandrosterone [DHEA]) to Δ4
steroids (progesterone, 17-­
hydroxyprogesterone, and androstenedione). Thus deficiency of the enzyme results in decreased synthesis of
cortisol, aldosterone, and androstenedione but increased secretion of
DHEA (see Fig. 614.1 in Chapter 614). The 3β-­HSD isozyme expressed
in the adrenal cortex and gonad is encoded by the HSD3B2 gene located
on chromosome 1p13.1. More than 30 pathogenic variants in HSD3B2
have been described in patients with 3β-­HSD deficiency.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Because cortisol and aldosterone are not synthesized in patients with
the classic form of the disease, infants are prone to salt-­wasting crises.
Because androstenedione and testosterone are not synthesized, males

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 616 u Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia and Related Disorders
are incompletely virilized; varying degrees of hypospadias may occur,
with or without bifid scrotum or cryptorchidism. Because DHEA levels
are elevated and this hormone is a weak androgen, females are mildly
virilized, with slight to moderate clitoral enlargement. Postnatally, continued excessive DHEA secretion can cause precocious adrenarche.
During adolescence and adulthood, hirsutism, irregular menses, and
polycystic ovarian disease occur in females. Males manifest variable
degrees of hypogonadism, although appropriate male secondary sexual development may occur. However, a persistent defect of testicular
3β-­HSD is demonstrated by the high Δ5:Δ4 steroid ratio in testicular
effluent.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

The hallmark of this disorder is the marked elevation of the Δ5
steroids (such as 17-­
hydroxypregnenolone and DHEA) preceding the enzymatic block. Patients may also have elevated levels of
17-­hydroxyprogesterone because of the extraadrenal 3β-­HSD activity that occurs in peripheral tissues; these patients may be mistaken
for patients with 21-­hydroxylase deficiency. The ratio of 17-­hydrox
ypregnenolone:17-­hydroxyprogesterone is markedly elevated in 3β-­
HSD deficiency, in contrast to the decreased ratio in 21-­hydroxylase
deficiency. Plasma renin activity is elevated in the salt-­wasting form.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

It is not unusual for children with premature adrenarche, or females
with signs of androgen excess, to have mild to moderate elevations in
DHEA levels. It has been suggested that such individuals have nonclassic 3β-­HSD deficiency. Variants in HSD3B2 are usually not found
in such individuals, and a nonclassic form of this deficiency may be
quite rare. The activity of 3β-­HSD in the adrenal zonae fasciculata and
reticularis, relative to CYP17A1 (17-­hydroxylase/17,20-­lyase) activity,
normally decreases during adrenarche to facilitate DHEA synthesis,
and so modest elevations in DHEA in preteenage children or women
usually represent a normal variant.

3469

with normal cortisol synthesis). These include an accessory electron
transfer protein, cytochrome-­b5, (CYB5) and variants in two aldo-­keto
reductases AKR1C2 and AKR1C4. These AKR1C isozymes normally
catalyze 3α-­HSD activity, which allows synthesis of the potent androgen dihydrotestosterone through an alternative backdoor biosynthetic
pathway that does not include testosterone as an intermediate (see
Chapter 614).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND LABORATORY
FINDINGS

Patients with 17-­hydroxylase deficiency cannot synthesize cortisol, but their ability to synthesize corticosterone is intact. Because
corticosterone is an active glucocorticoid, patients do not develop
adrenal insufficiency. Deoxycorticosterone, the immediate precursor of corticosterone, is synthesized in excess. This can cause
hypertension, hypokalemia, and suppression of renin and aldosterone secretion, as occurs in 11β-­hydroxylase deficiency. However, in contrast to 11β-­
hydroxylase deficiency, patients with
17-­hydroxylase deficiency are unable to synthesize sex hormones.
Affected males are incompletely virilized and present as phenotypic
females (but the gonads are usually palpable in the inguinal region
or the labia) or with sexual ambiguity. Affected females usually
present with failure of sexual development at the expected time of
puberty. 17-­Hydroxylase deficiency in females must be considered
in the differential diagnosis of primary hypogonadism (see Chapter 626). Levels of deoxycorticosterone are elevated, and renin and
aldosterone are consequently suppressed. Cortisol and sex steroids
are unresponsive to stimulation with ACTH and human chorionic
gonadotropin, respectively.
Patients with isolated 17,20-­lyase deficiency have deficient androgen
synthesis with normal cortisol synthesis and therefore do not become
hypertensive.

TREATMENT

Patients require glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid replacement with hydrocortisone and fludrocortisone, respectively, as in
21-­
hydroxylase deficiency. Incompletely virilized genetic males
in whom a male sex of rearing is contemplated may benefit from
several injections of 25 mg of a depot form of testosterone every 4
weeks early in infancy to increase the size of the phallus. They may
also require testosterone replacement at puberty.

Patients with 17-­
hydroxylase deficiency require glucocorticoid
replacement with hydrocortisone to suppress secretion of deoxycorticosterone and thus control hypertension. Additional antihypertensive
medication may be required. Females require estrogen replacement
at puberty. Genetic males may require either estrogen or androgen
supplementation depending on the sex of rearing. Because of the possibility of malignant transformation of abdominal testes, genetic males
with severe 17-­hydroxylase deficiency being reared as females require
gonadectomy at or before adolescence.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

616.4 Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia
Caused by 17-­Hydroxylase Deficiency

616.5 Lipoid Adrenal Hyperplasia

TREATMENT

Perrin C. White and Ming Yang
Less than 1% of CAH cases are caused by 17-­hydroxylase deficiency, but the condition is apparently more common in Brazil
and China. A single polypeptide, CYP17A1, catalyzes two distinct reactions: 17-­
hydroxylation of pregnenolone and progesterone to 17-­hydroxypregnenolone and 17-­hydroxyprogesterone,
respectively, and the 17,20-­lyase reaction–mediating conversion
of 17-­
hydroxypregnenolone to DHEA and, to a lesser extent,
17-­hydroxyprogesterone to Δ4-­
androstenedione. DHEA and
androstenedione are steroid precursors of testosterone and estrogen (see Fig. 614.1 in Chapter 614). The enzyme is expressed in
both the adrenal cortex and the gonads and is encoded by a gene
on chromosome 10q24.3. Most pathogenic variants affect both the
hydroxylase and lyase activities, but rare variants can affect either
activity alone.
Pathogenic variants in genes other than CYP17A1 can have the same
phenotype as 17,20-­lyase deficiency (i.e., deficient androgen synthesis

Perrin C. White and Ming Yang
Lipoid adrenal hyperplasia is a rare disorder, most frequently found in
Japanese persons. Patients with this disorder exhibit marked accumulation of cholesterol and lipids in the adrenal cortex and gonads associated with severe impairment of all steroidogenesis. Lipoid adrenal
hyperplasia is usually caused by pathogenic variants in the gene for
steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR), a mitochondrial protein
that promotes the movement of cholesterol from the outer to the inner
mitochondrial membrane. However, pathogenic variants in CYP11A1
(which encodes the cholesterol side-­chain cleavage enzyme) have been
reported in more than 30 patients. A milder, nonclassic form of StAR
deficiency has been reported.
Some cholesterol is able to enter mitochondria even in the absence
of StAR, so it might be supposed that this disorder would not completely impair steroid biosynthesis. However, the accumulation of
cholesterol in the cytoplasm is cytotoxic, eventually leading to death
of all steroidogenic cells in which StAR is normally expressed. This
occurs prenatally in the adrenals and testes. The ovaries do not

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3470 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
normally synthesize steroids until puberty, so cholesterol does not
accumulate, and the ovaries can retain the capacity to synthesize
estrogens until adolescence.
Although estrogens synthesized by the placenta are required to
maintain pregnancy, the placenta does not require StAR for steroid
biosynthesis. Variants of StAR are not prenatally lethal.

syndrome. These include craniosynostosis; brachycephaly; frontal
bossing; severe midface hypoplasia with proptosis and choanal stenosis or atresia; humeroradial synostosis; medial bowing of ulnas;
long, slender fingers with camptodactyly; narrow iliac wings; anterior bowing of femurs; and malformations of the heart and kidneys.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

More than 130 cases of POR deficiency have been reported.
Although the prevalence is not known with certainty, it might be
the second most common cause of CAH in some populations such
as Korea and Japan.

Patients with lipoid adrenal hyperplasia are usually unable to synthesize
any adrenal steroids. Thus affected infants are likely to be confused with
those with adrenal hypoplasia congenita. Salt-­losing manifestations are
typical, and many infants die in early infancy. Genetic males are unable
to synthesize androgens and thus are phenotypically female but with
gonads palpable in the labia majora or inguinal areas. Genetic females
appear normal at birth and may undergo feminization at puberty with
menstrual bleeding. They, too, progress to hypergonadotropic hypogonadism when accumulated cholesterol damages granulosa (i.e., steroid
synthesizing) cells in the ovary.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Adrenal and gonadal steroid hormone levels are low in lipoid adrenal hyperplasia, with a decreased or absent response to stimulation
(ACTH, human chorionic gonadotropin). Plasma renin levels are
increased.
Imaging studies of the adrenal gland demonstrating massive adrenal
enlargement in the newborn help to establish the diagnosis of lipoid
adrenal hyperplasia.

TREATMENT

Patients require glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid replacement.
Genetic males are usually assigned a female sex of rearing; thus both
genetic males and females require estrogen replacement at the expected
age of puberty.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

616.6 Deficiency of P450 Oxidoreductase
(Antley-­Bixler Syndrome)
Perrin C. White and Ming Yang
P450 oxidoreductase (POR; gene located on chromosome 7q11.3)
is required for the activity of all microsomal cytochrome P450
enzymes (see Chapter 614), including the adrenal enzymes CYP17
and CYP21. Complete POR deficiency abolishes all microsomal
P450 activity. This is embryonically lethal in mice and presumably also in humans. Patients with pathogenic variants that
decrease but do not abolish POR activity have partial deficiencies
of 17-­hydroxylase and 21-­hydroxylase activities in the adrenals. A
single recurrent variant A287P (alanine-­287 to proline) is found on
approximately 40% of alleles.
Deficiency of 17-­hydroxylase leads to incomplete masculinization in
males; 21-­hydroxylase deficiency may lead to virilization in females.
In addition, aromatase (CYP19) activity in the placenta is decreased,
leading to unopposed action of androgens produced by the fetal adrenal. This exacerbates virilization of female fetuses and may virilize the
mother of an affected fetus as well. Although it is puzzling that affected
females could be virilized despite a partial deficiency in CYP17 (which
is required for androgen biosynthesis), an alternative (backdoor) biosynthetic pathway is used in which 17-­hydroxyprogesterone is converted to 5α-­pregnane-­3α,17α-­diol-­20-­one, a metabolite that is a much
better substrate for the 17,20-­lyase activity of CYP17 than the usual
substrate, 17-­hydroxypregnenolone (see Chapter 614). The metabolite
is then converted in several enzymatic steps to dihydrotestosterone, a
potent androgen.
Because many other P450 enzymes are affected, patients may have
other congenital anomalies collectively referred to as Antley-­Bixler

EPIDEMIOLOGY

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Serum steroids that are not 17-­or 21-­
hydroxylated are
most increased, including pregnenolone and progesterone.
17-­
Hydroxy and 21-­
deoxysteroids are also increased, including 17-­
hydroxypregnenolone, 17-­
hydroxyprogesterone, and
21-­
deoxycortisol. Urinary steroid metabolites may be determined by quantitative mass spectrometry. Metabolites excreted at
increased levels include pregnanediol, pregnanetriol, pregnanetriolone, and corticosterone metabolites. Urinary cortisol metabolites
are decreased. Genetic analysis demonstrates pathogenic variants
in POR.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

This disorder must be distinguished from other forms of CAH, particularly 21-­hydroxylase deficiency in females, which is far more
common and has similar laboratory findings. Suspicion for POR deficiency may be raised if the mother is virilized or if the associated
abnormalities of Antley-­Bixler syndrome are present. Conversely,
virilization of both the mother and her daughter can result from a
luteoma of pregnancy, but in this case postnatal abnormalities of
corticosteroid biosynthesis should not be observed. Antley-­Bixler
syndrome may also occur without abnormalities of steroid hormone
biosynthesis, resulting from pathogenic variants in the fibroblast
growth factor receptor FGFR2.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

616.7 Aldosterone Synthase Deficiency
Perrin C. White and Ming Yang
This is an autosomal recessive disorder in which conversion of corticosterone to aldosterone is impaired; a group of Iranian Jewish
patients has been the most thoroughly studied. Most cases result
from pathogenic variants in CYP11B2 coding for aldosterone synthase; however, linkage to CYP11B2 has been excluded in other
kindreds. When not caused by CYP11B2 variants, the disorder has
been termed familial hyperreninemic hypoaldosteronism type 2;
the causative gene or genes have not yet been identified.
Aldosterone synthase mediates the three final steps in the synthesis of aldosterone from deoxycorticosterone (11β-­hydroxylation,
18-­hydroxylation, and 18-­oxidation). Although 11β-­hydroxylation
is required to convert deoxycorticosterone to corticosterone, this
conversion can also be catalyzed by the related enzyme, CYP11B1,
located in the fasciculata, which is unaffected in this disorder. For
the same reason, these patients have normal cortisol biosynthesis.
The disease has been classified into two types, termed corticosterone methyloxidase deficiency types I and II. They differ only in levels of the immediate precursor of aldosterone,
18-­hydroxycorticosterone; levels are low in type I deficiency and
elevated in type II deficiency.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Infants with aldosterone synthase deficiency may have severe
electrolyte abnormalities with hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 616 u Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia and Related Disorders
metabolic acidosis. Because cortisol synthesis is unaffected, infants
rarely become as ill as untreated infants with salt-­losing forms of
CAH such as 21-­hydroxylase deficiency. Thus some infants escape
diagnosis. Later in infancy or in early childhood they may exhibit
failure to thrive and poor growth. Adults often are asymptomatic,
although they may develop electrolyte abnormalities when depleted
of sodium through procedures such as bowel preparation for a barium enema.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Infants have elevated plasma renin activity. Aldosterone levels are
decreased; they may be at the lower end of the normal range but are
always inappropriately low for the degree of hyperkalemia or hyperreninemia. Corticosterone levels are often elevated.
Some, but not all, patients have marked elevation of
18-­
hydroxycorticosterone; however, low levels of this steroid do not exclude the diagnosis. In those kindreds in which
18-­hydroxycorticosterone levels are elevated in affected individuals,
this biochemical abnormality persists in adults even when they have
no electrolyte abnormalities.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

It is important to distinguish aldosterone synthase deficiency from
primary adrenal insufficiency in which both cortisol and aldosterone
are affected (including salt-­wasting forms of CAH), because the latter condition is usually associated with a much greater risk of shock
and hyponatremia. This becomes apparent after the appropriate laboratory studies. Adrenal hypoplasia congenita may initially present
with aldosterone deficiency; all male infants with apparently isolated
aldosterone deficiency should be carefully monitored for subsequent
development of cortisol deficiency. Pseudohypoaldosteronism (see
Chapter 615.4) may have similar electrolyte abnormalities and hyperreninemia, but aldosterone levels are high, and this condition usually
does not respond to fludrocortisone treatment.

TREATMENT

Treatment consists of giving enough fludrocortisone (0.05-­0.2 mg
daily) or sodium chloride, or both, to return plasma renin levels to normal. With increasing age, salt-­losing signs usually improve, and drug
therapy can often be discontinued.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

616.8 Glucocorticoid-­Remediable
Aldosteronism
Perrin C. White
Glucocorticoid-­remediable aldosteronism (glucocorticoid-­suppressible
hyperaldosteronism, familial hyperaldosteronism type I) is an autosomal dominant form of low-­renin hypertension in which hyperaldosteronism is rapidly suppressed by glucocorticoid administration.
This unusual effect of glucocorticoids suggests that aldosterone secretion in this disorder is regulated by ACTH instead of by the renin-­
angiotensin system. In addition to abnormally regulated secretion of
aldosterone, there is marked overproduction of 18-­hydroxycortisol
and 18-­
oxocortisol. The synthesis of these steroids requires both
17-­hydroxylase (CYP17A1) activity, which is expressed only in the
zona fasciculata, and aldosterone synthase (CYP11B2) activity, which

3471

is normally expressed only in the zona glomerulosa. These features
imply that aldosterone synthase is being expressed in a manner similar to the closely related enzyme steroid 11-­hydroxylase (CYP11B1).
The disorder is caused by unequal meiotic crossing-­
over events
between the CYP11B1 and CYP11B2 genes, which are closely linked
on chromosome 8q24. An additional “chimeric” gene is produced,
having regulatory sequences of CYP11B1 juxtaposed with coding
sequences of CYP11B2. This results in the inappropriate expression of
a CYP11B2-­like enzyme with aldosterone synthase activity in the adrenal fasciculata.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Some affected children have no symptoms, the diagnosis being
established after incidental discovery of moderate hypertension,
typically approximately 30 mm Hg higher than unaffected family
members of the same age. Others have more symptomatic hypertension with headache, dizziness, and visual disturbances. A strong
family history of early-­onset hypertension or early strokes may alert
the clinician to the diagnosis. Some patients have chronic hypokalemia, but this is not a consistent finding and is usually mild.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Patients have elevated plasma and urine levels of aldosterone
and suppressed plasma renin activity. Hypokalemia is not consistently present. Urinary and plasma levels of 18-­oxocortisol and
18-­hydroxycortisol are markedly increased. The hybrid CYP11B1/
CYP11B2 gene can be readily detected by molecular genetic
methods.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

This condition should be distinguished from primary aldosteronism based on bilateral hyperplasia or an aldosterone-­
producing
adenoma (see Chapter 620). Most cases of primary aldosteronism
are sporadic, although several affected kindreds have been reported.
Patients with primary aldosteronism may also have elevated levels of
18-­hydroxycortisol and 18-­oxocortisol, and these biochemical tests
should be used cautiously when attempting to distinguish primary and
glucocorticoid-­suppressible aldosteronism. By definition, a therapeutic
trial of dexamethasone should suppress aldosterone secretion only in
glucocorticoid-­remediable aldosteronism, and genetic testing should
identify the hybrid gene if it is present.

TREATMENT

Glucocorticoid-­remediable aldosteronism is managed by daily administration of a glucocorticoid, usually dexamethasone 25 μg/kg/day in
divided doses. If necessary, effects of aldosterone can be blocked with
a potassium-­sparing diuretic such as spironolactone, eplerenone, or
amiloride. Hypertension resolves in patients in whom the hypertension is not severe or of long standing. If hypertension is long standing,
additional antihypertensive medication may be required, such as a calcium channel blocker.

GENETIC COUNSELING

Because of the autosomal dominant mode of inheritance, at-­risk family members should be investigated for this easily treated cause of
hypertension.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3472 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System

Chapter 617

Adrenocortical Tumors
and Masses
Perrin C. White
Adrenocortical tumors are rare in childhood, with an incidence of
0.3-­0.5 cases per 1 million child-­years. They occur in all age-­groups
but most commonly in children younger than 6 years of age and
are slightly more frequent (1.6-­fold) in females. In 2–10% of cases,
the tumors are bilateral. Almost half of childhood adrenocortical
tumors are carcinomas. Pathogenic variants in many genes can
influence the risk of developing adrenal tumors (Table 617.1).
Tumors may be associated with hemihypertrophy, usually occurring during the first few years of life. They are also associated with
other congenital defects, particularly genitourinary tract and central nervous system abnormalities and hamartomatous defects.
Many adrenocortical tumors secrete sex hormones, cortisol, or
aldosterone; these are discussed in Chapters 618, 619, and 620,
respectively.

617.1 Adrenocortical Carcinoma
Perrin C. White

ETIOLOGY

The incidence of adrenocortical carcinoma is increased in several
familial cancer syndromes resulting from abnormalities in genes that
encode transcription factors implicated in cell proliferation, differentiation, senescence, apoptosis, and genomic instability. These include
tumor protein 53 (TP53), menin (the MEN1 gene involved in multiple
endocrine neoplasia type 1; 1–2% of MEN1 patients develop adrenocortical carcinoma), the APC gene involved in familial adenomatous
polyposis coli, and the PRKAR1A gene encoding a cyclic adenosine
monophosphate–dependent protein kinase regulatory subunit (also
see Chapter 619).
Germline pathogenic variants in TP53 (on chromosome 17p13.1)
occur in 50–80% of children with adrenocortical carcinoma. They
have been found in patients with isolated adrenal carcinoma and in
patients with familial clustering of unusual malignancies (choroid
plexus tumors, sarcomas, early-­onset breast cancers, brain cancers,
and leukemias); this latter condition is termed Li-­Fraumeni syndrome. A 15-­fold increased incidence of childhood adrenocortical
tumors is found in southern Brazil, associated with an R337H variant in TP53.
Overexpression of insulin-­
like growth factor (IGF) 2 (encoded
by IGF2, on chromosome 11p15.5) occurs in 80% of sporadic childhood adrenocortical tumors and in those associated with Beckwith-­
Wiedemann syndrome, in which there is loss of the normal imprinting
of genes in this chromosomal region, including H19, CDKN1C,
KCNQ1, and KCNQ1OT1. However, whereas 5–10% of patients with
Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome develop tumors, <1% develop an
adrenocortical carcinoma. Further implicating IGFs in pathogenesis,
many pediatric adrenocortical tumors overexpress the IGF receptor,
IGF1R.

Pathogenic variants in the MENIN gene on chromosome 11q13
cause multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1. Approximately 10%
of MEN1 patients have adrenocortical tumors, of which ∼14% are
malignant. Adrenocortical carcinomas also occur in patients with
Lynch syndrome, a hereditary cancer syndrome (mainly colorectal and endometrial cancer) caused by pathogenic variants in genes
involved in DNA mismatch repair, including MLH1, MSH2, MSH6,
and PMS2, or loss of expression of MSH2 caused by deletion in
the EPCAM gene. Occasional adrenocortical carcinomas occur in
patients with familial adenomatous polyposis, neurofibromatosis
type 1, Werner syndrome, and Carney complex.
In adult adrenocortical carcinoma samples, somatic pathogenic
variants are detected in nine genes (ZNRF3, CTNNB1, TP53,
CDKN2A, RB1, MEN1, DAXX, MED12, and TERT), most frequently
(21%) in ZNRF3. This gene encodes a cell surface transmembrane
E3 ubiquitin ligase that acts as a negative feedback regulator of
Wnt/β-­catenin signaling. There are also tumor-­specific differences
in DNA methylation and in micro-­RNA (miRNA) expression that
have prognostic significance in adults, but there are no corresponding data in children.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Symptoms of endocrine hyperfunction are present in 80–90% of
children with adrenal tumors. Tumors that secrete cortisol and
aldosterone are discussed in Chapters 619 and 621. Other tumors
are detected because of symptoms related to local tumor growth,
such as abdominal pain, or as incidental findings on abdominal
imaging.
Tumors can usually be detected by ultrasonography, CT, or MRI.
Preoperatively, the presence of metastatic disease should be determined by MRI or CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis. Because
these tumors are metabolically active, 18F-­f luorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (PET)/CT has very good sensitivity and
specificity in distinguishing benign from malignant lesions, but it
cannot distinguish adrenocortical carcinomas from other metabolically active tumors such as metastases, lymphoma, or pheochromocytoma. Radiochemical imaging of these tumors by PET may be
improved with 11C-­metomidate or single photon emission CT or
MRI with 123I-­iodometomidate.

PATHOLOGIC FINDINGS

Most pediatric adrenocortical tumors would be classified as malignant by the criteria used to classify adult tumors. Size is a useful
prognostic factor, with tumors weighing less than 200 g, 200-­400 g,
and >400 g being classified, respectively, as low, intermediate, and
high risk (>10 cm diameter has also been suggested as a high-­risk
category). Incomplete resection and gross local invasion or metastasis are also associated with a poor prognosis. However, most tumors
occurring in children younger than 4 years of age have a favorable
prognosis. Tumors associated with Cushing syndrome may have a
poor prognosis, whereas the presence of germline TP53 variants
may be more favorable.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

For functioning tumors, the differential diagnoses are those of the
main presenting signs and symptoms. The differential diagnosis for
Cushing syndrome is discussed in Chapter 619. For virilizing signs,
the differential includes virilizing forms of adrenal hyperplasia (see
Chapter 616) and factitious exposure to androgens, such as topical
testosterone preparations. The differential diagnosis for hormonally

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 617 u Adrenocortical Tumors and Masses

3473

Table 617.1  Genes Involved in Adrenal Neoplasia
SYNDROME

ADRENAL NEOPLASIA TYPE

GENE

OTHER PHENOTYPE

Li-­Fraumeni
syndrome

Adrenocortical carcinoma

TP53

Sarcoma, choroid plexus tumor, brain cancer, early breast
cancer, leukemia, lymphoma

Multiple endocrine
neoplasia type 1

Diffuse hyperplasia, nodular
hyperplasia, adrenal
adenoma, adrenocortical
carcinoma

MENIN

Foregut neuroendocrine tumors, pituitary tumors,
parathyroid hyperplasia or tumors, collagenoma,
angiofibroma

Lynch syndrome

Adrenocortical carcinoma

MSH2, MSH6, MLH1,
PMS2

Colorectal cancer, endometrial cancer, sebaceous
neoplasms, ovarian cancer, pancreatic cancer, brain
cancer

Beckwith-­Wiedemann
syndrome

Adrenal adenoma,
adrenocortical carcinoma

IGF2, CDKN1C, H19
methylation changes on
11p15

Macrosomia, hemihypertrophy, macroglossia,
omphalocele, ear pits; Wilms tumor, hepatoblastoma

Familial adenomatous
polyposis coli

Bilateral macronodular adrenal
hyperplasia, aldosterone-­
producing adenoma,
adrenocortical carcinoma

APC

Intestinal polyps, colon cancer, duodenal carcinoma,
thyroid cancer, desmoid tumor, supernumerary teeth,
congenital hypertrophy of the retina, osteoma,
epidermoid cysts

Neurofibromatosis
type 1

Adrenocortical carcinoma,
pheochromocytoma

NF1

Malignant peripheral nerve sheet tumor, café-­au-­lait
spots, neurofibroma, optic glioma, Lisch nodule,
skeletal abnormalities

PRKAR1A

Large-­cell calcifying Sertoli cell tumors, thyroid adenoma,
myxoma, somatotroph pituitary adenoma, lentigines

ADRENAL ADENOMA AND CARCINOMA
Carney complex
Primary pigmented
nodular adrenal disease,
adrenocortical carcinoma
Primary pigmented nodular
adrenal disease

PDE8B or PDE11A

Overexpression
of steroidogenic
factor-­1

Adrenal adenoma,
adrenocortical carcinoma

Somatic amplification of
NR5A1

McCune-­Albright
syndrome

Nodular hyperplasia, cortisol-­
secreting adenoma
Cortisol-­secreting adenomas

Activating somatic mosaic
variant of GNAS
Activating somatic variant
in PRKACA

Somatic pathogenic
variants

Adrenocortical carcinoma

CDKN2A, CTNNB1,
DAXX, MED12, MEN1,
RB1,TERT, or TP53

PRIMARY ALDOSTERONISM
Genetic causes of
Hypertrophy of zona
excess cortisol
glomerulosa, aldosterone-­
and aldosterone
producing adenoma
secretion
Aldosterone-­producing
adenoma
Aldosterone-­producing
adenoma
Aldosterone-­producing
adenoma

Hyperfunction of bone (producing fibrous dysplasia),
gonads, thyroid, and pituitary

Germline or somatic
activating variant in
KCNJ5
Germline variants in
CYP11B2, CLCN2, or
CACNA1H
Germline and somatic
activating variants in
CACNA1D
Somatic variants in
ATP1A1, ATP2B3,
CTNNB1, or APC

Pheochromocytoma
von Hippel-­Landau
syndrome

Pheochromocytoma

VHL

Retinal and central nervous system hemangioblastomas,
renal clear cell carcinomas

Multiple endocrine
neoplasia
syndromes MEN2A
and MEN2B

Pheochromocytoma

RET

Pheochromocytoma, often
malignant

SDHB, SDHD, SDHC,
SDHA, SDHAF2, MAX,
TMEM127

Medullary thyroid carcinoma and parathyroid tumors;
type 2B also may include multiple mucosal neuromas
and intestinal ganglioneuromas, a marfanoid habitus,
and other skeletal abnormalities
Paragangliomas, sometimes associated with
gastrointestinal stromal tumors and/or pulmonary
chondromas (Carney-­Stratakis dyad or triad)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3474 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
inactive adrenocortical adenomas includes pheochromocytomas
(see Chapter 621), adrenocortical carcinoma, and metastasis from
an extraadrenal primary carcinoma (very rare in children). Careful history, physical examination, and endocrine evaluation must
be performed to seek evidence of autonomous cortisol, androgen,
mineralocorticoid, or catecholamine secretion. Not infrequently, a
low level of autonomous cortisol secretion is detected that does not
cause clinically apparent symptoms; this condition is sometimes
referred to as subclinical Cushing syndrome.

TREATMENT

Functioning adrenocortical tumors should be removed surgically.
There are no data on which to base a recommendation regarding
nonfunctioning childhood incidentalomas; in adults, such tumors
may be closely observed with imaging and repeat biochemical studies if smaller than 4 cm in diameter, but it is not certain that this
is prudent in children. Adrenalectomy should be performed transperitoneally to minimize the risk of surgical rupture of the capsule
and consequent dissemination of malignant cells. Some adrenocortical neoplasms are highly malignant and metastasize widely, but
less malignant, encapsulated tumors (stage I-­II) are often curable
if they can be resected without tumor spillage. Postoperatively,
patients should be closely monitored biochemically, with frequent
determinations of adrenal androgen levels and imaging studies.
Recurrent symptoms or biochemical abnormalities should prompt
a careful search for metastatic disease. Metastases primarily involve
liver, lung, and regional lymph nodes. Most metastatic recurrences
appear within 1 year of tumor resection. Repeat surgical resection
of metastatic lesions should be performed if possible and adjuvant therapy instituted. Radiation therapy has not been generally
helpful. Antineoplastic agents such as cisplatin, doxorubicin and
etoposide, ifosfamide and carboplatin, and 5-­f luorouracil and leucovorin have had limited use in children, toxicity is high, and in
adults with metastatic disease, progression-­free survival is only a
few months. Therapy with o,p′-­DDD (mitotane), an adrenolytic
agent, may relieve the symptoms of hypercortisolism or virilization in recurrent disease. In adults, treatment with mitotane plus
local or regional treatment (surgery or radiotherapy) is associated
with improved survival. Other agents that interfere with adrenal
steroid synthesis, such as ketoconazole, aminoglutethimide, and
metyrapone, may also relieve symptoms of steroid excess but do not
improve survival.
A neoplasm of one adrenal gland may produce atrophy of the
other because excessive production of cortisol by the tumor suppresses adrenocorticotropic hormone stimulation of the normal
gland. Consequently, adrenal insufficiency may follow surgical
removal of the tumor. This situation can be avoided by giving 10-­25
mg of hydrocortisone every 6 hours, starting on the day of operation and gradually decreased postoperatively. Adequate quantities
of water, sodium chloride, and glucose also must be provided.

617.2 Adrenal Incidentaloma
Perrin C. White
Adrenal masses are discovered with increasing frequency in patients
undergoing abdominal imaging for reasons unrelated to the adrenal

gland. There are no published data on the frequency of the occurrence of such tumors in childhood. They are likely to be infrequent,
being found in approximately 7% of autopsies of persons older than
age 70 years but in <1% of those younger than age 30 years. They are
detected in 1–4% of abdominal CT examinations in adults.
The unexpected discovery of such a mass presents the clinician
with a dilemma in terms of diagnostic steps to undertake and treatment interventions to recommend. The differential diagnosis of
adrenal incidentaloma includes benign lesions such as cysts, hemorrhagic cysts, hematomas, and myelolipomas. These lesions can
usually be identified on CT or MRI. If the nature of the lesion is
not readily apparent, additional evaluation is required. Included in
the differential diagnosis of lesions requiring additional evaluation
are benign adenomas, pheochromocytomas, adrenocortical carcinoma, and metastasis from an extraadrenal primary carcinoma.
Benign, hormonally inactive adrenocortical adenomas make up the
majority of incidentalomas. Careful history, physical examination,
and endocrine evaluation must be performed to seek evidence of
autonomous cortisol, androgen, mineralocorticoid, or catecholamine secretion. Functional tumors require removal. If the adrenal
mass is nonfunctional but is larger than 4-­6 cm, recommendations
are to proceed with surgical resection of the mass. Lesions of 3
cm or less should be followed clinically with periodic reimaging.
Treatment must be individualized; nonsecreting adrenal incidentalomas may enlarge and become hyperfunctioning. Nuclear scan,
and occasionally fine-­needle aspiration, may be helpful in defining
the mass.

617.3 Adrenal Calcification
Perrin C. White
Calcification within the adrenal glands may occur in a wide variety
of situations, some serious and others of no obvious consequence.
Adrenal calcifications are often detected as incidental findings in
radiographic studies of the abdomen in infants and children. The
physician may elicit a history of anoxia or trauma at birth. Hemorrhage into the adrenal gland at or immediately after birth is
probably the most common factor that leads to subsequent calcification (see Fig. 615.1). Although it is advisable to assess the adrenocortical reserve of such patients, there is rarely any functional
disorder.
Neuroblastomas, ganglioneuromas, adrenocortical carcinomas,
pheochromocytomas, and cysts of the adrenal gland may be responsible for calcifications, particularly if hemorrhage has occurred
within the tumor. Calcification in such lesions is almost always
unilateral.
In the past, tuberculosis was a common cause of both calcification within the adrenals and Addison disease. Calcifications may
also develop in the adrenal glands of children who recover from
Waterhouse-­
Friderichsen syndrome; such patients are usually
asymptomatic. Infants with Wolman disease, a rare lipid disorder
caused by a deficiency of lysosomal acid lipase, have extensive bilateral calcifications of the adrenal glands (see Chapter 106.4).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 618 u Cushing Syndrome 3475

Chapter 618

Virilizing and Feminizing
Adrenal Tumors
Perrin C. White
Virilization is the most common presenting symptom in children with
adrenocortical tumors (see Chapter 617), occurring in 50–80%. In males,
the clinical picture is similar to that of simple virilizing congenital adrenal
hyperplasia: accelerated growth velocity and muscle development, acne,
penile enlargement, and the precocious development of pubic and axillary
hair. In females, virilizing tumors of the adrenal gland cause masculinization of a previously normal female with clitoral enlargement, growth acceleration, acne, deepening of the voice, and premature pubic and axillary
hair development.
Conversely, adrenal tumors can occasionally (<10%) secrete high
levels of estrogens because of overexpression of CYP19 (aromatase).
Gynecomastia in males or premature thelarche in females is often the
initial manifestation. Growth and development may be otherwise normal, or concomitant virilization may occur.
In addition to virilization, 15–40% of children with adrenocortical tumors also have Cushing syndrome (see Chapter 619). Whereas
isolated virilization occurs relatively frequently, children with adrenal
tumors usually do not have Cushing syndrome alone.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Serum levels of dehydroepiandrosterone, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate,
and androstenedione are usually elevated, often markedly. Serum levels of
testosterone are often increased, usually because of peripheral conversion
of androstenedione, but infants with predominantly testosterone-­secreting
adenomas have been reported. Levels of estrone and estradiol are elevated
in tumors from patients with feminizing signs. Urinary 17-­ketosteroids
(sex steroid metabolites) are also increased but are no longer routinely
measured. Many adrenocortical tumors have a relative deficiency of 11β-­
hydroxylase activity and secrete increased amounts of deoxycorticosterone; these patients are hypertensive, and their tumors are often malignant.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

For virilizing signs, the differential includes virilizing forms of adrenal
hyperplasia (see Chapter 616) and factitious exposure to androgens,
such as topical testosterone preparations. The differential diagnosis for
adrenal tumors is discussed in Chapter 617.

TREATMENT

Functioning adrenocortical tumors should be removed surgically (see
Chapter 617).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 619

Cushing Syndrome
Perrin C. White
Cushing syndrome is the result of abnormally high blood levels of cortisol or other glucocorticoids. This can be iatrogenic or the result of
endogenous cortisol secretion, a result of either an adrenal tumor or of
hypersecretion of corticotropin (adrenocorticotropic hormone [ACTH])
by the pituitary (Cushing disease), or by a tumor (Table 619.1).

Table 619.1  Etiologic Classification of Adrenocortical
Hyperfunction
EXCESS ANDROGEN
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
21-­Hydroxylase (CYP21A2) deficiency
11β-­Hydroxylase (CYP11B1) deficiency
3β-­Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (HSD3B2) defect (deficiency or
dysregulation)
Tumor
EXCESS CORTISOL (CUSHING SYNDROME)
Bilateral adrenal hyperplasia
Adenoma
Hypersecretion of corticotropin (Cushing disease)
Ectopic secretion of corticotropin
Exogenous corticotropin
Adrenocortical nodular dysplasia
Pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease (Carney complex)
Tumor
McCune-­Albright syndrome
EXCESS MINERALOCORTICOID
Primary hyperaldosteronism
Aldosterone-­secreting adenoma
Bilateral micronodular adrenocortical hyperplasia
Glucocorticoid-­suppressible aldosteronism
Tumor
Deoxycorticosterone excess
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
• 11β-­Hydroxylase (CYP11B1)
• 17α-­Hydroxylase (CYP17A1)
Tumor
Apparent mineralocorticoid excess (deficiency of 11β-­hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase type 2 [HSD11B2])
EXCESS ESTROGEN
Tumor

ETIOLOGY

The most common cause of Cushing syndrome is prolonged exogenous administration of glucocorticoid hormones, especially at the
high doses used to treat lymphoproliferative disorders. This rarely
represents a diagnostic challenge, but management of hyperglycemia,
hypertension, weight gain, linear growth retardation, and osteoporosis
often complicates therapy with corticosteroids.
Endogenous Cushing syndrome is most often caused in infants by
a functioning adrenocortical tumor (see Chapter 617). Patients with
these tumors often exhibit signs of hypercortisolism along with signs
of hypersecretion of other steroids such as androgens, estrogens, and
aldosterone.
Although extremely rare in infants, the most common etiology of
endogenous Cushing syndrome in children older than 7 years of age
is Cushing disease, in which excessive ACTH secreted by a pituitary adenoma causes bilateral adrenal hyperplasia. Such adenomas
are often too small to detect by imaging techniques and are termed
microadenomas. They consist principally of chromophobe cells and
frequently show positive immunostaining for ACTH and its precursor, proopiomelanocortin. Although most such tumors are sporadic, a
small number occur in kindreds with familial isolated pituitary adenoma syndrome. This syndrome, which is caused by pathogenic variants in the AIP gene, accounts for perhaps 2% of pituitary adenomas;
more commonly tumors with AIP variants secrete growth hormone or
prolactin, and only rarely do they secrete ACTH. Similarly, multiple
endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) patients who have pathogenic
variants in the MEN1 gene may develop pituitary tumors, but these are
typically prolactinomas. Other genes have also been implicated (Fig.
619.1).
ACTH-­dependent Cushing syndrome may also result from ectopic
production of ACTH, although this is uncommon in children. Ectopic
ACTH secretion in children is associated with islet cell carcinoma of
the pancreas, neuroblastoma or ganglioneuroblastoma, hemangiopericytoma, Wilms tumor, and thymic carcinoid. Hypertension is more

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3476 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Cushing disease:
• Gene variants
USP8, MEN1, CDKIs, CDKN1B/p27Kip1,
AIP, SDHx(?), DICER1, others
• Abnormal protein expression
Brg1, HDAC2, TR4, PTTG, EGFR, others

Fig. 619.1 Summary of genetic and molecular mecha-

nisms implicated in Cushing syndrome. For each cause,
the various pathogenic variants or abnormal protein expression believed to play a part in the pathophysiology
is shown. The most frequent mechanisms are highlighted
in red; the well-­characterized mechanisms are highlighted in bold characters, and other potential mechanisms
are in normal characters; a question mark shows an unconfirmed association or genetic predisposition. Please
refer to the text for explanation of the various genetic
defects under each diagnostic category. AC, Adenylate
cyclase; ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone; BMAH,
bilateral macronodular adrenal hyperplasia; Cα, catalytic
subunit of PKA; GEP-NETs, gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumors; GPCR, G protein–coupled receptor;
PDEs, phosphodiesterases; PKA, protein kinase A; PPNAD, primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease;
R1α, type 1α regulatory subunit of PKA. (From Lacroix A,
Feelders RA, Stratakis CA, et al. Cushing’s syndrome.
Lancet. 2015;386:913–927. Fig. 1.)

common in ectopic ACTH syndrome than in other forms of Cushing syndrome, because very high cortisol levels may overwhelm type
2 11β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase in the kidney (see Chapter 615)
and thus have an enhanced mineralocorticoid (salt-­retaining) effect.
Several syndromes are associated with the development of multiple
autonomously hyperfunctioning nodules of adrenocortical tissue,
rather than single adenomas or carcinomas (see Chapter 617). In many
cases they are caused by pathogenic variants in genes in the cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)–mediated signaling pathway by which
ACTH normally regulates cortisol secretion. Primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease (PPNAD) is a distinctive form of ACTH-­
independent Cushing syndrome. It may occur as an isolated event or,
more commonly, as a familial disorder with other manifestations. The
adrenal glands are small and have characteristic multiple small (<4
mm in diameter), pigmented (black) nodules containing large cells
with cytoplasm and lipofuscin; there is cortical atrophy between the
nodules. This adrenal disorder occurs as a component of Carney complex, an autosomal dominant disorder also consisting of centrofacial
lentigines and blue nevi; cardiac and cutaneous myxomas; pituitary,
thyroid, and testicular tumors; and pigmented melanotic schwannomas. Carney complex is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner,
although sporadic cases occur. Genetic loci for Carney complex have
been mapped to the gene for the type 1α regulatory subunit of protein
kinase A (PRKAR1A) on chromosome 17q22-­24 and less frequently to
chromosome 2p16. Patients with Carney complex and PRKAR1A variants generally develop PPNAD as adults, and those with the disorder
mapping to chromosome 2 (and most sporadic cases) develop PPNAD
less frequently and later. Conversely, children presenting with PPNAD
as an isolated finding rarely have pathogenic variants in PRKAR1A, or
subsequently develop other manifestations of Carney complex. Some
patients with isolated PPNAD have pathogenic variants in PDE8B or
PDE11A encoding different phosphodiesterase isozymes. In contrast,
activating somatic variants have been documented in the PRKACA
catalytic subunit of protein kinase A in cortisol-­secreting adenomas.
ACTH-­independent Cushing syndrome with nodular hyperplasia
and adenoma formation occurs rarely in cases of McCune-­Albright
syndrome, with symptoms beginning in infancy or childhood.
McCune-­Albright syndrome is caused by somatic variants of GNAS
encoding the G protein, Gsα, through which the ACTH receptor
(MCR2) normally signals. When the variant is present in adrenal tissue, cortisol and cell division are stimulated independently of ACTH.
Other tissues in which activating mutations may occur are bone (producing fibrous dysplasia), gonads, thyroid, and pituitary. Clinical manifestations depend on which tissues are affected.

Ectopic ACTH secretion:
• Gene variants
RET, MEN1, others

Adrenal Cushing syndrome:
AC

GPCR

Gs

ATP

cAMP

PDEs
PDE11A
PDE8B

GEP-NETs

BMAH:
Adrenal adenoma:
• Gene variants
• Gene variants
PRKACA, CTNNB1,
ARMC5, MEN1, FH, GNAS1,
PDE11A, PDE8B, MC2R, PRKACA, GNAS1, PRKAR1A
DOTL1(?), HDAC9(?), PRUNE2(?)

PPNAD:
• Gene variants
PRKAR1A, PDE11A,
PDE8B, PRKACA

• Protein expression
GPCR, PRKAR1A,
others

• Protein expression
PRKACA,
glucocorticoid receptor

• Protein expression
GPCR, POMC/ACTH, PRKAR1A,
others

The genes causing nodular adrenocortical hyperplasia that have
been identified mainly produce overactivity of the ACTH signaling
pathway either by constitutively activating Gsα (McCune-­Albright
syndrome), by reducing the breakdown of cAMP and thus increasing its intracellular levels (variants of PDE8B or PDE11A), by disrupting the regulation of the cAMP-­dependent enzyme protein
kinase A (PRKAR1A mutations), or via microduplications encompassing PRKACA. Additionally, ARMC5, a tumor-suppressor gene,
is abnormal in approximately 40% of cases of primary bilateral
macronodular adrenocortical hyperplasia. Adrenocortical lesions,
including diffuse hyperplasia, nodular hyperplasia, adenoma, and
rarely carcinoma, may occur as part of MEN1 syndrome (see Chapter 617), an autosomal dominant disorder in which there is homozygous inactivation of the menin (MEN1) tumor-­suppressor gene
on chromosome 11q13.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Signs of Cushing syndrome have been recognized in infants younger
than 1 year of age. The disorder appears to be more severe and the clinical findings more dramatic in infants than in older children. The face
is rounded, with prominent cheeks and a flushed appearance (moon
facies). Generalized obesity is common in younger children. In children with adrenal tumors, signs of abnormal masculinization occur
frequently; accordingly, there may be hirsutism on the face and trunk,
pubic hair, acne, deepening of the voice, and enlargement of the clitoris
in females. Growth is impaired, with length falling below the third percentile, except when significant virilization produces normal or even
accelerated growth. Hypertension is common and may occasionally
lead to heart failure. An increased susceptibility to infection may also
lead to sepsis.
In older children, in addition to obesity, short stature is a common
presenting feature (Table 619.2). Gradual onset of obesity and deceleration or cessation of growth may be the only early manifestations.
Older children most often have more severe obesity of the face and
trunk compared with the extremities. However, obesity of the neck
and upper back (“buffalo hump”) is a nonspecific finding to which
excessive importance should not be attached. Purplish striae on the
hips, abdomen, and thighs are common. Pubertal development may
be delayed, or amenorrhea may occur in females past menarche.
Weakness, headache, and emotional lability may be prominent.
Hypertension and hyperglycemia usually occur; hyperglycemia may
progress to frank diabetes. Osteoporosis is common and may cause
pathologic fractures.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 619 u Cushing Syndrome 3477
Table 619.2  Presenting Signs and Symptoms of Cushing
Syndrome in Children
Dermatologic

Facial plethora, acne, acanthosis
nigricans, easy bruising, supratemporal
and supraclavicular fat pads, moon
facies, fungal infection, hirsutism, fine
downy hair, violaceous striae (unusual
in children <7 yr age)

Neurologic

Headaches

Cardiovascular

Hypertension, coagulopathy

Growth

Growth deceleration with concomitant
weight gain, central obesity

Gonadal

Amenorrhea, virilization, gynecomastia

Other

Nephrolithiasis, bone fractures, impaired
glucose tolerance, type 2 diabetes

Psychologic

Depression, anxiety, mood swings,
irritability, fatigue

From Lodish MB, Keil MF, Stratakis CA. Cushing’s syndrome in pediatrics: an update.
Endocrinol Metab Clin N Am. 2018;47:451–462. Table 1.

the sensitivity of detection. Bilateral inferior petrosal blood sampling
to measure concentrations of ACTH before and after corticotropin-­
releasing hormone administration may be required to localize the
tumor when a pituitary adenoma is not visualized; this is not routinely
available in many centers, and moreover may be of decreased specificity in children.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Cushing syndrome is frequently suspected in children with obesity,
particularly when striae and hypertension are present. Children with
simple obesity are usually tall, whereas those with Cushing syndrome
are short or have a decelerating growth rate. Although urinary excretion of cortisol is often elevated in simple obesity, salivary nighttime
levels of cortisol are usually normal, and cortisol secretion is normally
suppressed by oral administration of low doses of dexamethasone.
Elevated levels of cortisol and ACTH without clinical evidence of
Cushing syndrome occur in patients with generalized glucocorticoid
resistance (see Chapter 615.4). Affected patients may be asymptomatic or exhibit hypertension, hypokalemia, and precocious pseudopuberty; these manifestations are caused by increased mineralocorticoid
and adrenal androgen secretion in response to elevated ACTH levels.
Mutations in the glucocorticoid receptor have been identified.

TREATMENT
LABORATORY FINDINGS

Cortisol levels in blood are normally highest at 8 am and decrease to
less than 50% of peak levels by midnight, except in infants and young
children, in whom a diurnal rhythm is not always established. In
patients with Cushing syndrome, this circadian rhythm is lost; midnight cortisol levels >4.4 μg/dL strongly suggest the diagnosis. It is difficult to obtain diurnal blood samples as part of an outpatient evaluation,
but cortisol can be measured in saliva samples, which can be obtained
at home at the appropriate times of day. Elevated nighttime salivary
cortisol levels raise suspicion for Cushing syndrome.
Urinary excretion of free cortisol is increased. This is best measured
in a 24-­hour urine sample and is expressed as a ratio of micrograms of
cortisol excreted per gram of creatinine. This ratio is independent of
body size and completeness of the urine collection.
A single-­
dose dexamethasone suppression test is often helpful;
a dose of 25-­30 μg/kg (maximum: 2 mg) given at 11 pm results in a
plasma cortisol level of less than 5 μg/dL at 8 am the next morning in
normal individuals but not in patients with Cushing syndrome. It is
prudent to measure the dexamethasone level in the same blood sample
to ensure the adequacy of dosing.
A glucose tolerance test is often abnormal but is of no diagnostic
utility. Levels of serum electrolytes are usually normal, but potassium may be decreased, especially in patients with tumors that secrete
ACTH ectopically.
After the diagnosis of Cushing syndrome has been established, it is
necessary to determine whether it is caused by a pituitary adenoma,
an ectopic ACTH-­
secreting tumor, or a cortisol-­
secreting adrenal
tumor (Fig. 619.2). ACTH concentrations are usually suppressed in
patients with cortisol-­secreting tumors and are very high in patients
with ectopic ACTH-­secreting tumors, but may be normal in patients
with ACTH-­secreting pituitary adenomas. After an intravenous bolus
of corticotropin-­releasing hormone, patients with ACTH-­dependent
Cushing syndrome have an exaggerated ACTH and cortisol response,
whereas those with adrenal tumors show no increase in ACTH and
cortisol. The two-­
step dexamethasone suppression test consists of
administration of dexamethasone, 30 and 120 μg/kg/24 hr in four
divided doses, on consecutive days. In children with pituitary Cushing
syndrome, the larger dose, but not the smaller dose, suppresses serum
levels of cortisol. Typically, patients with ACTH-­independent Cushing
syndrome do not show suppressed cortisol levels with dexamethasone.
CT detects virtually all adrenal tumors larger than 1.5 cm in diameter. MRI may detect ACTH-­secreting pituitary adenomas, but many
are too small to be seen; the addition of gadolinium contrast increases

Transsphenoidal pituitary microsurgery is the treatment of choice in
pituitary Cushing disease in children. The overall success rate with
follow-­up of less than 10 years is 60–80%. Low postoperative serum or
urinary cortisol concentrations predict long-­term remission in most
cases. Relapses are treated with reoperation or pituitary irradiation.
Cyproheptadine, a centrally acting serotonin antagonist that blocks
ACTH release, has been used to treat Cushing disease in adults; remissions are usually not sustained after discontinuation of therapy. This
agent is rarely used in children. Inhibitors of adrenal steroidogenesis
(metyrapone, ketoconazole, aminoglutethimide, etomidate) have been
used preoperatively to normalize circulating cortisol levels and reduce
perioperative morbidity and mortality. Mifepristone, a glucocorticoid receptor antagonist, has been used in a limited number of cases.
Pasireotide, a somatostatin analog, can inhibit ACTH secretion and is
approved for use in adults with persistent disease after surgery or in
whom surgery is contraindicated.
If a pituitary adenoma does not respond to treatment or if ACTH is
secreted by an ectopic metastatic tumor, the adrenal glands may need
to be removed. This can often be accomplished laparoscopically. Adrenalectomy may lead to increased ACTH secretion by an unresected
pituitary adenoma, evidenced mainly by marked hyperpigmentation;
this condition is termed Nelson syndrome, which occurs in ∼25% of
adults who have undergone adrenalectomy for Cushing syndrome.
Several drugs that inhibit adrenocortical function may be an alternative to adrenalectomy. FDA-­
approved agents include mitotane
(which is toxic to adrenocortical cells) and osilodrostat (a cortisol
synthesis inhibitor); levoketoconazole, a stereoisomer of ketoconazole,
inhibits several steroidogenic enzymes and is in an advanced stage of
development.
Management of patients undergoing adrenalectomy requires adequate preoperative and postoperative replacement therapy with a
corticosteroid. Tumors that produce corticosteroids usually lead to
atrophy of the normal adrenal tissue, and replacement with cortisol
(10 mg/m2/24 hr in three divided doses after the immediate postoperative period) is required until there is recovery of the hypothalamic-­
pituitary-­adrenal axis. Postoperative complications may include sepsis,
pancreatitis, thrombosis, poor wound healing, and sudden collapse,
particularly in infants with Cushing syndrome. Substantial catch-­up
growth, pubertal progress, and increased bone density occur, but bone
density remains abnormal and adult height is often compromised. The
management of adrenocortical tumors is discussed in Chapter 617.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3478 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Confirmed Cushing syndrome
ACTH (two measurements)

<10 pg/mL (<2·2 pmol/L)
ACTH independent

>20 pg/mL (>4·4 pmol/L)
ACTH dependent

10–20 pg/mL (2·2–4·4 pmol/L)
CRH test to differentiate the
two forms

CT or MRI of adrenals
MRI
pituitary

Primary adrenal disorders:
unilateral mass–adrenal adenoma or carcinoma;
bilateral abnormalities–macronodular
or micronodular hyperplasia

Adenoma
<6 mm

Negative

Positive

CRH test
(desmopressin test)

Discordant
tests

Adenoma >6 mm
and concordant
tests

BIPSS

CT or MRI
(neck, chest, abdomen and pelvis)

Ectopic ACTH
tumour

HDDSST

Complementary imaging
octreo scan, PET or PET-CT

Negative

Positive

Cushing disease
confirmed

Follow-up
re-imaging

Surgery

Fig. 619.2 Clinical decision-­making algorithm for the differential diagnosis of confirmed Cushing syndrome of different causes. ACTH, Adreno-

corticotropic hormone; BIPSS, bilateral inferior petrosal sinus sampling; CRH, corticotropin-­releasing hormone; HDDSST, high-­dose dexamethasone
suppression test. (From Lacroix A, Feelders RA, Stratakis CA, et al. Cushing’s syndrome. Lancet. 2015;386:913–927. Fig. 3.)

Chapter 620

Primary Aldosteronism
Perrin C. White
Primary aldosteronism encompasses disorders caused by excessive
aldosterone secretion independent of the renin-­angiotensin system.
These disorders are characterized by hypertension, hypokalemia, and
suppression of the renin-­angiotensin system.
Aldosterone-­
secreting adenomas are unilateral and have been
reported in children as young as 3.5 years of age. They are rarely malignant. Bilateral micronodular adrenocortical hyperplasia tends to occur
in older ages. Primary aldosteronism caused by unilateral adrenal
hyperplasia may also occur. Glucocorticoid-­suppressible hyperaldosteronism is discussed in Chapter 616.8.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

These conditions are thought to be rare in children, but they may
account for 5–10% of cases of hypertension in adults. Although
usually sporadic, kindreds with several affected members have been
reported. Genetic linkage to chromosome 7p22 was reported in
some kindreds, but the involved gene has not yet been identified.

Pathogenic variants in KCNJ5 on chromosome 11q24 (encoding
G protein–gated inward rectifier potassium channel 4) have been
identified in several kindreds; these variants (G151R and G151E)
altered channel selectivity, producing increased Na+ conductance
and membrane depolarization, which increase aldosterone production and proliferation of adrenal glomerulosa cells. Such variants
have been identified in a subset of sporadic aldosterone-­producing
adenomas. Germline variants have also been reported in CYP11B2
(encoding aldosterone synthase), CLCN2 (encoding voltage-­gated
chloride channel ClC-­2), and CACNA1H (encoding a subunit of
the T-­type voltage-­gated calcium channel CaV3.2). Germline and
somatic variants have also been reported in CACNA1D encoding a
voltage-­sensitive calcium channel and somatic variants in ATP1A1
and ATP2B3, respectively, encoding sodium-­potassium and calcium
ATPases. Most aldosterone-­producing adenomas have pathogenic
variants that activate the Wnt/β-­catenin signaling pathway, either in
β-­catenin (CTNNB1) itself, or in APC, which regulates this pathway.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Some affected children have no symptoms, the diagnosis being established after incidental discovery of moderate hypertension. Others
have severe hypertension (up to 240/150 mm Hg), with headache, dizziness, and visual disturbances. If present, chronic hypokalemia may
lead to polyuria, nocturia, enuresis, and polydipsia. Muscle weakness
and discomfort, tetany, intermittent paralysis, fatigue, and growth failure affect children with severe hypokalemia.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 621 u Pheochromocytoma 3479
LABORATORY FINDINGS

Hypokalemia occurs frequently. Serum pH and carbon dioxide and
sodium concentrations may be elevated and serum chloride and magnesium levels decreased. Serum levels of calcium are normal, even in
children who manifest tetany. The urine is neutral or alkaline, and urinary potassium excretion is high. Plasma levels of aldosterone may be
normal or elevated. Aldosterone concentrations in 24-­hour urine collections are always increased. Plasma levels of renin are persistently
low.
The diagnostic test of choice for primary aldosteronism is controversial. Both renin and aldosterone levels may vary by time of
day, posture, and sodium intake, making it difficult to establish
consistent reference ranges. It is desirable to establish a consistent
sampling protocol, for example, at midmorning after the patient
has been sitting for 15 minutes. If possible, antihypertensive drugs
or other medications that can affect aldosterone or renin secretion should be avoided for several weeks before testing, including
diuretics, β blockers, angiotensin-­converting enzyme inhibitors,
angiotensin receptor blockers, clonidine, and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents. Patients taking these agents may need to
be changed to α-­adrenergic blockers or calcium channel blockers
that have smaller effects on the biochemical measurements. The
ratio of plasma aldosterone concentration to renin activity is
always high, and this represents a cost-­effective screening test for
primary aldosteronism. Aldosterone does not decrease with administration of saline solution or fludrocortisone, and renin does
not respond to salt and fluid restriction. Urinary and plasma levels of
18-­oxocortisol and 18-­hydroxycortisol may be increased but not to
the extent seen in glucocorticoid-­suppressible hyperaldosteronism.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Primary aldosteronism should be distinguished from glucocorticoid-­
remediable aldosteronism (also termed glucocorticoid-­suppressible
hyperaldosteronism, see Chapter 616.8), which is specifically treated
with glucocorticoids. An autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance should raise suspicion for the latter disorder. Glucocorticoid-­
remediable aldosteronism is diagnosed by dexamethasone suppression
tests or by specific genetic testing.
Patients with primary aldosteronism should be evaluated by computed tomography (CT). It does not reliably distinguish aldosterone-­
producing adenomas, which tend to be small, from bilateral hyperplasia,
but it can exclude the presence of large tumors that might otherwise
raise concern for adrenocortical carcinomas. Adrenal venous sampling
can accurately determine if excess aldosterone secretion is originating
in one gland or both, but it is invasive and may not be available in all
centers. Positron emission tomography with 11C-­metomidate is a noninvasive alternative.

TREATMENT

The treatment of an aldosterone-­producing adenoma is laparoscopic
adrenalectomy; successful enucleation of aldosterone-­
producing
adenomas has also been reported. Hyperaldosteronism caused by
bilateral adrenal hyperplasia is treated with the mineralocorticoid
antagonist spironolactone (1-­3 mg/kg/day to a maximum of 100
mg/day) or eplerenone (25-­100 mg/day in 2 divided doses), often
normalizing blood pressure and serum potassium levels. There is
greater experience with spironolactone, but this agent has antiandrogenic properties that may be unacceptable in pubertal males.
Eplerenone is a more specific antimineralocorticoid that is safe in
children, but there is little specific experience with primary aldosteronism in the pediatric age-­group. As an alternative, an epithelial sodium channel blocker, such as amiloride, may be used, with
other antihypertensive agents added as necessary. In patients whose
condition cannot be controlled medically, unilateral adrenalectomy
may be considered.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 621

Pheochromocytoma
Perrin C. White
See also Chapter 555.4.
Pheochromocytomas are catecholamine-­secreting tumors arising
from chromaffin cells. The most common site of origin (approximately
90%) is the adrenal medulla; however, tumors may develop anywhere
along the abdominal sympathetic chain and are likely to be located
near the aorta at the level of the inferior mesenteric artery or at its
bifurcation. They also appear in the periadrenal area, urinary bladder
or ureteral walls, thoracic cavity, and cervical region. Ten percent occur
in children, presenting most frequently between 6 and 14 years of age.
Tumors vary from 1 to 10 cm in diameter; they are found more often
on the right side than on the left. In more than 20% of affected children,
the adrenal tumors are bilateral; in 30–40% of children, tumors are
found in both adrenal and extraadrenal areas or only in an extraadrenal area.
Most pheochromocytomas are associated with germline pathogenic
variants (see Table 555.2 in Chapter 555.4). They may be associated
with genetic syndromes such as von Hippel-­Lindau disease, multiple
endocrine neoplasia (MEN) syndromes MEN2A and MEN2B, and
less often, in association with neurofibromatosis (type 1) or tuberous
sclerosis. The classic features of von Hippel-­Landau syndrome, which
occurs in 1 in 36,000 individuals, include retinal and central nervous
system hemangioblastomas, renal clear cell carcinomas, and pheochromocytomas, but kindreds differ in their propensity to develop pheochromocytoma; in some kindreds, pheochromocytoma is the only
tumor to develop. Germline variants in the VHL tumor-suppressor
gene on chromosome 3p25-­26 have been identified in patients with
this syndrome. Variants of the RET protooncogene on chromosome
10q11.2 have been found in families with MEN2A and MEN2B.
Patients with MEN2 are at risk of developing medullary thyroid carcinoma and parathyroid tumors; approximately 50% develop pheochromocytoma, with patients carrying variants at codon 634 of the RET
gene being at particularly high risk. Variants are present in the NF1
gene on chromosome 17q11.2 in neurofibromatosis type 1 patients (see
Table 555.2 in Chapter 555.4).
Pheochromocytomas may occur in kindreds along with paragangliomas, particularly at sites in the head and neck. Such families typically carry pathogenic variants in SDHB, SDHD, and rarely the SDHC
encoding subunits of the mitochondrial enzyme succinate dehydrogenase. Approximately 50% of tumors with SDHB variants are malignant.
The VHL and the various SDH gene products participate in the pseudohypoxia signaling pathway (pseudohypoxia is a decrease in the ratio of
the cytosolic oxidized to reduced forms of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide [NAD (+)/NADH]) and thus represent a common pathogenetic pathway. In rare cases, individuals with germline variants in SDH
genes develop pheochromocytomas and/or paragangliomas along with
pituitary adenomas, which is termed the 3P association (3Pas).
Pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas can occur in association with gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs; the association is
termed the Carney-­Stratakis dyad) and/or pulmonary chondromas
(Carney-­Stratakis triad) and adrenocortical tumors. These associations
have heterogenous genetic etiologies but often involve variants in SDH
genes.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Pheochromocytomas detected by surveillance of patients who are
known carriers of variants in tumor-suppressor genes may be asymptomatic. Particularly in adults, some are diagnosed on abdominal CT
or MRI performed for another purpose (see Chapter 617). Otherwise,
patients are detected owing to hypertension, which results from excessive secretion of metanephrines, epinephrine and norepinephrine. All

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3480 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
patients have hypertension at some point. Paroxysmal hypertension
should particularly suggest pheochromocytoma as a diagnostic possibility, but in contrast to adults, the hypertension in children is more
often sustained rather than paroxysmal. When there are paroxysms of
hypertension, the attacks are usually infrequent at first, but become
more frequent and eventually give way to a continuous hypertensive
state. Between attacks of hypertension, the patient may be free of symptoms. During attacks, the patient complains of headache, palpitations,
abdominal pain, and dizziness; pallor, vomiting, and sweating also
occur. Seizures and other manifestations of hypertensive encephalopathy may occur. In severe cases, precordial pains radiate into the arms;
pulmonary edema and cardiac and hepatic enlargement may develop.
Symptoms may be exacerbated by exercise or with the use of nonprescription medications containing stimulants such as pseudoephedrine. Patients have a good appetite but because of the hypermetabolic
state may not gain weight, and severe cachexia may develop. Polyuria
and polydipsia can be sufficiently severe to suggest diabetes insipidus.
Growth failure may be striking. The blood pressure may range from
180 to 260 mm Hg systolic and from 120 to 210 mm Hg diastolic, and
the heart may be enlarged. Ophthalmoscopic examination may reveal
papilledema, hemorrhages, exudate, and arterial constriction. The differential diagnosis is noted in Table 555.3.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

The urine may contain protein, a few casts, and occasionally glucose.
Gross hematuria suggests that the tumor is in the bladder wall. Polycythemia is occasionally observed.
Pheochromocytomas produce norepinephrine and epinephrine.
Normally, norepinephrine in plasma is derived from both the adrenal
gland and adrenergic nerve endings, whereas epinephrine is derived
primarily from the adrenal gland. In contrast to adults with pheochromocytoma in whom both norepinephrine and epinephrine are
elevated, children with pheochromocytoma predominantly excrete
norepinephrine in the urine (see Fig. 614.3 in Chapter 614). Daily urinary excretion of these compounds by unaffected children increases
with age. Although urinary excretion of vanillylmandelic acid
(3-­methoxy-­4-­hydroxymandelic acid), the major metabolite of epinephrine and norepinephrine, is increased, vanilla-­containing foods
and fruits can produce falsely elevated levels of this compound, which
therefore is no longer routinely measured.
Elevated levels of free catecholamines and metanephrines can
also be detected in plasma. The consensus is to measure plasma free
metanephrines and urinary fractionated metanephrines. The patient
should be instructed to abstain from caffeinated drinks and to avoid
acetaminophen, which can interfere with plasma normetanephrine
immunoassays. If possible, the blood sample should be obtained from
an indwelling intravenous catheter to avoid acute stress associated with
venipuncture.
Most tumors in the area of the adrenal gland are readily localized
by CT or MRI (Fig. 621.1), but extraadrenal tumors may be difficult
to detect. 123I or 131I-­metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) is taken up
by chromaffin tissue anywhere in the body and is useful for localizing
small tumors. PET-­CT with 18F-­fluorodeoxyglucose or 68Ga-­DOTA(0)-­
Tyr(3)-­octreotate (a somatostatin receptor ligand) is highly sensitive
and a more favored imaging approach (Fig. 621.2 and Fig. 555.2) for
difficult-­to-­localize tumors. Venous catheterization with sampling of
blood at different levels for catecholamine determinations is now only
rarely necessary for localizing the tumor.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Various causes of hypertension in children must be considered, such
as renal or renovascular disease; coarctation of the aorta; hyperthyroidism; Cushing syndrome; deficiencies of 11β-­hydroxylase, 17α-­
hydroxylase, or 11β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (type 2 isozyme);
primary aldosteronism; adrenocortical tumors; and, rarely, essential
hypertension (see Chapter 494). A nonfunctioning kidney may result
from compression of a ureter or of a renal artery by a pheochromocytoma. Paroxysmal hypertension may be associated with porphyria
or familial dysautonomia. Cerebral disorders and hyperthyroidism
must also be considered in the differential diagnosis. Hypertension

Fig. 621.1 Bilateral pheochromocytoma in an 11-­yr-­old child with

von Hippel-­
Lindau disease and arterial hypertension. An axial fat-­
suppressed T2 weighted magnetic resonance image shows bilateral
adrenal masses (arrows), larger on the left. The masses are hyperintense
with small cystic change on the right medially. (From Navarro OM,
Daneman A. Acquired conditions. In: Coley B, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric
Diagnostic Imaging, 12th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2013: Fig. 123.9.)

in patients with neurofibromatosis may be caused by renal vascular
involvement or by concurrent pheochromocytoma.
Neuroblastoma, ganglioneuroblastoma, and ganglioneuroma frequently produce catecholamines, but urinary levels of most catecholamines are higher in patients with pheochromocytoma, although levels
of dopamine and homovanillic acid are usually higher in neuroblastoma. Secreting neuroendocrine tumors often produce hypertension,
excessive sweating, flushing, pallor, rash, polyuria, and polydipsia.
Chronic secretory diarrhea may be associated with these tumors, particularly with ganglioneuroma.

TREATMENT

These tumors must be removed surgically, but careful preoperative,
intraoperative, and postoperative management is essential. Manipulation and excision of these tumors result in marked increases in catecholamine secretion that increase blood pressure and heart rate.
Therefore preoperative α-­ and β-­adrenergic blockade are required.
Whereas phenoxybenzamine has been most often used, it may not be
covered by insurance, and selective α1-­blockers, such as doxazosin, as
well as calcium channel blockers like amlodipine, have also been used.
Because these tumors are often multiple in children, a thorough transabdominal exploration of all the usual sites offers the best opportunity to find them all. Appropriate choice of anesthesia and expansion
of blood volume with appropriate fluids before and during surgery are
critical to avoid a precipitous drop in blood pressure during operation or within 48 hours postoperatively. Surveillance must continue
postoperatively.
Because bilateral and recurrent pheochromocytomas occur frequently, some have advocated for adrenal cortex–sparing surgery
to reduce the probability of causing Addison disease. However, this
approach increases the risk of tumor recurrence.
Although these tumors often appear malignant histologically, the
only accurate indicators of malignancy are the presence of metastatic disease or local invasiveness that precludes complete resection,
or both. Approximately 10% of all adrenal pheochromocytomas are
malignant. Such tumors are rare in childhood; pediatric malignant
pheochromocytomas occur more frequently in extraadrenal sites and
are often associated with pathogenic variants in SDHB encoding a
subunit of succinate dehydrogenase. Prolonged follow-­up is indicated,
particularly in patients with germline mutations in risk loci, because
functioning tumors at other sites may be manifested many years after
the initial operation. Examination of relatives of affected patients may
reveal other individuals harboring unsuspected tumors that may be
asymptomatic.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 622 u Development and Function of the Gonads 3481

A

B

C

Fig. 621.2 Paraganglioma in a 30-­yr-­old woman who presented with refractory hypertension. A, Axial T2-weighted MRI shows homogeneously

T2-­hyperintense left periaortic mass just above the level of the aortic bifurcation (Zuckerkandl organ), illustrating the “light bulb” T2-­bright appearance of pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas. B, Axial contrast-­enhanced T1-­weighted MRI demonstrates heterogeneous enhancement within
the mass. C, 123I-­MIBG fused SPECT/CT axial image shows diffuse uptake within the tumor, compatible with paraganglioma. (From Ho LM. Adrenal
glands. In: Haaga JR, Boll DT, eds. CT and MRI of the Whole Body, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017: Fig. 53-­18.)

Section 5

Disorders of the
Gonads
Chapter 622

Development and
Function of the Gonads
Patricia A. Donohoue
GENETIC CONTROL OF EMBRYONIC GONADAL
DIFFERENTIATION

Gonadal differentiation is a complex, multistep process that requires
the sequential action and interaction of multiple gene products. Early
in the first trimester, the undifferentiated, bipotential fetal gonad begins
as a thickening of the urogenital ridge, near the developing kidney and
adrenal cortex. At 6 weeks of gestation, the gonad contains germ cells,
stromal cells that will become Leydig cells in the testes or theca, interstitial, or hilar cells in the ovaries, and supporting cells that will develop
into Sertoli cells in the testes or granulosa cells in the ovaries. In males,
the SRY gene (sex-­determining region on the Y chromosome) is transiently expressed, followed by a sequential upregulation of a number of
testis-­specific genes. In the absence of SRY, the bipotential gonad will
be able to develop into an ovary. Ovarian development is also characterized by expression of ovary-­specific genes during the same period.
One such gene is R-­spondin1. During the gestation period of 6-­9 weeks,
a number of genes are upregulated to the same degree in both the testis
and the ovary, including WNT4 and CTNNB1.
A chromosome complement of 46,XX is necessary for the development of normal ovaries. Both the long and short arms of the X chromosome contain genes for normal ovarian development. The DSS
(dosage sensitive/sex reversal) locus associated with the DAX1 (DSS
adrenal hypoplasia on the X chromosome) gene, which is defective
in 46,XY patients with X-­linked congenital adrenal hypoplasia and
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, is a member of the nuclear receptor
superfamily and acts as a repressor of male gene expression. The DAX1
gene product acts by binding to a related nuclear receptor SF-­1 (steroidogenic factor-­1, also known as NR5A1). In vitro, the signaling gene

WNT4 stimulates expression of DAX1, resulting in the suppression of
androgen synthesis in XX females. The WNTs are ligands that activate
receptor-­mediated signal transduction pathways and are involved in
modulating gene expression as well as cell behavior, adhesion, and
polarity. Once developed, the ovary requires FAX12 to preserve its differentiation and stability. A key to its role in humans was elucidated by
a loss-­of-­function pathogenic variant of WNT4 that was found in an
18-­year-­old 46,XX woman. She had an absence of müllerian-­derived
structures (uterus and fallopian tubes), unilateral renal agenesis, and
clinical signs of androgen excess.
Pathogenic variants of the Wilms tumor 1 (WT1) gene may also
affect sex differentiation. WT1 pathogenic variants are associated with
Denys-­Drash syndrome (early-­onset renal failure, abnormal external
genitalia in genetic males, and Wilms tumor). Haploinsufficiency of
a three–amino acid (KTS) form of WT1 has been implicated in the
gonadal dysgenesis of patients with Fraser syndrome (late-­onset progressive glomerulopathy and 46,XY gonadal dysgenesis). Variants in
the FOXL2 and SF-­1 genes are associated with ovarian failure. Pathogenic variants of the R-­spondin1 gene has been described in individuals with 46,XX disorder of sex development (DSD). Other autosomal
genes also play a role in normal ovarian organogenesis and testicular
development. Several conditions of gonadal dysgenesis are associated
with gross abnormalities of both autosomes and sex chromosomes. A
deletion affecting the short arm of the X chromosome produces the
typical somatic anomalies of Turner syndrome.
Development of the testis requires the short arm of the Y chromosome; this contains the SRY gene, which is required for testicular differentiation. During male meiosis, the Y chromosome must segregate
from the X chromosome so that both X and Y chromosomes do not
occur in the same spermatozoa. The major portion of the Y chromosome is composed of Y-­specific sequences that do not pair with the X
chromosome. However, a minor portion of the Y chromosome shares
sequences with the X chromosome, and pairing does occur in this
region. The genes and sequences in this area recombine between the
sex chromosomes, behaving like autosomal genes. Therefore the term
pseudoautosomal region is used to describe this portion of the chromosome, and the term indicates genetic behavior of these genes relative to
pairing and recombinational events. The SRY gene is localized to the
35-­kb portion proximal to the pseudoautosomal region of the Y chromosome. It contains a high-­mobility group (HMG) nonhistone protein (HMG box), supporting SRY’s role as a transcriptional regulator of
other genes involved in sex differentiation. The gonadal ridge forms at
around 33 days of gestation. SRY is detected at 41 days, peaks at 44 days
when testis cords are first visible, and persists into adulthood.
Other genes that are found on autosomes are important in this
process. SOX9, an SRY-­related gene containing a region homologous
with the HMG box 9 of SRY, is located on chromosome 17. Pathogenic variants of this gene result in XY sex reversal and camptomelic dysplasia. SF-­1 (NR5A1) on chromosome 9q33 is important

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3482 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
in adrenal and gonadal development, as well as the development
of gonadotropin-­
releasing hormone–secreting neurons in the
hypothalamus. WTI, especially the KST isoform on chromosome
11p13, is needed for early gonadal, adrenal, and renal development.
Fibroblast growth factor-­9, GATA-­4, XH-­2, and SOY9 are also
important.
When genetic recombination events on sex chromosomes
extend beyond the pseudoautosomal region, X-­and Y-­
specific
DNA may be transferred between the chromosomes. Such aberrant

recombinations result in X chromosomes carrying SRY, resulting in
XX males, or Y chromosomes that have lost SRY, resulting in XY
females. SRY acts as a transcriptional regulator to increase cellular
proliferation, attract interstitial cells from adjacent mesonephros
into the genital ridge, and stimulate testicular Sertoli cell differentiation. Sertoli cells act as an organizer of steroidogenic and germ
cell lines and produce antimüllerian hormone (AMH) that causes
the female duct system to regress. Table 622.1 lists additional genes
involved in sex development that, if abnormal, result in DSD.

Table 622.1  Pathogenic Genes in Disorders of Sex Development

GENE

PROTEIN

OMIM #

LOCUS

INHERITANCE GONAD

MÜLLERIAN EXTERNAL
STRUCTURES GENITALIA

46,XY DSD
DISORDERS OF GONADAL (TESTICULAR) DEVELOPMENT: SINGLE-­GENE DISORDERS
WT1
TF
607102
11p13
AD
Dysgenetic
testis

ASSOCIATED
FEATURES/VARIANT
PHENOTYPES

±

Female or
ambiguous

Wilms tumor, renal
abnormalities, gonadal
tumors (WAGR, Denys-­
Drash, and Frasier
syndromes)
More severe
phenotypes include
primary adrenal failure;
milder phenotypes
have isolated partial
gonadal dysgenesis;
mothers who carry
SF-­1 mutation have
premature ovarian
insufficiency

SF1
(NR5A1)

Nuclear
receptor TF

184757

9q33

AD/AR

Dysgenetic
testis;
ovotestis

±

Female or
ambiguous

SRY

TF

480000

Yp11.3

Y

Dysgenetic
testis or
ovotestis

±

Female or
ambiguous

SOX9

TF

608160

17q24-­25

AD

Dysgenetic
testis or
ovotestis

±

Female or
ambiguous

Camptomelic
dysplasia (17q24
rearrangements milder
phenotype than point
mutations)

DHH

Signaling
molecule

605423

12q13.1

AR

Dysgenetic
testis

±

Female

The severe phenotype
of one patient
included minifascicular
neuropathy; other
patients have isolated
gonadal dysgenesis

ATRX

Helicase
(?chromatin
remodeling)

300032

Xq13.3

X

Dysgenetic
testis

−

Female,
ambiguous
or male

α-­Thalassemia,
intellectual disability

ARX

TF

3003382

Xp22.13

X

Dysgenetic
testis

–

Ambiguous

X-­linked lissencephaly,
epilepsy, temperature
instability

Gata4

TF

615542

8p23.1

AD in XY
subjects

Dysgenetic
testes

_

Ambiguous

Congenital heart
disease

DISORDERS OF GONADAL (TESTICULAR) DEVELOPMENT: CHROMOSOMAL CHANGES INVOLVING KEY CANDIDATE GENES
DMRT1
TF
602424
9p24.3
Monosomic
Dysgenetic
±
Female or
Intellectual disability
deletion
testis
ambiguous
DAX1
(NR0B1)

Nuclear
receptor TF

300018

Xp21.3

dupXp21

Dysgenetic
testis or
ovary

±

Female or
ambiguous

WNT4

Signaling
molecule

603490

1p35

dup1p35

Dysgenetic
testis

+

Ambiguous

Intellectual disability

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 622 u Development and Function of the Gonads 3483
Table 622.1  Pathogenic Genes in Disorders of Sex Development—cont’d

GENE

PROTEIN

OMIM #

LOCUS

INHERITANCE GONAD

MÜLLERIAN EXTERNAL
STRUCTURES GENITALIA

ASSOCIATED
FEATURES/VARIANT
PHENOTYPES

DISORDERS IN HORMONE SYNTHESIS OR ACTION
LHGCR
G-­protein
152790
2p21
receptor

AR

Testis

–

Female,
ambiguous
or
micropenis

Leydig cell hypoplasia

DHCR7

Enzyme

602858

11q12-­13

AR

Testis

–

Variable

Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz
syndrome: coarse
facies, 2nd-­3rd toe
syndactyly, failure to
thrive, developmental
delay, cardiac and
visceral abnormalities

StAR

Mitochondrial
membrane
protein

600617

8p11.2

AR

Testis

–

Female

Congenital lipoid
adrenal hyperplasia
(primary adrenal
failure), pubertal failure

CYP11A1

Enzyme

118485

15q23-­24

AR

Testis

–

Female or
ambiguous

Congenital adrenal
hyperplasia (primary
adrenal failure),
pubertal failure

HSD3B2

Enzyme

201810

1p13.1

AR

Testis

–

Ambiguous

CAH, primary adrenal
failure, partial
androgenization
caused by ↑ DHEA

CYP17

Enzyme

202110

10q24.3

AR

Testis

–

Female
ambiguous
or
micropenis

CAH, hypertension caused
by ↑ corticosterone and
11-­deoxycorticosterone
(except in isolated
17,20-­lyase deficiency)

POR (P450
oxido­reductase)

CYP enzyme
electron donor

124015

7q11.2

AR

Testis

–

Male or
ambiguous

Mixed features of
21-­hydroxylase
deficiency, 17α-­
hydroxylase/17,20-­
lyase deficiency, and
aromatase deficiency;
sometimes associated
with Antley-­Bixler
skeletal dysplasia

HSD17B3

Enzyme

605573

9q22

AR

Testis

–

Female or
ambiguous

Partial androgenization
at puberty,
↑ androstenedione:
testosterone ratio

SRD5A2

Enzyme

607306

2p23

AR

Testis

–

Ambiguous
or
micropenis

Partial androgenization
at puberty,
↑ testosterone:DHT ratio

AKR1C4

Enzyme

600451

10p15.1

Unclear

Testis

–

Ambiguous
or
micropenis

DHT deficiency in
patients once thought
to have 17,20 lyase
deficiency; dose effect
with AKR1C2 variant is
possible

AKR1C2

Enzyme

600450

10p15.1

Unclear

Testis

–

Ambiguous
or
micropenis

DHT deficiency in
patients once thought
to have 17,20 lyase
deficiency; dose effect
with AKR1C2 variant is
possible

AMH

Signaling
molecule

600957

19p13.3-­13.2 AR

Testis

+

Normal male

Persistent müllerian duct
syndrome (PMDS);
male

AHM
receptor

Serine-­threonine 600956
kinase
transmembrane
receptor

12q13

Testis

–

Normal male

External genitalia,
bilateral
cryptorchidism

AR

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Continued

3484 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 622.1  Pathogenic Genes in Disorders of Sex Development—cont’d

GENE

PROTEIN

OMIM #

LOCUS

INHERITANCE GONAD

Androgen
receptor

Nuclear
receptor TF

3130700

Xq11-­12

X

46,XX DSD
DISORDERS OF GONADAL (OVARIAN) DEVELOPMENT
SRY
TF
480000
Yp11.3
Translocation

MÜLLERIAN EXTERNAL
STRUCTURES GENITALIA

Testis

–

Female,
ambiguous,
micropenis,
or normal
male

Testis or
ovotestis

–

Male or
ambiguous

ASSOCIATED
FEATURES/VARIANT
PHENOTYPES
Phenotypic spectrum
from complete
androgen insensitivity
syndrome (female
external genitalia)
and partial androgen
insensitivity
(ambiguous) to normal
male genitalia/infertility

SOX9

TF

608160

17q24

dup17q24

ND

–

Male or
ambiguous

R-spondin1

TF

610644

1p34.3

AR

Ovotestis

±

Male or
ambiguous

ANDROGEN EXCESS
HSD3B2
Enzyme

201810

1p13

AR

Ovary

+

Clitoromegaly CAH, primary
adrenal failure,
partial androgenization
caused by ↑ DHEA

CYP21A2

Enzyme

201910

6p21-­23

AR

Ovary

+

Ambiguous

CAH, phenotypic
spectrum from severe
salt-­losing forms
associated with adrenal
failure to simple virilizing
forms with compensated
adrenal function,
↑ 17-­hydroxyprogesterone

CYP11B1

Enzyme

20210

8q21-­22

AR

Ovary

+

Ambiguous

CAH, hypertension
caused by
↑ 11-­deoxycortisol and
11-­deoxycorticosterone

POR (P450
oxidoreductase)

CYP enzyme
electron donor

124015

7q11.2

AR

Ovary

+

Ambiguous

Mixed features of
21-­hydroxylase
deficiency, 17α-­
hydroxylase/17,20-­
lyase deficiency, and
aromatase deficiency;
associated with
Antley-­Bixler skeletal
dysplasia

CYP19

Enzyme

107910

15q21

AR

Ovary

+

Ambiguous

Maternal virilization
during pregnancy,
absent breast
development at
puberty, except in
partial cases

Glucocorticoid
receptor

Nuclear
receptor TF

138040

5q31

AR

Ovary

+

Ambiguous

↑ ACTH,
17-­hydroxyprogesterone
and cortisol; failure
of dexamethasone
suppression (patient
heterozygous for a
variant in CYP21)

Palmoplantar
hyperkeratosis and
certain malignancies

ACTH, Adrenocorticotropin; AD, autosomal dominant (often de novo mutation); AR, autosomal recessive; CAH, congenital adrenal hyperplasia; ND, not determined; OMIM #, Online
Mendelian Inheritance in Man number; TF, transcription factor; WAGR, Wilms, aniridia, genital anomalies, and retardation; X, X-­chromosomal; Y, Y-­chromosomal. Chromosomal
rearrangements likely to include key genes are included.
From Lee PA, Houk CP, Ahmed SF, et al. International Consensus Conference on Intersex organized by the Lawson Wilkins Pediatric Endocrine Society and the European
Society for Paediatric Endocrinology. Consensus statement on management of intersex disorders. International Consensus Conference on Intersex. Pediatrics. 2006;118:e488–
e500; with additional data from Baxter RM, Arboleda VA, Lee H, et al. Exome sequencing for the diagnosis of 46,XY disorders of sex development. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
2015;100:e333–e344; and Lourenco D, Brauner R, Rybczynska M, et al. Loss-­of-­function mutation in GATA4 causes anomalies of human testicular development. PNAS.
2011;108:1597–1602.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 622 u Development and Function of the Gonads 3485

CYPIIAI StAR

3 HSD2

(17 CH activity)
CYP17A1 POR

3 HSD2

(17,20-Lyase activity)
CYP17A1 POR

3 HSD2

ARO

Estrone
HSD17B3

ARO

Estradiol 17

Fig. 622.1 Biosynthesis of sex steroids.
5 RED2

AKRIC2/RoDH
(ox)

Development of the ovary was once thought to be a passive process in
the absence of SRY. Although the morphologic changes in the developing ovary are less marked than in the testis, sequentially expressed genes
and pathways are required for complete ovarian development along
with maintenance of ovarian integrity postnatally. One of these genes
is R-­spondin1, which if abnormal can result in testicular or ovotesticular
development in 46,XX individuals. Some peptides in the Wnt-­signaling
pathway may antagonize testicular development, thus allowing for ovarian differentiation. This effect may be mediated by β-­catenin signaling,

Dashed lines indicate enzymatic defects associated with 46,XY disorders of sex development. 3β-­HSD2, 3β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2; 5RED2, 5α-reductase type 2;
AKR1C2/RoDH (Ox), one of the enzymes in the
alternative androgen biosynthetic pathway;
ARO, aromatase; CYP17A1, the enzyme that
catalyzes both 17α-­hydroxylase (17-­OH) and
17,20-­
lyase activities; HSD17B3, the enzyme
that catalyzes the 17-­ketoreductase reaction;
POR, P450 oxidoreductase; StAR, steroidogenic acute regulatory protein.

which is required for suppressing testicular features. Once developed,
the ovary requires FAX12 to preserve its differentiation and stability.

FUNCTION OF THE TESTES

Levels of placental chorionic gonadotropin peak at 8-­12 weeks of gestation and stimulate the fetal Leydig cells to secrete testosterone, the
main hormonal product of the testis (Fig. 622.1). By way of two different biosynthetic pathways, the more potent metabolite of testosterone,
dihydrotestosterone (DHT), is produced. In the originally described

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3486 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
pathway, testosterone is converted by the enzyme 5α-­reductase to
DHT. In another pathway, DHT is produced from androstanediol. The
early fetal period of DHT production and action is critical for normal
and complete virilization of the XY fetus. Defects in this process lead
to different forms of atypical male development (see Chapter 628.2).
After virilization occurs, fetal levels of testosterone decrease but are
maintained at lower levels in the latter half of pregnancy by luteinizing
hormone (LH) secreted by the fetal pituitary; this LH-­mediated testosterone secretion is required for continued penile growth and to some
degree also for testicular descent.
As part of the normal transition from intrauterine to extrauterine
life, perhaps related to the sudden withdrawal of maternal and placental hormones, newborns and young infants experience a transient surge
of gonadotropins and sex steroids. This is the so-­called minipuberty.
In males, LH and testosterone peak at 1-­2 months of age and then
decline to reach prepubertal levels by 4-­6 months of age. Follicle-­
stimulating hormone (FSH), along with inhibin B, peak at 3 months
and decline to prepubertal levels by 9 and 15 months, respectively. The
LH rise is more dominant than that of FSH.
The neonatal surge may be important for postnatal maturation of
the gonads, stabilization of male external genitalia, and perhaps also
for gender identity and sexual behaviors. The postnatal surge in LH
and testosterone is absent or blunted in infants with hypopituitarism,
cryptorchidism, and complete androgen insensitivity syndrome. The
development of nocturnal pulsatile secretion of LH marks the beginning of puberty.
Within specific target cells, 6–8% of testosterone is converted by
5α-­reductase to DHT, the more potent androgen (see Fig. 622.1), and
approximately 0.3% is acted on by aromatase to produce estradiol.
Approximately half of circulating testosterone is bound to sex hormone–binding globulin and half to albumin; only 2% circulates in the
free form. Plasma levels of sex hormone–binding globulin are low at
birth, rise rapidly during the first 10 days of life, and then remain stable
until the onset of puberty. Thyroid hormone may play a role in this
physiologic increase because neonates with athyreosis (absence of the
thyroid gland) have very low levels of sex hormone–binding globulin.
AMH (previously referred to as müllerian inhibitory substance),
inhibin, and activin are members of the transforming growth factor-­β
(TGF-­β) superfamily of growth factors. This group, which has more
than 45 members, also includes bone morphogenetic proteins. Members of the TGF-­
β superfamily are involved in the regulation of
developmental processes and multiple diverse human disease states,
including chondrodysplasias and cancer.
AMH, a homodimeric glycoprotein hormone encoded by a gene
on chromosome 19, is the earliest secreted product of the Sertoli
cells of the fetal testis. Produced as a prohormone, its carboxyterminal fragment is cleaved to make it active. AMH transcription is initiated by SOX9 acting through the HMG box, and its expression is
upregulated by SF-­1 binding to its promoter and further interacting
with SOX9, WT1, and GATA4. AMH binds to two distinct serine/
threonine receptors, each having a single transmembrane domain.
The activated type 1 receptor signals to the SMAD family of intracellular mediators.
The gene for the AMH receptor (on chromosome 12) is expressed
in Sertoli cells. In the female, it is expressed in fetal müllerian duct
cells and in fetal and postnatal granulosa cells. During sex differentiation in males, AMH causes involution of the müllerian (paramesonephric) ducts, which are embryologic precursors of the cervix
and uterus. It works in concert with SF-­1 to cause involution of the
fallopian tubes.
AMH is secreted in males by Sertoli cells during both fetal and postnatal life. In females, it is secreted by granulosa cells from 36 weeks of
gestation to menopause but at lower levels. The serum concentration
of AMH in males is highest at birth, whereas in females it is highest at
puberty. After puberty, both sexes have similar serum concentrations
of AMH. Its role in postnatal life is not yet fully characterized.
Inhibin is another glycoprotein hormone secreted by the Sertoli
cells of the testes and granulosa and theca cells of the ovary. Inhibin
A consists of an α-­
subunit disulfide linked to the β-­A subunit,

whereas inhibin B consists of the same α subunit linked to the β-­B
subunit. Activins are dimers of the B subunits, either homodimers
(BA/BA, BB/BB) or heterodimers (BA/BB). Inhibins selectively
inhibit, whereas activins stimulate pituitary FSH secretion. By means
of immunoassays specific for inhibin A or B, it has been shown that
inhibin A is absent in males and is present mostly in the luteal phase
in women. Inhibin B is the principal form of inhibin in males and
in females during the follicular phase. Inhibin B may be used as a
marker of Sertoli cell function in males. FSH stimulates inhibin B
secretion in females and males, but only in males is there also evidence for gonadotropin-­independent regulation. Levels of inhibin B
are potentially informative in children with various forms of gonadal
and pubertal disorders. In males with delayed puberty, inhibin B
may be a useful screening test to differentiate between constitutional
delay of puberty and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. In hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, the serum inhibin B level is very low to
undetectable.
Like inhibin and activin, follistatin (a single-­
chain glycosylated
protein) is produced by gonads and other tissues such as the hypothalamus, kidney, adrenal gland, and placenta. Follistatin inhibits FSH
secretion principally by binding activins, thereby blocking the effects of
activins at the level of both ovary and pituitary.
Many additional peptides act as mediators of the development and
function of the testis. They include neurohormones such as growth
hormone–releasing hormone, gonadotropin-­
releasing hormone,
corticotropin-­
releasing hormone, oxytocin, arginine vasopressin,
somatostatin, substance P, and neuropeptide Y; growth factors such as
insulin-­like growth factors (IGFs) and IGF-­binding proteins, TGF-­β,
and fibroblast, platelet-­derived, and nerve growth factors; vasoactive
peptides; and immune-­derived cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor
and interleukins 1, 2, 4, and 6.
Clinical patterns of pubertal changes vary widely (see Chapter 599).
In 95% of males, enlargement of the genitals begins between 9.5 and
13.5 years of age, reaching maturity at 13-­17 years of age. In a minority
of normal males, puberty begins after 15 years of age. In some males,
pubertal development is completed in less than 2 years, but in others
it may take longer than 4.5 years. Pubertal development and the adolescent growth spurt occur at an older age in males than in females by
approximately 2 years.
The median age of sperm production (spermarche) is 14 years. This
event occurs in midpuberty as judged by pubic hair, testis size, evidence of growth spurt, and testosterone levels. Nighttime levels of FSH
are in the adult male range at the time of spermarche; the first conscious ejaculation occurs at about the same time.

FUNCTION OF THE OVARIES

In the normal female, the undifferentiated gonad can be identified histologically as an ovary by 10-­11 weeks of gestation, after the upregulation of R-­spondin1. Oocytes are present from the fourth month of
gestation and reach a peak of 7 million by 5 months of gestation. For
normal maintenance, oocytes need granulosa cells to form primordial
follicles. Functional FSH (but not LH) receptors are present in oocytes
of primary follicles during follicular development. Two normal X chromosomes are needed for maintenance of oocytes. In contrast to somatic
cells, in which only one X chromosome is active, both X chromosomes
are active in germ cells. At birth, the ovaries contain approximately
1 million active follicles, which decrease to 0.5 million by menarche.
Thereafter, they decrease at a rate of 1,000/month and at an even higher
rate after the age of 35 years.
The hormones of the fetal ovary are provided for the most part
by the fetoplacental unit. As in males, peak gonadotropin secretion occurs in fetal life and then again at 2-­3 months of life, with
the lowest levels at about 6 years of age. In contrast to males, the
FSH surge predominates over LH in females. FSH peaks around 3-­6
months of age and declines by 12 months, but remains detectable
for 24 months. Under LH influence, estradiol peaks at 2-­6 months
of age. The inhibin B response is variable, peaking between 2 and
12 months and remaining above prepubertal levels until 24 months.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 623 u Hypofunction of the Testes
In both infancy and childhood, gonadotropin levels are higher in
females than in males.
The most important estrogens produced by the ovary are
estradiol-­17β (E2) and estrone (E1); estriol is a metabolic product
of these two, and all three estrogens may be found in the urine of
mature females. Estrogens also arise from androgens produced by
the adrenal gland and both the female and male gonads (see Fig.
622.1). This conversion explains why in certain types of DSD in
males, feminization occurs at puberty. In 17-­ketosteroid reductase deficiency, for example, the enzymatic block results in markedly increased secretion of androstenedione, which is converted in
the peripheral tissues to estradiol and estrone. These estrogens, in
addition to those directly secreted by the testis, result in gynecomastia. Estradiol produced from testosterone in complete androgen
insensitivity syndrome causes complete feminization in these XY
individuals.
Estrogen regulates a host of functionally different activities in multiple tissues. There are at least two distinct estrogen receptors with different expression patterns. The ovary also synthesizes progesterone, the
main progestational steroid; the adrenal cortex and testis also synthesize progesterone, where it is a precursor for other adrenal and testicular hormones.
A host of other hormones with autocrine, paracrine, and intracrine
effects have been identified in the ovary. They include inhibins, activins, relaxin, and the growth factors IGF-­1, TGF-­α and TGF-­β, and
cytokines.
Plasma levels of estradiol increase slowly but steadily with advancing sexual maturation and correlate well with clinical evaluation of
pubertal development, skeletal age, and rising levels of FSH. Levels of
LH do not rise until secondary sexual characteristics are well developed. Estrogens, like androgens, inhibit secretion of both LH and FSH
(negative feedback). In females, estrogens also provoke the surge of LH
secretion that occurs in the midmenstrual cycle and stimulates ovulation. The capacity for this positive feedback is another maturational
milestone of puberty.
The average age at menarche in American females is approximately
12.5-­13 years, but the range of normal is wide, and 1–2% of normal
females have not menstruated by 16 years of age. The age at onset of
pubertal signs varies, with studies suggesting earlier ages than previously thought, especially in the US Black population (see Chapter
599). Menarche generally correlates closely with skeletal age. Maturation and closure of the epiphyses is estrogen-­dependent, as demonstrated by a very tall 28-­year-­old, normally masculinized male with
continued growth as a result of incomplete closure of the epiphyses,
who had complete estrogen insensitivity caused by an estrogen receptor defect.

DIAGNOSTIC TESTING

In male infants, measurements of LH, FSH, and testosterone can
detect pituitary and testicular defects. Leydig cell integrity in childhood can be determined by the testosterone response after human
chorionic gonadotropin administration. One protocol is to inject
5,000 IU IM daily for 3 days; other protocols are available. The
integrity and maturity of the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­gonadal axis
in males and females can be assessed by measuring serial sex steroid, LH, and FSH levels after the subcutaneous administration of
the gonadotropin-­releasing hormone analog leuprolide. An ultrasensitive LH assay has been shown to differentiate between males
with delayed puberty and those with complete, but not partial,
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism.
The normal range for inhibin B levels has been established in
infant males. Inhibin B may be a marker of spermatogenesis and
also of tumors such as granulosa cell tumors. Inhibins may be
involved in tumor suppression. Estrogen receptor assays may be
clinically useful in the management of various ovarian cancers.
AMH measurements are useful in the evaluation of children with
nonpalpable gonads and DSD.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

3487

Chapter 623

Hypofunction of the
Testes
Omar Ali and Patricia A. Donohoue
Testicular hypofunction during fetal life can be a component of some
types of disorders of sex development (see Chapter 628.2) and may
lead to varying degrees of ambiguous genitalia. After birth, neonates
undergo minipuberty with relatively high levels of gonadotropins and
sex steroids, but this phenomenon is transient, and its absence does
not appear to lead to any obvious clinical findings. Because prepubertal children normally do not produce significant amounts of testosterone and are not yet producing sperm, there are no discernible effects
of testicular hypofunction in this age-­group. Testicular hypofunction
from the age of puberty onward may lead to testosterone deficiency,
infertility, or both. Such hypofunction may be primary in the testes
(primary hypogonadism) or secondary to deficiency of pituitary
gonadotropic hormones (secondary hypogonadism). Insults to the
testes (primary hypogonadism) tend to affect sperm counts more than
testosterone secretion, as the seminiferous tubules take up much more
of the testicular volume than Leydig cells do, so sperm production is
usually affected more than testosterone production. On the other hand,
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism tends to affect both testosterone and
sperm production.
Both types of hypogonadism may be caused by inherited genetic
defects or acquired causes, and in some cases the etiology may be
unclear, but the level of the lesion (primary or secondary) is usually
well defined; patients with primary hypogonadism have elevated levels
of gonadotropins (hypergonadotropic); those with secondary hypogonadism have inappropriately low or absent levels (hypogonadotropic).
Table 623.1 details the etiologic classification of male hypogonadism
(see also Fig. 600.6).

623.1 Hypergonadotropic Hypogonadism in
the Male (Primary Hypogonadism)
Omar Ali and Patricia A. Donohoue
Complete absence or severe dysfunction of the testes in the first trimester will lead to a lack of male sex differentiation and the fetus will have
a female phenotype or pronounced ambiguous genitalia (see Chapter
628). If testicular function is present, sex differentiation is normally
complete by the 14th week of intrauterine life. Testicular dysfunction
after this stage will lead to hypergonadotropic hypogonadism, and this
can occur for a variety of reasons; genetic or chromosomal anomalies
may lead to testicular hypofunction that does not become apparent until the time of puberty, when these males may have delayed or
incomplete pubertal development. In other cases, normally developed
testes may be damaged by infarction, trauma, radiation, chemotherapy,
infections, infiltration, or other causes after sexual differentiation has
occurred. In some cases, genetic defects may predispose to atrophy or
maldescent; torsion or infarction may lead to progressive testicular
damage and atrophy after a period of normal development. If testicular
compromise is global, both testosterone secretion and fertility (sperm
production) are likely to be affected. Even when the primary defect is in
testosterone production, low levels of intratesticular testosterone will
frequently lead to infertility. The reverse is not necessarily true. Defects
in sperm production and in the storage and transit of sperm may not
be associated with low testosterone levels; infertility may thus be seen
in patients with normal testosterone levels, normal libido, and normal
secondary sexual characteristics.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3488 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 623.1  Etiologic Classification of Male
Hypogonadism
HYPERGONADOTROPIC HYPOGONADISM (PRIMARY
HYPOGONADISM; TESTES)
Congenital
Follicle-­stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH)
resistance
Pathogenic variants in steroid synthetic pathways
Gonadal dysgenesis
Klinefelter syndrome (47,XXY)
Noonan syndrome (RASopathy genes)
Cystic fibrosis (infertility)
Acquired
Cryptorchidism (some cases)
Vanishing testes
Chemotherapy
Testicular radiation
Infection (e.g., mumps)
Infarction (testicular torsion)
Trauma
HYPOGONADOTROPIC HYPOGONADISM (SECONDARY
HYPOGONADISM; HYPOTHALAMIC-­PITUITARY)
Congenital
Genetic defects causing Kallmann syndrome and/or normosmic
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (HH)
Other genetic disorders associated with HH: leptin gene, leptin
receptor, DAX1 (dosage-­sensitive/sex-­reversal adrenal hypoplasia
on the X chromosome), SF-­1 (steroidogenic factor-­1)
Inherited syndromes: Prader-­Willi, Bardet-­Biedl, Laurence-­Moon-­
Biedl, Alström
Isolated HH at pituitary level (gonadotropin-­releasing hormone
receptor, FSH and LH β-­subunit)
Multiple pituitary hormone deficiencies: septo-­optic dysplasia
(HESX-­1 in some cases) and other disorders of pituitary
organogenesis (e.g., PROP1, LHX3, LHX4, SOX-­3)
Idiopathic
Acquired
Anorexia nervosa
Drug use
Malnutrition
Chronic illness, especially Crohn disease
Hyperprolactinemia
Pituitary tumors
Pituitary infarction
Infiltrative disorders (e.g., histiocytosis, sarcoidosis)
Hemosiderosis and hemochromatosis
Cranial radiation

Various degrees of primary hypogonadism occur in a significant
percentage of patients with chromosomal aberrations, as in Klinefelter
syndrome, males with more than one X chromosome, and XX males.
These chromosomal anomalies are also associated with other characteristic findings. Noonan syndrome is also associated with cryptorchidism and infertility, but other (nongonadal) features dominate its
clinical picture (see Chapters 100 and 101).

CONGENITAL ANORCHIA OR TESTICULAR
REGRESSION SYNDROME

Males in whom the external genitalia have developed normally (or
nearly normally) and paramesonephric (müllerian) duct derivatives
(uterus, fallopian tubes) are absent have had testicular function for at
least some part of gestation. If their testes cannot be palpated at birth,
they are said to have cryptorchidism. In most such cases, the testes are
undescended or retractile, but in some cases no testes are found in any
location, even after extensive investigation. This syndrome of absence
of testes in a phenotypic male with a normal 46,XY karyotype (indicating that there was some period of testicular function in intrauterine life) is known as vanishing testes, congenital anorchia, or testicular
regression syndrome.

Testicular regression syndrome is not uncommon. Cryptorchidism
occurs in 1.5–9% of male births; in 10–20% of these cases, the testes are
impalpable. Of children with impalpable testes, up to 50% may have no
detectable testes after extensive investigation. Most cases appear to be
sporadic and are thought to be the result of torsion or vascular accidents. The incompletely descended testis may be more prone to torsion, and this may be one of the causes of vanishing testes. Most cases
are sporadic, but in a subset of patients, testicular regression syndrome
occurs in monozygotic twins or in families with other affected individuals, suggesting a genetic etiology. Some cases are associated with
micropenis, and in these cases the testicular loss probably occurred
after the 14th week but well before the time of birth, or this may indicate
a preexisting dysfunction of male hormonal development. Low levels
of testosterone (<10 ng/dL) and markedly elevated levels of luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-­stimulating hormone (FSH) are found
in the early postnatal months; thereafter levels of gonadotropins tend
to decrease even in agonadal children, rising to very high levels again
as the pubertal years approach. Stimulation with human chorionic
gonadotropin (hCG) fails to evoke an increase in the level of testosterone. Serum levels of antimüllerian hormone (AMH) are undetectable
or low. All patients with undetectable testes should be tested for AMH
and should undergo an hCG stimulation test. If the results indicate that
no testicular tissue is present (absent AMH and no rise in testosterone after hCG stimulation), then the diagnosis of testicular regression
syndrome is confirmed. If testosterone secretion is demonstrated, then
imaging with abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and/or
surgical exploration is indicated. A small fibrotic nodule may be found
at the end of the spermatic cord in many cases of testicular regression
syndrome. There is no possibility of normal fertility in these patients.
Treatment of male hypogonadism (primary or secondary) is discussed in Chapter 623.2.

Chemotherapy and Radiation-­Induced
Hypogonadism

Testicular damage is a frequent consequence of chemotherapy and
radiotherapy for cancer. The frequency and extent of damage depend
on the agent used, total dose, duration of therapy, and posttherapy
interval of observation. Another important variable is age at therapy;
it has been suggested that prepubertal testes are less prone to damage
than pubertal testes, though the evidence is not conclusive. Chemotherapy is most damaging if more than one agent is used, and alkylating agents and platinum-­containing agents are the ones most likely
to lead to testicular damage. Although many chemotherapeutic agents
produce azoospermia and infertility, Leydig cell damage (leading to
low testosterone levels) is less common. In many cases the damage
is transient and sperm counts recover after 12-­24 months. The use of
alkylating agents such as cyclophosphamide in prepubertal children
may not impair pubertal development, even though there may be
biopsy evidence of germ cell damage. Cisplatin causes transient azoospermia or oligospermia at lower doses, whereas higher doses (400-­
600 mg/m2) can cause permanent infertility. Interleukin 2 can depress
Leydig cell function, whereas interferon-­α does not seem to affect
gonadal function. Both chemotherapy and radiotherapy are associated
with an increase in the percentage of abnormal gametes, but data concerning the outcomes of pregnancies after such therapy have not shown
any increase in genetically mediated birth defects, possibly because of
selection bias against abnormal sperm.
Radiation damage is dose dependent. Temporary oligospermia can
be seen with doses as low as 0.1 Gy, with permanent azoospermia seen
with doses greater than 2 Gy. Recovery of spermatogenesis can be seen
5 years (or more) after irradiation, with higher doses leading to slower
recovery. Leydig cells are more resistant to irradiation. Mild damage as
determined by elevated LH levels can be seen with up to 6 Gy; doses
greater than 30 Gy cause hypogonadism in most patients. Whenever
possible, testes should be shielded from irradiation. Testicular function should be carefully evaluated in adolescents after multimodal
treatment for cancer in childhood. Replacement therapy with testosterone and counseling concerning fertility may be indicated. The storage of sperm before chemotherapy or radiation treatment in pubertal

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 623 u Hypofunction of the Testes
and postpubertal males is an option. Even in those cases where sperm
counts are abnormal, recovery is possible, though the chances of recovery decline with increasing dose of radiation. If sperm counts remain
low, fertility is still possible in some cases with testicular sperm extraction and intracytoplasmic sperm injection.

Sertoli Cell–Only Syndrome

Small testes and azoospermia are seen in patients with the extremely
rare Sertoli cell–only syndrome (SCO, germ cell aplasia, or Del Castillo syndrome). These patients have no germ cells in the testes but
usually have normal testosterone production and present as adults
with infertility. Typically, patients have small testes and elevated FSH
levels with normal LH and testosterone. They may have gynecomastia
because of FSH stimulation of aromatase activity. Inhibin B levels may
be decreased when compared with individuals with normal spermatogenesis. Most cases are sporadic and idiopathic, but large deletions
involving the azoospermia factor (AZF) region of the Y chromosome
(Yq11) may be found in some cases. Y chromosome microdeletions are
also occasionally identified as a cause of SCO syndrome.

Other Causes of Testicular Hypofunction

Atrophy of the testes may follow damage to the vascular supply because
of manipulation of the testes during surgical procedures for correction
of cryptorchidism or because of bilateral torsion of the testes. Cryptorchidism is a common condition (found in 3% of male children at birth,
decreasing to 1% by age 6 months), and guidelines stress the importance of treatment before age 12 months (or even earlier) to maximize
future fertility. But a small percentage of cases will develop fertility
issues even when surgical treatment is successful and is completed
within the first year of life. These cases may represent intrauterine damage, surgical damage, or genetic defects in testicular development and
are therefore included among the causes of testicular hypofunction.
Acute orchitis is common in pubertal or adult males with mumps
and may lead to subfertility in ∼10% of cases, though infertility is
rare. Testosterone secretion usually remains normal. The incidence
of mumps orchitis in postpubertal males has increased in some areas
because of a decrease in measles, mumps, and rubella vaccination
uptake. Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy may be associated with
primary hypogonadism (associated with anti-­P450scc antibodies), but
this appears to be more common in females.

Testicular Dysgenesis Syndrome

The incidence of testicular cancer has increased in many developed
societies, and the incidence of cryptorchidism, hypospadias, low
sperm counts, and sperm abnormalities also appears to have increased
in some, but not all, studies. It has been proposed that all these trends
are linked by prenatal testicular dysgenesis. The hypothesis is that some
degree of testicular dysgenesis develops in intrauterine life from genetic
and environmental factors and is associated with an increased risk of
cryptorchidism, hypospadias, hypofertility, and testicular cancer. The
environmental influences that have been implicated in this syndrome
include environmental chemicals that act as endocrine disruptors, such
as bisphenol A and phthalates (components of many types of plastics),
several pesticides, phytoestrogens or mycoestrogens, and other chemicals. The fact that these lesions can be reproduced in some animal
models by environmental chemicals has led to efforts to remove these
chemicals from products used by infants and pregnant mothers and
from the environment in general. Nonetheless the evidence is only suggestive and not conclusive.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Primary hypogonadism may be suspected at birth if the testes and
penis are abnormally small. Normative data are available for different
populations. The condition is often not noticed until puberty, when
secondary sex characteristics fail to develop. Facial, pubic, and axillary hair are scant or absent; there is neither acne nor regression of
scalp hair; and the voice remains high pitched. The penis and scrotum
remain infantile and may be almost obscured by pubic fat; the testes
are small or not palpable. Fat accumulates in the region of the hips

3489

and buttocks and sometimes in the breasts and on the abdomen. The
epiphyses close later than normal; therefore the extremities are long.
The span may be several inches longer than the height, and the distance
from the symphysis pubis to the soles of the feet (lower segment) is
much greater than that from the symphysis to the vertex (upper segment). The proportions of the body are described as eunuchoid. The
ratio of the upper to lower segment is considerably less than 0.9. Many
individuals with milder degrees of hypogonadism may be detected only
by appropriate studies of the pituitary-­gonadal axis. Examination of the
testes should be performed routinely by the pediatrician; testicular volumes as determined by comparison with standard orchidometers or by
measurement of linear dimensions should be recorded.

DIAGNOSIS

Levels of serum FSH and, to a lesser extent, of LH are elevated to
greater than age-­specific normal values in early infancy (when minipuberty normally occurs and the gonadotropins are normally disinhibited). This is followed by a time when even agonadal children may
not exhibit significant elevation in gonadotropins, indicating that the
gonadotropins are also suppressed at this stage by some mechanism
independent of feedback inhibition by gonadal hormones. In the latter
half of childhood and several years before the onset of puberty, this
inhibition is released and gonadotropin levels again rise above age-­
based normal levels in subjects with primary hypogonadism. These
elevated levels indicate that even in the prepubertal child there is an
active hypothalamic-­gonadal feedback relationship. After the age of
11 years, FSH and LH levels rise significantly, reaching the agonadal
range. Measurements of random plasma testosterone levels in prepubertal males are not helpful because they are low in normal prepubertal
children, rising during puberty to attain adult levels. During puberty,
these levels, when measured in an early morning blood sample, correlate better with testicular size, stage of sexual maturity, and bone age
than with chronological age. In patients with primary hypogonadism,
testosterone levels remain low at all ages. There is an attenuated rise or
no rise at all after administration of hCG, in contrast to normal males
in whom hCG produces a significant rise in plasma testosterone at any
stage of development.
AMH is secreted by the Sertoli cells, and this secretion is suppressed
by testosterone. AMH levels are elevated in prepubertal males and suppressed at the onset of puberty. Males with primary hypogonadism
continue to have elevated AMH levels in puberty. Detection of AMH
may be used in the prepubertal years as an indicator of the presence of
testicular tissue (e.g., in patients with bilateral cryptorchidism). Inhibin
B is also secreted by the Sertoli cells, is present throughout childhood,
and rises at the onset of puberty (more in males than in females). It may
be used as another marker of the presence of testicular tissue in bilateral
cryptorchidism and as a marker of spermatogenesis (e.g., in delayed
puberty, cancer survivors, and patients with Noonan syndrome). Bone
age x-­rays are useful to document delayed bone age in patients with
constitutional growth delay as well as primary hypogonadism.

NOONAN SYNDROME

The term Noonan syndrome has been applied to males and females with
normal karyotypes who have certain phenotypic features that occur
also in females with Turner syndrome (although the genetic causes are
completely distinct) (see Chapter 101). Males with this syndrome frequently have cryptorchidism and small testes. Testosterone secretion
may be low or normal, but spermatogenesis may be affected even in
those with normal testosterone (and normal secondary sexual characteristics). Serum inhibin-­B is a useful marker of Sertoli cell function in
these patients. Puberty is delayed, and adult height is achieved by the
end of the second decade; the syndrome is discussed in detail in Chapter 101. Patients with significant hypogonadism will need treatment as
discussed in Chapter 623.2.

KLINEFELTER SYNDROME

See also Chapter 99.4.
Klinefelter syndrome is the most common sex chromosomal aneuploidy in males, with an incidence of 0.1–0.2% in the general population

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3490 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
(1 in 500-­1,000) and rising to 4% among infertile males and 10–11% in
those with oligospermia or azoospermia. Approximately 80% of them
have a 47,XXY chromosome complement, whereas mosaics and higher
degrees of poly-­X are seen in the remaining 20%. Even with as many
as four X chromosomes, the Y chromosome determines a male phenotype. The chromosomal aberration most often results from meiotic
nondisjunction of an X chromosome during parental gametogenesis;
the extra X chromosome is maternal in origin in 54% and paternal in
origin in 46% of patients. A national study in Denmark revealed a prenatal prevalence of 213 per 100,000 male fetuses, but in adult men the
prevalence was only 40 per 100,000, suggesting that 25% of adult males
with Klinefelter syndrome were diagnosed. The incidence of Klinefelter
syndrome increases with maternal age and possibly also with paternal
age.

Clinical Manifestations

In patients who do not have a prenatal diagnosis, the diagnosis is rarely
made before puberty because of the paucity or subtlety of clinical
manifestations in childhood. Behavioral or psychiatric disorders may
be apparent long before defects in sexual development. These children
tend to have learning disabilities and deficits in executive function
(concept formation, problem solving, task switching, and planning),
and the condition should be considered in males with psychosocial,
learning, or school adjustment problems. Affected children may be
anxious, immature, or excessively shy and tend to have difficulty in
social interactions throughout life. In a prospective study, a group of
children with 47,XXY karyotypes identified at birth exhibited relatively
mild deviations from normal during the first 5 years of life. None had
major physical, intellectual, or emotional disabilities; some were inactive, with poorly organized motor function and mild delay in language
acquisition. Problems often first become apparent after the child begins
school. Full-­scale IQ scores may be normal, with verbal IQ being somewhat decreased. Verbal cognitive defects and underachievement in
reading, spelling, and mathematics are common. By late adolescence,
many males with Klinefelter syndrome have generalized learning disabilities, most of which are language based. Despite these difficulties,
most complete high school.
The patients tend to be tall and slim and have a specific tendency
to have long legs (disproportionate to the arms and longer than those
seen with other causes of hypogonadism), but body habitus can vary
markedly. The testes tend to be small for age, but this sign may become
apparent only after puberty, when normal testicular growth fails to
occur. The phallus tends to be smaller than average, and cryptorchidism is more common than in the general population. Bone mineral
density may be low in adults with Klinefelter syndrome, and this correlates with lower testosterone levels.
Pubertal development may be delayed, although some children
undergo apparently normal or nearly normal virilization. Despite
normal testosterone levels, serum LH and FSH concentrations and
their responses to gonadotropin-­releasing hormone (GnRH) stimulation are elevated starting at around 13 years of age. Approximately
50–80% of adults have gynecomastia; they have sparser facial hair. The
most common testicular lesions are spermatogenic arrest and Sertoli
cell predominance. The sperm have a high incidence of sex chromosomal aneuploidy. Azoospermia and infertility are usual, although rare
instances of fertility are known. It is now clear that germ cell numbers
and sperm counts are higher in early puberty and decline with age. Testicular sperm extraction followed by intracytoplasmic sperm injection
can result in the birth of healthy infants, with success rates declining
with increasing age. In nonmosaic Klinefelter patients, most testicular
sperm (94%) have a normal pattern of sex chromosome segregation,
indicating that meiotic checkpoints can remove most aneuploid cells.
Antisperm antibodies have been detected in 25% of tested specimens.
There is an increased incidence in adulthood of central adiposity,
metabolic syndrome, pulmonary disease, varicose veins, and cancer
of the breast. Among 93 unselected male breast cancer patients, 7.5%
were found to have Klinefelter syndrome. Mediastinal germ cell tumors
have been reported; some of these tumors produce hCG and cause
precocious puberty in young males. They may also be associated with

leukemia, lymphoma, and other types of hematologic neoplasia. The
highest cancer risk (relative risk: 2.7) occurs in the 15-­to 30-­year age-­
group. A large cohort study in Britain demonstrated an overall significantly increased standardized mortality ratio, with increases in deaths
from diabetes, epilepsy, peripheral and intestinal vascular sufficiency,
pulmonary embolism, and renal disease. Mortality from ischemic
heart disease was decreased. In adults, structural brain abnormalities
correlate with cognitive deficits.
Patients with Klinefelter syndrome also have an increased risk of
autoimmune disorders. It seems that the presence of one or more X
chromosomes changes the risk of autoimmune disorders, which are
similar to those seen in XX females. These patients have an increased
incidence of rheumatoid arthritis, Sjogren syndrome, systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE), and other autoimmune disorders.
In adults with XY/XXY mosaicism, the features of Klinefelter syndrome are decreased in severity and frequency. Children with mosaicism have a better prognosis for virilization, fertility, and psychosocial
adjustment.

Klinefelter Variants and Other Poly-­X Syndromes

When the number of X chromosomes exceeds two, the clinical manifestations, including intellectual disability and impairment of virilization, are more severe. Height decreases with increasing number of X
chromosomes. The XXYY variant is the most common variant (1 in
18,000-­40,000 male births). In most, intellectual disability occurs with
IQ scores between 60 and 80, but 10% have IQs greater than 110. The
XXYY male phenotype is not distinctively different from that of the
XXY patient except that XXYY adults tend to be taller than the average XXY patient. The 49,XXXXY variant is sufficiently distinctive to
be detected in childhood. Its incidence is estimated to be 1 in 80,000-­
100,000 male births. The disorder arises from sequential nondisjunction in meiosis. Affected patients are severely cognitively impaired and
have short necks and typical coarse facies. The eyes are wide set, with a
mild upward slant of the fissures as well as epicanthus and strabismus;
the nose is upturned, wide, and flat; also noted is a large open mouth
and large malformed ears. The testes are small and may be undescended,
the scrotum is hypoplastic, and the penis is very small. Defects suggestive of Down syndrome (short, incurved terminal fifth phalanges,
single palmar creases, and hypotonia) and other skeletal abnormalities
(including defects in the carrying angle of the elbows and restricted
supination) are common. The most frequent radiographic abnormalities are radioulnar synostosis or dislocation, elongated radius, pseudoepiphyses, scoliosis or kyphosis, coxa valga, and retarded bone age.
Most patients with such extensive changes have a 49,XXXXY chromosome karyotype; several mosaic patterns have also been observed:
48,XXXY/49,XXXXY;
48,XXXY/49,XXXXY/50,XXXXXY;
and
48,XXXY/49,XXXXY/50,XXXXYY. Prenatal diagnosis of a 49,XXXXY
infant has been reported. The fetus had intrauterine growth restriction,
edema, and cystic hygroma colli.
The 48,XXXY variant is relatively rare. The characteristic features
are generally less severe than those of patients with 49,XXXXY and
more severe than those of 47,XXY patients. Mild intellectual disability,
delayed speech and motor development, and immature but passive and
pleasant behavior are associated with this condition.
Very few patients have been described with 48,XYYY and 49,XXYYY
karyotypes. Dysmorphic features and cognitive impairment are common to both.

Laboratory Findings

Most males with Klinefelter syndrome go through life undiagnosed.
The chromosomes should be examined in all patients suspected of
having Klinefelter syndrome, particularly those attending child guidance, psychiatric, and cognitive disability clinics. In infancy, inhibin
B and AMH levels are normal but testosterone levels are lower than
in controls. Before 10 years of age, males with 47,XXY Klinefelter syndrome have normal basal plasma levels of FSH and LH. Responses to
gonadotropin-­stimulating hormone and to hCG are normal. The testes
show normal growth early in puberty, but by midpuberty the testicular
growth stops, gonadotropins become elevated, and testosterone levels

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 623 u Hypofunction of the Testes
are slightly low. Inhibin B levels are normal in early puberty, decrease
in late puberty, and are low in adults with the syndrome. Elevated levels of estradiol, resulting in a high ratio of estradiol to testosterone,
account for the development of gynecomastia during puberty. Sex
hormone–binding globulin levels are elevated, further decreasing free
testosterone levels. A long androgen receptor polyglutamine (CAG)
repeat length is associated with the more severe phenotype, including
gynecomastia, small testes, and short penile length.
Testicular biopsy before puberty may reveal only deficiency or
absence of germinal cells. After puberty, the seminiferous tubular
membranes are hyalinized and there is adenomatous clumping of Leydig cells. Sertoli cells predominate. Azoospermia is characteristic, and
infertility is the rule.

Management

Males known to have Klinefelter syndrome should be monitored
closely for speech, learning, and behavioral problems; they should be
referred for early evaluation and treatment as needed. Testosterone,
LH, and FSH levels should be checked at 11-­12 years of age; replacement therapy with testosterone is recommended once FSH and LH
begin to rise above normal. Fasting glucose, lipids, and hemoglobin
A1C should also be obtained, as these children are at risk for central
adiposity and metabolic syndrome. A baseline dual-­
energy x-­
ray
absorptiometry scan to assess bone density is also recommended by
some authorities. Although testosterone treatment will normalize
testosterone levels, stimulate the development of secondary sexual
characteristics, increase bone and muscle mass, and improve body
composition, it will not improve fertility (and will, in fact, suppress
spermatogenesis). There is some evidence that it also improves mood
and may have a positive effect on cognition and social functioning,
but the findings are not conclusive at this time. Either long-­acting testosterone injections or a daily application of testosterone gel may be
used (testosterone patches have a high incidence of skin rash and are
not frequently used in pediatrics). Testosterone enanthate or cypionate
ester may be used in a starting dose of 25-­50 mg injected intramuscularly or subcutaneously every 3-­4 weeks, with 50-­mg increments every
6-­12 months until a maintenance dose for adults (200-­250 mg every
3-­4 weeks) is achieved. At that time, testosterone patches or testosterone gel may be substituted for the injections. Depending on patient
and physician preference, transdermal testosterone may also be used
as initial treatment instead of injections. For older males, larger initial
doses and increments can achieve more rapid virilization. The various
transdermal preparations differ somewhat, and standard references
should be consulted for recommendations regarding dosage and mode
of application.
Gynecomastia may be treated with aromatase inhibitors (which will
also increase endogenous testosterone levels), but medical treatment
is not always successful and plastic surgery may be needed. Fertility is
usually not an issue in the pediatric age-­group, but adults can father
children using testicular sperm extraction followed by intracytoplasmic sperm injection. Because sperm counts decrease rapidly after the
onset of puberty in children with Klinefelter syndrome, sperm banking
during early puberty is an option that can be discussed with a fertility
specialist. Sperm counts can be stimulated using hCG treatment before
testicular sperm extraction. Therapy, counseling, and psychiatric services should be provided as needed for learning difficulties and psychosocial disabilities.

XX MALES

This disorder is thought to occur in 1 in 20,000 newborn males.
Affected individuals have a male phenotype, small testes, a small phallus, and no evidence of ovarian or müllerian duct tissue. They therefore appear to be distinct from those with the ovotesticular disorder of
sexual development. Undescended testes and hypospadias occur in a
minority of patients. Infertility occurs in practically all cases, and the
histologic features of the testes are essentially the same as in Klinefelter
syndrome. Patients with the condition usually come to medical attention in adult life because of hypogonadism, gynecomastia, or infertility. Hypergonadotropic hypogonadism occurs secondary to testicular

3491

failure. A few cases have been diagnosed perinatally as a result of discrepancies between prenatal ultrasonography and karyotype findings.
In 90% of XX males with normal male external genitalia, one of
the X chromosomes carries the SRY (sex-­determining region on the
Y chromosome) gene. The exchange from the Y to the X chromosome occurs during paternal meiosis, when the short arms of the Y
and X chromosomes pair. XX males inherit one maternal X chromosome and one paternal X chromosome containing the translocated male-­determining gene. A few cases of 46,XX males with 9P
translocations have also been identified. Most XX males who are
identified before puberty have hypospadias or a micropenis; this
group of patients may lack Y-­specific sequences, suggesting other
mechanisms for virilization. Fluorescent in situ hybridization and
primed in situ labeling have been used to identify small SRY DNA
segments. Yp fragment abnormalities may result in sexually ambiguous phenotypes.

45,X MALES

In a few male patients recognized with a 45,X karyotype, Yp sequences
are translocated to an autosomal chromosome. In one instance, the
terminal short arm of the Y chromosome was translocated onto an
X chromosome. In another, SRY/autosomal translocation was postulated. A male with the 45,X karyotype and Leri-­Weill dyschondrosteosis, SHOX gene loss, and an SRY to Xp translocation has also been
described.

47,XXX MALES

A Japanese male with poor pubic hair development, hypoplastic scrotal testes (4 mL), normal penis and normal height, gynecomastia, and
severe cognitive impairment had 47,XXX karyotype caused by an
abnormal X-­Y interchange during paternal meiosis and X-­X nondisjunction during maternal meiosis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

623.2 Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism in
the Male (Secondary Hypogonadism)
Omar Ali and Patricia A. Donohoue
In hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (HH), lack of gonadal function is
secondary to deficiency of one or both gonadotropins: FSH or LH. The
primary defect may lie either in the anterior pituitary or in the hypothalamus. Hypothalamic etiologies result in deficiency of GnRH. The
testes are normal but remain in the prepubertal state because stimulation by gonadotropins is lacking. The disorder may be recognized in
infancy but is much more commonly recognized because of marked
pubertal delay. Rarely, patients with a milder inherited form of HH may
go through puberty and may present with hypogonadism as adults.
HH may be genetic or acquired (Table 623.2). Several different genes
can cause inherited forms of HH; the affected genes may be upstream
of GnRH, at the level of GnRH receptors, or at the level of gonadotropin
production. In addition, various genetic defects in transcription factors—such as POUF-­1, LHX-­3, LHX-­4, and HESX-­1—lead to defects
in pituitary development and multiple pituitary hormone deficiencies,
including deficiency of gonadotropins. Acquired pituitary gonadotropin deficiency may develop from various lesions in the hypothalamic-­
pituitary region (e.g., tumors, infiltrative disease, autoimmune disease,
trauma, stroke).

ISOLATED GONADOTROPIN DEFICIENCY

Isolated gonadotropin deficiency in which other pituitary hormone
levels are normal is more likely to be from defects in the secretion of
GnRH from the hypothalamus rather than defects in gonadotropin
synthesis in the pituitary. It affects approximately 1 in 10,000 males and
1 in 50,000 females and encompasses a heterogeneous group of entities. Many cases are associated with anosmia, and this combination of
anosmia and HH defines Kallmann syndrome.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3492 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 623.2  Forms of Congenital Hypogonadotropic
Hypogonadism and Differential Diagnosis
FORMS OF CHH
GnRH Deficiency and Defective Sense of Smell
Kallmann syndrome
Isolated GnRH Deficiency (Normal Sense of Smell)
Normosmic CHH
Complex Syndromes Including CHH or KS
Combined pituitary hormone deficiency
Septo-­optic dysplasia
CHARGE syndrome
Adrenal hypoplasia congenita with HH
Waardenburg syndrome
Bardet-­Biedl syndrome
Gordon Holmes syndrome
Others
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Functional Causes
Malnutrition and/or malabsorption
Any chronic disease (e.g., IBD or asthma)
Celiac disease
Eating disorders
Excessive exercise
Systemic Causes
Hemochromatosis
Sarcoidosis
Histiocytosis
Thalassemia
Acquired Causes
Hyperprolactinemia
Pituitary adenomas and/or brain tumors
Rathke cleft cyst
Pituitary apoplexy
Radiation (brain or pituitary)
Medication induced (such as by steroids, opiates, or chemotherapy)
CHARGE, Coloboma, heart defects, atresia of choanae, retardation of growth and/
or development, genital and/or urinary defects, ear anomalies or deafness; CHH,
congenital hypogonadotropic hypogonadism; GnRH, gonadotropin-­releasing
hormone; HH, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism; IBD, inflammatory bowel disease;
KS, Kallmann syndrome.
From Boehm U, Bouloux PM, Dattani MT, et al. European consensus statement on
congenital hypogonadotropic hypogonadism—pathogenesis, diagnosis and treatment.
Nat Rev. 2015;11:547–564. Box 2.

Kallmann syndrome is the most common form of HH and is genetically heterogeneous, with autosomal recessive, X-­linked, and autosomal dominant forms of inheritance. Clinically it is characterized by
its association with anosmia or hyposmia; 85% of cases appear to be
autosomal and 15% are X-­linked, but a specific genetic defect may
not be identified in more than half of the cases of HH. There is a wide
spectrum of severity and associated features in patients with Kallmann
syndrome, and the same genetic pathogenic variants may be associated
with different phenotypes, even within the same family. Some kindreds
contain anosmic individuals with or without hypogonadism; others
contain hypogonadal individuals who are anosmic. Cleft lip and palate,
hypotelorism, median facial clefts, sensorineural hearing loss, unilateral renal aplasia, neurologic deficits, and other findings occur in some
affected patients.
The X-­linked form (ANOS1, formerly known as KAL1) is caused by
variants of ANOS1 at Xp22.3. This leads to failure of olfactory axons
and GnRH-­expressing neurons to migrate from their common origin in the olfactory placode to the brain. The ANOS1 gene product
anosmin-­1, an extracellular 95-­kDa matrix glycoprotein, facilitates
neuronal growth and migration. The ANOS1 gene is also expressed
in various parts of the brain, facial mesenchyme, and mesonephros
and metanephros, thus explaining some of the associated findings in

patients with Kallmann syndrome, such as synkinesia (mirror movements), hearing loss, midfacial defects, and renal agenesis.
When Kallmann syndrome is caused by terminal or interstitial deletions of the Xp22.3 region, it may be associated with other contiguous
gene syndromes, such as steroid sulfatase deficiency, chondrodysplasia
punctata, X-­linked ichthyosis, or ocular albinism.
The autosomal dominant form of Kallmann syndrome (sometimes
referred to as KAL2) occurs in up to 10% of patients and is caused by
a loss-­of-­function pathogenic variant in the fibroblast growth factor
receptor 1 (FGFR1) gene. Cleft lip and palate are associated with this
form, but not with the X-­linked form. Oligodontia and hearing loss
may occur with both KAL1 and KAL2.
A variety of other genes—including SOX10, FGF8, PROK2/PROKR2,
NELF, CHD7 (responsible for CHARGE [coloboma of the eye, heart
anomaly, choanal atresia, retardation, and genital and ear anomalies]
syndrome, which includes hypogonadism in its phenotype), HS6ST1,
WDR11, and SEMA3A—are associated with defects in neuronal migration that can result in Kallmann syndrome.

Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism Without Anosmia

A specific genetic defect is not found in most cases of normosmic idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (IHH), but the list of genes
associated with this disorder is growing; pathogenic variants in KISS1/
KISS1R, TAC3/TACR3, and GNRH1/GNRHR lead to abnormalities in
the secretion and action of GnRH and are seen exclusively in patients
with normosmic IHH. Variants in FGFR1, FGF8, PROKR2, CHD7, and
WDR11 more commonly present with anosmia/hyposmia (Kallmann
syndrome) but are also associated with normosmic IHH in some cases.
It appears that kisspeptin (the gene product of the KISS1 gene) and
its G protein–coupled receptor (GPCR54) play an important role in
triggering puberty in humans and act downstream of the leptin receptor in this pathway. Rare cases of leptin deficiency and leptin receptor defects are also associated with HH. In addition, starvation and
anorexia are associated with hypogonadism, most likely acting via the
leptin pathway.
There are no known human variants of the GnRH gene, but several
families with variants in the GnRH receptor have been described. These
variants account for 2–14% of IHH without anosmia. The severity of
the defect is variable, and many patients will respond to high-­dose
GnRH with increased gonadotropin secretion, indicating that the
receptor defect is partial.
Variants in gonadotropin genes are extremely rare. Variants in the
common α-­subunit are not known in humans. Variants in the LH-­β
subunit have been described in a few individuals and may lead to low,
absent, or elevated LH levels, depending on the variant. This leads to
testosterone deficiency (diminished Leydig cell function), but because
intratesticular testosterone is critical for spermatogenesis, this also
leads to diminished sperm counts. Defects in the FSH-­β subunit may
be the cause of azoospermia in a few rare cases. Interestingly these
patients may also have testosterone deficiency, indicating that Sertoli
cells also play a role in supporting normal Leydig cell function.
Children with X-­linked adrenal hypoplasia congenita (AHC) have
associated HH because of impaired GnRH secretion. In these patients,
there is a pathogenic variant of DAX1 at Xp21.2-­21.3. This region of the
X chromosome includes genes for glycerol kinase, Duchenne muscular dystrophy, and ornithine transcarbamoyltransferase (OTC); these
genes may be affected as part of a contiguous gene deletion syndrome
that includes AHC, glycerol kinase deficiency, Duchenne muscular dystrophy, and OTC deficiency. Most males with DAX1 variants
develop HH in adolescence, although a patient with adult-­onset adrenal insufficiency and partial HH and two females with HH and delayed
puberty have also been described, the latter as part of extended families
including males with classic HH. The DAX1 gene defect is, however,
rare in patients with delayed puberty or HH without at least a family
history of adrenal failure (see Chapter 616).
It should be noted that genotype-­phenotype correlations in IHH
appear to be complex, and pedigrees with digenic or oligogenic inheritance have been described. The same genetic defect may be associated
with Kallmann syndrome, normosmic IHH, additional birth defects,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 623 u Hypofunction of the Testes
delayed normal puberty, or an apparently normal phenotype. This variability has been observed more frequently in kindreds with pathogenic
variants in FGF8/FGFR1 and in PROK2/PROKR2 ligand-­receptor pairs
and may result from other interacting genes, epigenetic effects, or environmental factors.

OTHER DISORDERS WITH HYPOGONADOTROPIC
HYPOGONADISM

HH has been observed in a few patients with polyglandular autoimmune syndrome, in some with elevated melatonin levels, and in those
with a variety of other syndromes, such as Bardet-­Biedl, Prader-­Willi,
multiple lentigines, and several ataxia syndromes. In rare cases, HH
is associated with complex chromosomal abnormalities.

HYPOGONADOTROPIC HYPOGONADISM
ASSOCIATED WITH OTHER PITUITARY HORMONE
DEFICIENCIES

Defects in pituitary transcription factors such as PROP-­1, HESX-­
1, LHX-­4, SOX-­3, and LHX-­3 lead to multiple pituitary deficiencies
including HH. Most of these present with multiple pituitary hormone
deficiency in infancy, but some cases (especially with PROP-­1 pathogenic variants) may present with hypogonadism or hypoadrenalism
in adult life. Growth hormone is almost always affected in multiple
pituitary hormone deficiency, but thyroid-­stimulating hormone and
adrenocorticotropic hormone may be spared in some cases. In patients
with organic lesions in or near the pituitary, the gonadotropin deficiency is usually pituitary in origin.

DIAGNOSIS

Levels of gonadotropins and gonadal steroids are normally elevated
for up to 6 months after birth (minipuberty); if the diagnosis of HH
is suspected in early infancy, these levels will be found to be inappropriately low. By the second half of the first year of life, these normally decline to nearly undetectable levels and remain suppressed
until late childhood. Routine laboratory tests cannot distinguish
HH from normal suppression of gonadotropins in this age-­group.
At the normal age of puberty, these patients fail to show clinical
signs of puberty or a normal increase in LH and FSH levels. Children with constitutional delay of growth and puberty will have the
same clinical picture and similar laboratory findings (these cases are
far more common than true HH, especially in males), and their differentiation from patients with HH is extremely difficult. Dynamic
testing with GnRH or hCG may not be able to distinguish these
groups in a reliable manner. A testosterone level greater than 50 ng/
dL (1.7 nmol/L) generally indicates that normal puberty is likely,
but a lower level does not reliably distinguish these groups. At least
one study showed that an inhibin B level of <35 pg/mL in Tanner
stage 1 and <65 pg/mL in Tanner stage 2 may be able to distinguish
IHH from constitutional delay in males, but no single test will reliably distinguish these conditions in all patients.
Insulin-­
like growth factor-­
1, thyroid-­
stimulating hormone, free
thyroxine, and morning cortisol levels should be checked to assess
the status of other anterior pituitary hormones; dynamic testing for
growth hormone deficiency and adrenal insufficiency may be necessary if these are abnormal or equivocal. HH is very likely if the patient
has evidence of another pituitary deficiency, such as a deficiency of
growth hormone, particularly if it is associated with adrenocorticotropic hormone deficiency. Hyperprolactinemia is a known cause of
delayed puberty and should be excluded by determination of serum
prolactin levels in all patients. The presence of anosmia usually indicates permanent gonadotropin deficiency, but occasional instances of
markedly delayed puberty (18-­20 years of age) have been observed in
anosmic individuals. Although anosmia may be present in the family
or in the patient from early childhood, its existence is rarely volunteered, and direct questioning is necessary in all patients with delayed
puberty. Formal olfactometry, such as the University of Pennsylvania
Smell Identification Test, is advisable to determine if partial degrees of
hyposmia are present, because IHH patients display a broad spectrum
of olfactory function.

3493

In the absence of family history, it may not be possible to make the
diagnosis of HH with certainty, but the diagnosis will become more
and more likely as puberty is delayed further beyond the normal age.
If pubertal delay persists beyond age 18 years with low 8 am testosterone levels and inappropriately low gonadotropins (normal values
are inappropriately low in this setting), then the patient can be presumptively diagnosed with HH. An MRI of the brain is indicated to
look for tumors and other anomalies in the hypothalamic-­pituitary
region. Genetic testing for pituitary transcription factors and several of
the genes involved in isolated HH is also available and should be performed when possible. A renal ultrasound is recommended in patients
with Kallmann syndrome because of its association with unilateral
renal agenesis. Some authorities also recommend obtaining a baseline
bone-­density evaluation.

TREATMENT

Constitutional delay of puberty should be ruled out before a diagnosis
of HH is established and treatment is initiated. Testicular volume of less
than 4 mL by 14 years of age occurs in approximately 3% of males, but
most of these are cases of constitutional delay of puberty, and true HH
is a rare condition. Although constitutional delay is a benign condition
that will (by definition) resolve spontaneously, even relatively moderate delays in sexual development and growth may result in significant
psychologic distress and require attention. Initially an explanation of
the variations characteristics of puberty and reassurance suffice for the
majority of males. If by 15 years of age no clinical evidence of puberty
is apparent and the testosterone level is <50 ng/dL, a brief course of
testosterone may be recommended. Various regimens are used, including testosterone enanthate or cypionate 100 mg intramuscularly once
monthly for 4-­6 months or 150 mg once monthly for 3 months. Some
practitioners use oral oxandrolone in a dose of 1.25-­2.5 mg daily for
6-­12 months, which has the theoretical advantage that it is not aromatized and may have less effect on bone age advancement (though definitive evidence of advantage is lacking). Oral oxandrolone may cause
hepatic dysfunction, and liver function tests should be monitored if it is
used. Treatment is not necessary in all cases of constitutional delay, but
if used it is usually followed by normal progression through puberty,
and this may differentiate constitutional delay in puberty from isolated
gonadotropin deficiency. The age of initiation of this treatment must
be individualized.
If puberty fails to progress spontaneously after a short course of testosterone has been attempted, then HH becomes the likely diagnosis
and necessitates continuous use of testosterone for normal pubertal
development. At this point the patient should undergo an MRI scan
and genetic testing to try to make a specific diagnosis. Once a diagnosis of HH has been made, treatment with testosterone will induce
secondary sexual characteristics but will not stimulate testicular
growth or spermatogenesis. Treatment with gonadotropins (either as
a combination of hCG and human menopausal gonadotropins or as
GnRH pulse therapy) will lead to testicular development, including
spermatogenesis, but it is much more complex to manage, so in most
cases testosterone treatment is still the best option. Either long-­acting
testosterone injections or a daily application of testosterone gel may be
used (testosterone patches have a high incidence of skin rash and are
infrequently used in pediatrics). Testosterone enanthate or cypionate
ester may be used in a starting dose of 25-­50 mg injected intramuscularly or subcutaneously every 3-­4 weeks, with 50-­mg increments every
6-­9 months until a maintenance dose for adults (200-­250 mg every 3-­4
weeks) is achieved. At that time, testosterone patches or testosterone
gel may be substituted for the injections. Depending on patient and
physician preference, transdermal testosterone may also be used as initial treatment instead of injections. For older males, larger initial doses
and increments can achieve more rapid virilization.
Treatment with gonadotropins is more physiologic but is expensive
and complex, so it is less commonly used in adolescence. This treatment may be attempted in adult life when fertility is desired. The treatment schedule varies from 1,250 to 5,000 IU hCG in combination
with 12.5-­150 IU human menopausal gonadotropins 3 times per week
intramuscularly. It may require up to 2 years of treatment to achieve

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3494 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
adequate spermatogenesis in adults. Recombinantly produced gonadotropins (LH and FSH) are also able to stimulate gonadal growth and
function but are much more expensive. Treatment with GnRH (when
available) is the most physiologically appropriate, but it requires the
use of a subcutaneous infusion pump to deliver appropriately pulsed
therapy because continuous exposure to GnRH will suppress gonadotropins rather than stimulate them. In some cases, patients with GnRH
defects also have pituitary or testicular dysfunction (a dual defect) and
may fail to respond adequately to GnRH or gonadotropin treatment.
The rare patient with isolated LH deficiency can be treated effectively
using hCG injections.
It has been found that up to 10% of patients diagnosed with HH
(with or without anosmia) may exhibit spontaneous reversal of hypogonadism with sustained normal gonadal function after treatment has
been discontinued; this may even occur in patients with known genetic
variants in various genes, including FGFR1, PROK2, GNRH, CHD7,
and TAC/TACR3. Such recovery is more likely in patients who show an
increase in testicular volume during treatment or when treatment has
been discontinued. A brief trial of interruption of treatment is justified
in patients with idiopathic HH. However, the recovery of gonadal function may not be lifelong.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 624

Pseudoprecocity Resulting
from Tumors of the Testes
Omar Ali and Patricia A. Donohoue
Testicular tumors are relatively rare tumors in childhood, accounting for only 2–4% of all childhood cancers. 35% of prepubertal
tumors are malignant, but in pubertal children most tumors are
malignant (98% of painless testicular masses in pubertal males are
malignant). Testicular tumors are discussed further in Chapter 552.
Tumors that cause masculinization or feminization are rare and are
derived from Leydig cells (producing androgens) or Sertoli cells
(producing feminization). In addition, enlargement of the testes can
be seen in congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH, caused by adrenal
rests), in fragile X syndrome, and in cases where one testis is lost
and the other hypertrophies to compensate.
Leydig cell tumors of the testes are rare causes of precocious
pseudopuberty (gonadotropin-­
independent puberty) and cause
asymmetric enlargement of the testes. Leydig cells are sparse before
puberty, and tumors derived from them are more common in
the adult. However, rare cases do occur in children; the youngest
reported case was in a 1-­year-­old male. Although up to 10% of adult
tumors may be malignant, metastasizing malignant tumors have
not been reported in children, and pediatric Leydig cell tumors are
usually unilateral and benign. Some tumors may be the result of
somatic activating pathogenic variants of the luteinizing hormone
receptor.
The clinical manifestations are those of puberty in the male;
onset usually occurs at 5-­
9 years of age. Unilateral pubarche
caused by local hormone action has been described. Gynecomastia
may occur. The tumor of the testis can usually be readily felt; the
contralateral unaffected testis is normal in size for the age of the
patient.

Plasma levels of testosterone are markedly elevated, and
follicle-­stimulating hormone and luteinizing hormone levels are
suppressed. Ultrasonography may aid in the detection of small nonpalpable tumors. Fine-­needle aspiration biopsy may help define the
diagnosis.
Treatment consists of surgical removal of the affected testis. These
tumors are generally resistant to chemotherapy. Progression of virilization ceases after removal of the tumor, and partial reversal of the signs
of precocity may occur.
Testicular adrenal rests may develop into tumors that mimic Leydig
cell tumors. Testicular adrenal rest tumors (TARTs) are usually bilateral and occur in children with inadequately controlled CAH, usually
of the salt-­losing variety, during adolescence or young adult life. The
stimulus for the growth of the adrenal rests is inadequate corticosteroid suppressive therapy causing excess adrenocorticotropic hormone
secretion; treatment with adequate doses may result in their regression
if they have not become quite large. These tumors are histologically
similar to primary Leydig cell tumors, but definite evidence of their
origin may be achieved by demonstrating their 21-­hydroxylase activity.
Misdiagnosis of these tumors as primary Leydig cell tumors may lead
to unnecessary orchiectomy and should be avoided. Treatment is frequently unsatisfactory; improving the control of CAH will lower adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) levels and prevent further growth
of TARTs but may not shrink existing masses. Surgical removal can
relieve pain (and is indicated if severe pain is present) but will not necessarily restore fertility. Sperm banking is recommended in adults with
TARTs because these treatment modalities may not reverse their effect
on fertility.
Fragile X syndrome (see Chapter 59) is caused by the amplification of a polymorphic CGG repeat in the 5′ untranslated region of
FMRI at Xp17.3. The gene encodes an RNA-­binding protein that is
highly expressed in the brain and the testis. In otherwise normal
individuals, 6-­50 CGG repeats are present in the gene; the presence of 50-­200 repeats is associated with mild intellectual disability
and other abnormalities, and the presence of more than 200 repeats
(fragile X pathogenic variant) is associated with the classic fragile X
syndrome. 50 to 200 repeats are present in 1 in 1,000 White males,
and pathogenic variants are found in 1 in 4,000-­8,000. A cardinal
characteristic of the condition is testicular enlargement (macroorchidism), reaching 40-­50 mL after puberty. Although the condition
has been recognized in a child as young as 5 months of age, affected
males younger than 6 years of age rarely have testicular enlargement; by 8-­10 years of age, most have testicular volumes greater
than 3 mL. The testes are enlarged bilaterally, are not nodular, and
are histologically normal. Results of hormonal studies are normal.
Direct DNA analysis searching for CGG repeat sequences permits
definitive diagnosis.
Large-­cell calcifying Sertoli cell tumors of the testes (usually
associated with Carney complex) and sex cord tumors with annular tubules (frequently associated with Peutz-­Jeghers syndrome)
are extremely rare Sertoli cell tumors that may be a cause of breast
development in young males. These tumors often occur bilaterally,
are multifocal, and are detectible by ultrasonography. Excessive
production of aromatase (P450arom), the enzyme that converts testosterone to estradiol, causes feminization of these males. Because
these tumors are usually benign, they may be left in place if they are
not causing pain; the gynecomastia can be treated with aromatase
inhibitors.
Other causes of testicular enlargement are also present. In males
with unilateral cryptorchidism, the contralateral testis is approximately
25% larger than normal for age. Testicular enlargement has also been
noted in males with Henoch-­Schönlein purpura and lymphangiectasia.
Epidermoid and dermoid cysts of the testes have been reported but are
rare.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 625 u Gynecomastia 3495

Chapter 625

Gynecomastia
Omar Ali and Patricia A. Donohoue
Gynecomastia, the proliferation of mammary glandular tissue in the
male, is a common condition. True gynecomastia (the presence of
glandular breast tissue) must be distinguished from pseudogynecomastia, which is the result of accumulation of adipose tissue in the area
of the breast that is commonly seen in overweight males. True gynecomastia is characterized by the presence of a palpable fibroglandular
mass at least 0.5 cm in diameter that is located concentrically beneath
the nipple and areolar region.

PHYSIOLOGIC FORMS OF GYNECOMASTIA

Gynecomastia occurs in many newborn males as a result of normal
stimulation by maternal estrogen; the effect usually disappears in a few
weeks. It is then extremely rare in prepubertal males, in whom it should
always be investigated to identify the cause, but it again becomes common during normal puberty.

Neonatal Gynecomastia

Transient gynecomastia occurs in 60–90% of male newborns secondary to exposure to estrogens during pregnancy. Breast development
may be asymmetric, and galactorrhea is seen in approximately 5%.
Most cases resolve within 4-­8 weeks of birth, but a few can last as long
as 12 months. No treatment is necessary.

Pubertal Gynecomastia

During early to mid-­puberty, up to 70% of males develop various
degrees of subareolar hyperplasia of the breasts. Incidence peaks at
the same time as peak height velocity, which is around 14 years of
age, at Tanner stage 3-­4 and at a testicular volume of 5-­10 mL. Physiologic pubertal gynecomastia may involve only one breast, and it is not
unusual for both breasts to enlarge at disproportionate rates or at different times. Tenderness of the breast is common but transient. Spontaneous regression may occur within a few months; it rarely persists
longer than 2 years. Significant psychosocial distress may be present,
especially in obese males with relatively large breasts.
The cause is thought to be an imbalance between estrogen and
androgen action at the level of breast tissue. Testing usually fails to
reveal any significant difference in circulating estrogen and androgen levels between affected and unaffected males, but minor degrees
of imbalance in free hormone levels may still be present. Other hormones, including leptin, insulin-­like growth factor 1 (IGF-­1), and
luteinizing hormone, may directly stimulate breast development and
may play a role in pubertal gynecomastia. Some cases may be caused
by an increased sensitivity to estrogens and/or relative androgen resistance in the affected tissue. As androgen levels continue to rise in later
puberty, most cases resolve and no specific treatment is needed.

Pathologic Gynecomastia

Monogenic forms of gynecomastia are extremely rare. Familial gynecomastia has occurred in several kindreds as an X-­linked or autosomal
dominant sex-­limited trait. Some of these cases were found to be caused
by constitutive activation of the P450 aromatase enzyme (CYP19A1),
leading to increased peripheral conversion of C-­19 steroids to estrogens (increased aromatization). A report of this syndrome in a father
and his son and daughter suggests autosomal dominant inheritance.
Exogenous sources of estrogens are an important cause of gynecomastia in prepubertal children. Very small amounts of estrogens
can cause gynecomastia in male children, and accidental exposure
may occur by inhalation, percutaneous absorption, or ingestion.
Common sources of estrogens include oral contraceptive pills and
oral and transdermal estrogen preparations. Gynecomastia has

been reported in workers involved in the manufacture of estrogens
and even in the children of such workers. Gynecomastia can also
occur secondary to exposure to medications that decrease the level
of androgens (especially free androgens), increase estradiol, or displace androgens from breast androgen receptors. Spironolactone,
alkylating agents, anabolic steroids, human chorionic gonadotropin, ketoconazole, cimetidine, and androgen inhibitors such as
flutamide are all associated with the occurrence of gynecomastia.
Antipsychotic medications may also cause gynecomastia by inducing hyperprolactinemia and hypogonadism. Weaker associations are
seen with a large number of other medications and drugs, including
opiates, alcohol, and marijuana, although the association with marijuana may not be as strong as previously thought. Lavender, tea tree
oils, and excessive consumption of soy are also implicated as possible causes of prepubertal gynecomastia. An increased incidence of
gynecomastia has also been reported in cancer survivors, in whom
the mechanisms include the antiandrogenic or hypogonadotropic
effects of cytotoxic drugs and radiotherapy.
Klinefelter syndrome and other causes of male hypogonadism are
strongly associated with gynecomastia. Significant gynecomastia is
seen in 50% of adolescents with Klinefelter syndrome; it is also seen
in other conditions characterized by male undervirilization, including
partial androgen insensitivity syndrome and 17-­ketosteroid reductase
deficiency. Gynecomastia has also been observed in children with
congenital virilizing adrenal hyperplasia caused by 11β-­hydroxylase
deficiency and with Leydig and Sertoli cell tumors of the testis or
with feminizing tumors of the adrenal gland. Patients with Klinefelter syndrome may also develop gynecomastia because of estrogen-­
secreting germ cell tumors of the mediastinum. The finding of such a
tumor should prompt a karyotype; conversely, the finding of elevated
β-­human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) in a patient with Klinefelter
syndrome should lead to imaging of the mediastinum to look for a possible germ cell tumor there. The testes may not be enlarged in patients
with Sertoli or Leydig cell tumors, and the tumor is frequently multifocal and bilateral. Excessive aromatase production and/or excessive
estrogen production accounts for the gynecomastia. Feminizing Sertoli
cell tumors are also a feature of Peutz-­Jeghers syndrome and Carney
complex. When gynecomastia is associated with galactorrhea, a prolactinoma should be considered. Hyperprolactinemia can also cause
gynecomastia indirectly by inducing hypogonadism. Hyperthyroidism
alters the ratio of androgen to estrogen by increasing bound androgen
and decreasing the free testosterone; this may result in gynecomastia in
up to 40% of cases. Gynecomastia is also seen in malnourished patients
after restoration of normal nutrition (refeeding syndrome), in whom
it may result from hepatic dysfunction or abnormal activation of the
gonadotropin axis.

EVALUATION OF GYNECOMASTIA

In pubertal cases a detailed history and physical examination may be
all that is needed to exclude rare pathologic causes. Historical evaluation should include family history of male relatives with gynecomastia,
history of liver or renal disease, use of medications or drugs of abuse,
and exposure to herbal and cosmetic products that may contain phytoestrogens. Physical examination should include special attention to
the breasts (looking for overlying skin changes, fixation, local lymphadenopathy, and nipple discharge) as well as a testicular exam. No laboratory evaluation is indicated in routine cases with no other associated
abnormality; however, all prepubertal cases and pubertal cases with
suspicious features should be investigated. Suspicious features include
diameter >4 cm, rapid progression, persistence for more than 2 years, and
persistence after age 17.
Initial laboratory evaluation should include thyroid function tests
(to rule out hyperthyroidism), testosterone, estradiol, HCG, luteinizing hormone, follicle-­stimulating hormone, and prolactin levels.
Because of circadian variation, these hormone levels should ideally
be obtained in the morning. Liver and kidney function should also
be evaluated. Most cases of hyperprolactinemia are associated with
galactorrhea, but hyperprolactinemia can also cause gynecomastia
without associated galactorrhea by suppressing gonadotropins and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3496 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
inducing some degree of hypogonadism. A karyotype should be
checked in all cases where history, examination, or laboratory tests
suggest the possibility of Klinefelter syndrome. Gonadotropin levels
can be a useful screen for Klinefelter syndrome and will be elevated
in pubertal males with this condition. If they are elevated, a karyotype should be performed.

TREATMENT

Treatment in cases of benign pubertal gynecomastia usually consists
of reassuring the boy and his family of the physiologic and transient
nature of the phenomenon. When the enlargement is striking and
persistent and causes serious emotional disturbance to the patient,
specific treatment may be justified. Unfortunately, medical treatment
is generally ineffective in long-­standing cases. Early cases respond
better to medical treatment, but it is then harder to justify, as most
cases will resolve spontaneously. Agents that have been used for medical treatment include androgens, aromatase inhibitors, and estrogen antagonists. The effectiveness of synthetic androgens is variable
and side effects are a concern, so these are rarely used in pediatrics.
Aromatase inhibitors have a physiologic rationale, but placebo-­
controlled trials have been disappointing. Estrogen antagonists like
tamoxifen and raloxifene are more effective, with raloxifene being the
superior agent in at least one well-­designed trial. If medical treatment
is attempted, it should be in early cases (<12 months standing) using
raloxifene (in a dose of 60 mg/day) or tamoxifen (10-­20 mg/day) for
3-­9 months, with the understanding that success rates are generally
low in severe cases and that mild cases will likely resolve on their own
without treatment.
In those cases where breast development is excessive (Tanner stages
3-­5), causes significant psychologic distress, or fails to regress in 18-­24
months, surgical removal of the enlarged breast tissue may be indicated, particularly in males who have completed or nearly completed
pubertal development. Careful examination and laboratory testing
to exclude nonphysiologic causes are advisable before proceeding to
surgery.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 626

Hypofunction of the
Ovaries
Alvina R. Kansra and Patricia A. Donohoue
Hypofunction of the ovaries can be either primary or central in etiology. It may be caused by congenital failure of development, postnatal injury (primary or hypergonadotropic hypogonadism), or lack of
central stimulation by the pituitary and/or hypothalamus (secondary
or tertiary hypogonadotropic hypogonadism). Primary ovarian insufficiency (hypergonadotropic hypogonadism), also termed premature
ovarian failure (POF), is characterized by the arrest of normal ovarian
function before 40 years of age. Certain genetic pathogenic variants
have been identified that can result in primary ovarian insufficiency.
Hypofunction of the ovaries because of a lack of central stimulation
(hypogonadotropic hypogonadism) can be associated with other
processes, such as multiple pituitary hormone deficiencies and some
chronic diseases. Table 626.1 details the etiologic classification of ovarian hypofunction (see also Fig. 600.7).

626.1 Hypergonadotropic Hypogonadism in
the Female (Primary Hypogonadism)
Alvina R. Kansra and Patricia A. Donohoue
A diagnosis of hypergonadotropic hypogonadism before puberty is difficult. Except in the case of Turner syndrome, most affected patients
have no prepubertal clinical manifestations.

TURNER SYNDROME

The term Ullrich-­Turner syndrome is frequently used in Europe but is
infrequently used in the United States, where the condition is called
just Turner syndrome (see Chapter 99.4). The syndrome is defined as
the combination of the characteristic phenotypic features accompanied
by a complete or partial absence of the second X chromosome with or
without mosaicism.

Pathogenesis

Half the patients with Turner syndrome have a 45,X chromosomal
complement. Approximately 15% of patients are mosaics for 45,X
and a normal cell line (45,X/46,XX). Other mosaics with isochromosomes, 45,X/46,X,i(Xq); with rings, 45,X/46,X,r(X); or with
fragments, 45,X/46fra, occur less often. Mosaicism is commonly
detected when more than one tissue is examined. The single X chromosome is of maternal origin in nearly 80% of 45,X patients. The
mechanism of chromosome loss is unknown, and the risk for the
syndrome does not increase with maternal age. The genes involved
in the Turner phenotype are X-­linked genes that escape inactivation. A major locus involved in the control of linear growth has been
mapped within the pseudoautosomal region of the X chromosome
(PAR1). SHOX, a homeobox-­containing gene of 170 kb of DNA
within the PAR1, is thought to be important for controlling growth
in children with Turner syndrome, with Leri-­Weill syndrome, and,
rarely, patients with idiopathic short stature. Genes for the control of
normal ovarian function are postulated to be on Xp and perhaps two
supergenes on Xq.
Turner syndrome occurs in approximately 1 in 1,500-­2,500 liveborn
females. The frequency of the 45,X karyotype at conception is approximately 3%. However, 99% of these are spontaneously aborted, accounting for 5–10% of all abortuses. Mosaicism (45,X/46,XX) occurs in a
proportion higher than that seen with any other aneuploid state, but
the mosaic Turner constitution is rare among the abortuses; these findings indicate preferential survival for mosaic forms.
The normal fetal ovary contains approximately 7 million oocytes,
but these begin to disappear rapidly after the fifth month of gestation.
At birth, there are only 2 million (1 million active follicles); by menarche, there are 400,000-­500,000; and at menopause, 10,000 remain.
In the absence of one X chromosome, this process is accelerated, and
nearly all oocytes are gone by 2 years of age. In aborted 45,X fetuses,
the number of primordial germ cells in the gonadal ridge appears to be
normal, suggesting that the normal process of oocyte loss is accelerated
in patients with Turner syndrome. Eventually, the ovaries are described
as streaks and consist only of connective tissue, with very few germ
cells present.

Clinical Manifestations

Many patients with Turner syndrome are recognizable at birth because
of a characteristic edema of the dorsa of the hands and feet and loose
skinfolds at the nape of the neck. Low birthweight and decreased birth
length are common (see Chapter 99.4). Clinical manifestations in
childhood include webbing of the neck, a low posterior hairline, small
mandible, prominent ears, epicanthal folds, high arched palate, a broad
chest presenting the illusion of widely spaced nipples, cubitus valgus,
and hyperconvex fingernails. The diagnosis is often first suspected at
puberty when breast development fails to occur.
Short stature, the cardinal finding in virtually all females with Turner
syndrome, may be present with few other clinical manifestations. The
linear growth deceleration begins in infancy and early childhood, gets
progressively more pronounced in later childhood and adolescence,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 626 u Hypofunction of the Ovaries 3497
Table 626.1  Etiologic Classification of Ovarian
Hypofunction
HYPOGONADOTROPIC HYPOGONADISM
Hypothalamic
Genetic defects
• Kallmann syndrome: KAL1, FGFR1, FGF8, PROK2, PROKR2,
CHD7, WDR11, NELF, SEMA3A
• Other gene defects: leptin, leptin receptor, KISS-­1 (deficiency
of kisspeptin), DAX-­1, TAC3 (deficiency of neurokinin B),
TACR3, SEMA7A
• Inherited syndromes: Prader-­Willi, Bardet-­Biedl, and others
• Marked constitutional growth delay
Acquired defects (reversible)
• Anorexia nervosa
• Drug use
• Malnutrition
• Chronic illness, especially Crohn disease
• Hyperprolactinemia
Pituitary
Genetic defects
• Isolated gonadotropin deficiency (GnRH receptor, FSH, and LH
β-­subunit)
• Septo-­optic dysplasia (HESX-­1 defect in some cases)
• Disorders of pituitary organogenesis (PROP1, LHX3, LHX4, SOX-­3)
Acquired defects
• Hyperprolactinemia
• Pituitary tumors
• Pituitary infarction
• Infiltrative disorders (histiocytosis, sarcoidosis)
• Hemosiderosis and hemochromatosis
• Radiation
HYPERGONADOTROPIC HYPOGONADISM
Genetic
• Follicle-­stimulating hormone and luteinizing hormone
resistance
• Pathogenic variants in steroidogenic pathways
• 46,XX gonadal dysgenesis
• Turner syndrome and its variants
• Noonan syndrome (RASopathy genes)
• SF-­1 pathogenic variants
• Galactosemia
• Fragile X–associated disorders
• Bloom syndrome
• Werner syndrome
• Ataxia-­telangiectasia
• Fanconi anemia
Acquired
• Chemotherapy
• Radiation
• Autoimmune ovarian failure from autoimmune polyendocrine
syndromes 1 and 2

and results in significant adult short stature. Sexual maturation (breast
development) fails to occur at the expected age; however, signs of adrenarche (pubic hair) are normally present. Among untreated patients
with Turner syndrome, the mean adult height is 143-­144 cm in the
United States and most of Northern Europe, but 140 cm in Argentina
and 147 cm in Scandinavia (Fig. 626.1). The height is well correlated
with the midparental height (average of the parents’ heights adjusted
for child’s sex). Specific growth curves for height have been developed
for females with Turner syndrome.
Associated cardiac defects are common. In females with Turner syndrome, life-­threatening consequences of X chromosome haploinsufficiency involve the cardiovascular system. There is a four-­to fivefold
increase in the rate of premature mortality secondary to congenital heart
disease and premature coronary heart disease in adults with Turner syndrome. Clinically silent cardiac defects, mainly bicuspid aortic valve, are

Fig. 626.1 Turner syndrome in a 15-­yr-­old female exhibiting failure

of sexual maturation, short stature, cubitus valgus, and a goiter. There
is no webbing of the neck. Karyotyping revealed 45,X/46,XX chromosome complement.

present in patients with Turner syndrome. Regardless of age, all patients
with Turner syndrome need comprehensive cardiovascular evaluation
by a cardiologist specializing in congenital heart disease at the time of
diagnosis. Complete cardiologic evaluation, including echocardiography, reveals isolated nonstenotic bicuspid aortic valves in one third to
half of the patients. In later life, bicuspid aortic valve disease can progress to dilation of the aortic root or aortic dissection. Less frequent
defects include aortic coarctation (20%), aortic stenosis, mitral valve
prolapse, and anomalous pulmonary venous drainage. In one study, 38%
of patients with 45,X chromosomes had cardiovascular malformations
compared with 11% of those with mosaic monosomy X; the most common were aortic valve abnormalities and aortic coarctation. Webbed
neck in patients with or without recognized chromosome syndromes
is associated with both flow-­related and non–flow-­related heart defects.
Among patients with Turner syndrome, those with webbed necks have
a much greater chance of having coarctation of the aorta than do those
without webbed necks. Transthoracic echocardiogram in young females
is adequate if cardiac anatomy is clearly seen; otherwise, magnetic resonance angiographic screening studies should be considered in asymptomatic individuals with Turner syndrome. During adolescence, and
certainly before pregnancy (when possible) is contemplated, repeat
cardiac evaluation should be considered even in those without prior
findings of cardiac abnormalities. Blood pressure should be routinely
monitored even in the absence of cardiac or renal lesions, especially in
those with suggestions of aortic root dilation. Cardiac MRI is a valuable
tool to detect and monitor aortic root dilation.
Renal ultrasound should be performed in all females with Turner
syndrome at diagnosis. One fourth to one third of patients have renal
malformations on ultrasonographic examination (50% of those with
45,X karyotypes). The more serious defects include pelvic kidney,
horseshoe kidney, double collecting system, the complete absence of
one kidney, and ureteropelvic junction obstruction. Some of the malformations may increase the risk of hypertension and urinary tract

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3498 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
infection. Idiopathic hypertension is also common. Females with
Turner syndrome who had normal baseline renal ultrasound findings
did not develop the renal disease during a follow-­up period averaging
6 years.
When the ovaries are examined by ultrasonography, there are no
age-­related differences in detecting ovarian tissue; 27–46% of patients
have detectable ovaries at various ages; 76% of those with X mosaicism
and 26% of those with 45,X karyotypes have detectable ovaries.
Sexual maturation usually fails to occur, but 10–20% of females have
spontaneous breast development, and a small percentage may have menstrual periods. Primary gonadal failure is associated with early onset of
adrenarche (elevation in dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate) but delayed
pubarche (pubic hair development). Spontaneous pregnancies have been
reported in menstruating patients with Turner syndrome. Premature
menopause, increased risk of miscarriage, and offspring with increased
risk of trisomy 21 have been reported. A woman with a 45,X/46,X,r(X)
karyotype treated with hormone replacement therapy had three pregnancies, resulting in a normal 46,XY male infant, a spontaneous abortion, and a healthy term female with Turner syndrome 45,X/46,Xr(X).
Antithyroid antibodies (thyroid peroxidase and/or thyroglobulin
antibodies) occur in 30–50% of patients. The prevalence increases with
advancing age. Autoimmune thyroid disease, with or without a goiter,
occurs in 10–30% of patients. Age-­dependent abnormalities in carbohydrate metabolism characterized by abnormal glucose tolerance and
insulin resistance and, only rarely, frank type 2 diabetes occur in older
patients with Turner syndrome. Impaired insulin secretion has been
described in 45,X women. Cholesterol levels are elevated in adolescence, regardless of body mass index or karyotype.
Inflammatory bowel disease (both Crohn disease and ulcerative colitis), gastrointestinal bleeding because of abnormal mesenteric vasculature,
and delayed gastric emptying time have all been reported. Screening for
celiac disease is recommended because the risk of celiac disease is increased
in Turner syndrome, with 4–6% of individuals affected. Although autoimmune diseases have been associated with Turner syndrome, the prevalence
of type 1 diabetes with Turner syndrome is not very high.
Chronic liver disease may develop in adults with Turner syndrome.
Its pathogenesis is poorly defined.
Sternal malformations can be detected by lateral chest radiography.
An increased carrying angle at the elbow is usually not clinically significant. Scoliosis occurs in approximately 10% of adolescent females.
Congenital hip dysplasia occurs more commonly than in the general
population. Reported eye findings include anterior segment dysgenesis
and keratoconus. Pigmented nevi become more prominent with age;
melanocytic nevi are common. Essential hyperhidrosis, torus mandibularis, and alopecia areata occur rarely.
Recurrent bilateral otitis media develops in approximately 75%
of patients. Sensorineural hearing deficits are common, and the frequency increases with age. Problems with gross and fine motor sensory
integration, failure to walk before 15 months of age, and early language
dysfunction often raise questions about developmental delay, but intelligence is normal in most patients. However, cognitive impairment does
occur in patients with 45,X/46,X,r(X); the ring chromosome is unable
to undergo inactivation and leads to two functional X chromosomes.
Special attention should be given to psychosocial development
in females with Turner syndrome. In general, behavior is normal in
females with Turner syndrome, but they are at an increased risk for
social isolation, immaturity, and anxiety. Other conditions, such as
dyslexia, nonverbal learning disability, and attention-­deficit disorder,
have been reported in females with Turner syndrome. In adults, deficits in perceptual spatial skills are more common than they are in the
general population. Some unconfirmed data suggest the existence of an
imprinted X-­linked locus that affects cognitive function such as verbal
and higher-­order executive function skills. These functions are apparently better when the X is paternal in origin.
The prevalence of mosaicism depends in large part on the techniques used for studying chromosomal patterns. The use of fluorescent
in situ hybridization and reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction (PCR) has increased the reported prevalence of mosaic patterns to
as high as 60–74%.

Mosaicism involving the Y chromosome occurs in 5%. A population study using PCR with five different primer sets found Y chromosome material in 12.2%. Gonadoblastoma among Y-­positive patients
occurred in 7–10%. Therefore the recommendation is that prophylactic
gonadectomy be performed even in the absence of MRI or CT evidence
of tumors. The recommended timing of this procedure is at the time of
diagnosis, but this may need to be reevaluated in the future. The gonadoblastoma locus on the Y chromosome (GBY) maps close to the Y centromere. The presence of only the SRY (sex-­determining region on the
Y chromosome) locus is not sufficient to confer increased susceptibility
for the development of gonadoblastoma. Routine PCR for Y chromosome detection for the purpose of assigning gonadoblastoma risk is
not indicated. High-­throughput quantitative genotyping may provide
an effective and inexpensive method for the identification of X chromosome abnormalities and Y chromosome material identification.
In patients with 45,X/46,XX mosaicism, the clinical abnormalities
are attenuated and fewer; short stature is as frequent as it is in the 45,X
patient and may be the only manifestation of the condition other than
ovarian failure (see Fig. 626.1).

Laboratory Findings

Chromosomal analysis must be considered routinely in females who
have unexpected short stature based on parental heights. Turner syndrome is detected in ∼5% of females referred to an endocrinology service because of short stature. Patients with a marker chromosome in
some or all cells should be tested for DNA sequences at or near the
centromere of the Y chromosome for GBY.
Ultrasonography of the heart, kidneys, and ovaries is indicated
after the diagnosis is established. The most common skeletal abnormalities are shortening of the fourth metatarsal and metacarpal bones,
epiphyseal dysgenesis in the joints of the knees and elbows, Madelung deformity, scoliosis, and, in older patients, inadequate osseous
mineralization.
Plasma levels of gonadotropins, particularly follicle-­
stimulating
hormone (FSH), are markedly elevated to greater than those of age-­
matched controls during infancy; at 2-­3 years of age, a progressive
decrease in levels occurs until they reach a nadir at 6-­8 years of age,
and by 10-­11 years of age, they rise to adult agonadal levels.
Thyroid peroxidase antibodies should be checked to detect autoimmune thyroiditis if the thyroid-­stimulating hormone (TSH) level is
abnormal. Annual or biannual TSH levels are recommended. Females
with Turner syndrome should be screened for celiac disease by measuring tissue transglutaminase immunoglobulin A antibodies. Initial
testing should be done around age 4 years and repeated every 2-­5 years.
Extensive studies have failed to establish that growth hormone deficiency plays a primary role in the pathogenesis of the growth disorder.
Defects in normal secretory patterns of growth hormone are seen in
adolescents because of a lack of gonadal steroids, but not in younger
females with Turner syndrome.

Treatment

Treatment with recombinant human growth hormone increases
height velocity and ultimate stature in most, but not all, children with
Turner syndrome. Many females achieve heights of greater than 150
cm with early initiation of treatment. In one clinical trial, 99 patients
with Turner syndrome who started receiving growth hormone at a
mean age of 10.9 years at doses between 0.27 and 0.36 mg/kg/wk
achieved a mean height of 149 cm, with nearly one third reaching
heights greater than 152.4 cm (60 in). In the Netherlands, higher
doses of growth hormone (up to 0.63 mg/kg/wk in the third year of
treatment) resulted in 85% of the subjects reaching adult heights in
the normal range for the Dutch reference population. Growth hormone treatment should be initiated in early childhood and/or when
there is evidence of height velocity attenuation on specific Turner
syndrome growth curves. Growth hormone therapy does not significantly aggravate carbohydrate tolerance and does not result in
marked adverse events in patients with Turner syndrome. Serum levels of insulin-­like growth factor 1 should be monitored if the patient
is receiving high doses of growth hormone. If the insulin-­like growth

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 626 u Hypofunction of the Ovaries 3499
factor 1 levels are significantly elevated, the dose of growth hormone
may need to be reduced. Treatment with growth hormone can cause
excessive growth of the hands and feet in some females with Turner
syndrome.
Oxandrolone has also been used to treat the short stature associated
with Turner syndrome, either alone or in combination with growth
hormone. This nonaromatizable synthetic anabolic steroid has weak
androgenic effects, and patients should be monitored for signs of
pubarche and hepatotoxicity. The latter is rare.
Replacement therapy with estrogens is indicated, but there is variation among pediatric endocrinologists about the optimal age at which
to initiate treatment. The psychologic preparedness of the patient to
accept therapy must be considered. The improved growth achieved by
females treated with growth hormone in childhood permits initiation
of estrogen replacement at 12-­13 years. Delaying estrogen therapy to
optimize height potential until 15 years of age, as previously recommended, seems unwarranted. This change to starting earlier estrogen
therapy was considered because of the psychologic importance of age-­
appropriate pubertal maturation. In addition, delaying estrogen therapy could be deleterious for bone health and potentially other aspects
of the child’s health. Low-­dose estrogen replacement at 12 years of age
permits a normal pace of puberty without interfering with the positive
effect of growth hormone on the final adult height. Estrogen therapy
improves verbal and nonverbal memory in females with Turner syndrome. In young women with age-­appropriate pubertal development
who achieve normal height, health-­related quality-­of-­life questionnaires have yielded normal results.
Many forms of estrogen are available. Oral estrogens had been
mostly used in the past. Transdermal patches are increasing in
popularity. This is because transdermal patches bypass the first-­pass
hepatic metabolism, requiring only a small amount of estrogen to
attain adequate function. Many treatment protocols have been developed, and several are as follows. For oral preparations, a conjugated
estrogen (Premarin), 0.15-­0.625 mg daily, or micronized estradiol
(Estrace), 0.5 mg given daily for 3-­6 months, is usually effective in
inducing puberty. The recommendations for transdermal patch therapy are 6.25 μg daily, gradually increased over 2 years to the adult
dose of 100-­200 μg daily. The estrogen may be cycled (taken on days
1-­23) or not. A progestin (Provera) is added (taken on days 10-­23) in
a dose of 5-­10 mg daily. In the week after the progestin, withdrawal
bleeding usually occurs. Combination oral contraceptive pills may
also be used for hormone replacement therapy.
Prenatal chromosome analysis for advanced maternal age has
revealed a frequency of 45,X/46,XX that is 10 times higher than when
diagnosed postnatally. Most of these patients have no clinical manifestations of Turner syndrome, and levels of gonadotropins are normal.
Awareness of this mild phenotype is important in counseling patients.
Psychosocial support for these females is an integral component of
treatment. A comprehensive psychologic education evaluation is recommended either at the time of Turner syndrome diagnosis, depending on the patient’s age, when any of the components of behavior or
cognition become obvious, or immediately preceding school entry. In
addition to the healthcare team, the Turner Syndrome Society, which
has local chapters in the United States and similar groups in Canada
and other countries, provides a valuable support system for these
patients and their families.
Successful pregnancies have been carried to term using ovum
donation and in vitro fertilization. Adolescents with few signs of
spontaneous puberty may have ovaries with follicles. There remains
a future possibility of using cryopreserved ovarian tissue with
immature oocytes before the regression of the ovaries for future
pregnancies. In adult women with Turner syndrome, there seems
to be a high prevalence of undiagnosed bone mineral density, lipid,
and thyroid abnormalities. Glucose intolerance diminished first-­
phase insulin response, elevated blood pressure, and lowered fat-­
free mass are common. Glucose tolerance worsens, but fat-­free mass
and blood pressure and general physical fitness improve with sex
hormone replacement. The neurocognitive profile of adult women
is unaffected by estrogen status.

XX GONADAL DYSGENESIS

Some phenotypically and genetically normal females have gonadal
lesions identical to those in 45,X patients but without somatic features
of Turner syndrome; their condition is termed pure gonadal dysgenesis or pure ovarian dysgenesis.
The disorder is rarely recognized in prepubertal children because the
external genitals are normal, no other abnormalities are visible, and
growth is normal. At pubertal age, sexual maturation fails to take place.
Plasma gonadotropin levels are elevated. Delay of epiphyseal fusion
may result in a eunuchoid habitus. Pelvic ultrasonography reveals
streak ovaries.
Affected siblings, parental consanguinity, and failure to uncover
mosaicism suggest female-­
limited autosomal recessive inheritance.
The disorder appears to be especially frequent in Finland (1 in 8,300
liveborn females). In this population, several pathogenic variants in
the FSH receptor gene (on chromosome 2p) are demonstrated as the
cause of the condition. In contrast, FSH receptor gene variants are not
detected in Mexican women with 46,XX gonadal dysgenesis. In some
patients, XX gonadal dysgenesis has been associated with sensorineural deafness (Perrault syndrome). A patient with this condition and
concomitant growth hormone deficiency and virilization has also been
reported. There may be distinct genetic forms of this disorder. Müllerian agenesis, or Mayer-­Rokitansky-­Küster-­Hauser syndrome,
which is second to gonadal dysgenesis as the most common cause of
primary amenorrhea, occurring in 1 in 4,000-­5,000 females, has been
reported in association with 46,XX gonadal dysgenesis in a 17-­year-­old
adolescent with primary amenorrhea and lack of breast development.
One case of dysgerminoma with syncytiotrophoblastic giant cells was
reported. An 18-­year-­old woman with primary amenorrhea and an
absence of müllerian-­derived structures, unilateral renal agenesis, and
clinical signs of androgen excess—a phenotype resembling Mayer-­
Rokitansky-­Küster-­Hauser syndrome—was found to have a loss-­of-­
function variant in WNT4. Treatment consists of estrogen replacement
therapy.

45,X/46,XY GONADAL DYSGENESIS

45,X/46,XY gonadal dysgenesis, also called mixed gonadal dysgenesis,
has extreme postnatal phenotypic variability that may extend from a
Turner-­like syndrome to a male phenotype with a penile urethra; it is
possible to delineate three major clinical phenotypes. Short stature is
a major finding in all affected children. Ninety percent of prenatally
diagnosed cases have a normal male phenotype.
Some patients have no evidence of virilization; they have a female
phenotype and often have the somatic signs of Turner syndrome. The
condition is discovered prepubertally when chromosomal studies are
made in short females or later when chromosomal studies are made
because of failure of sexual maturation. Fallopian tubes and uterus
are present. The gonads consist of intraabdominal undifferentiated
streaks; chromosomal study of the streak often reveals an XY cell line.
The streak gonad differs somewhat from that in females with Turner
syndrome; in addition to wavy connective tissue, there are often tubular or cordlike structures, occasional clumps of granulosa cells, and,
frequently, mesonephric or hilar cells.
Some children have mild virilization manifested only by prepubertal
clitoromegaly. Normal müllerian structures are present, but at puberty
virilization occurs. These patients usually have an intraabdominal testis, a contralateral streak gonad, and bilateral fallopian tubes.
Many 45,X/46,XY children present with frank ambiguity of the genitals in infancy (Fig. 626.2). A testis and vas deferens are found on one
side in the labioscrotal fold, and a streak gonad is identified on the contralateral side. Despite the presence of a testis, fallopian tubes are often
present bilaterally. An infantile or rudimentary uterus is often present.
Other genotypes and phenotypes have been described in mixed
gonadal dysgenesis. Approximately 25% of 200 analyzed patients have
a dicentric Y chromosome (45,X/46,X,dic Y). In some patients the Y
chromosome may be represented by only a fragment (45,X/45,X +fra);
application of Y-­specific probes can establish the origin of the fragment. It is unclear why the same genotype (45,X/46,XY) can result in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3500 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
phenotypes. However, 45,X/46,XY mosaicism is found in approximately 7% of fetuses, with true chromosome mosaicism encountered
prenatally. Of 76 infants with 45,X/46,XY mosaicism diagnosed prenatally, 72 had a normal male phenotype, 1 had a female phenotype, and
only 3 males had hypospadias. Of 12 males whose gonads were examined, only 3 were abnormal. These data must be considered when counseling a family in which a 45,X/46,XY infant is discovered prenatally.

XXX, XXXX, AND XXXXX FEMALES
XXX Females

Fig. 626.2 A 45,X/46XY neonate with sex chromosome disorder of
sex development was noted at birth to have male-­appearing external genitalia with a phallus measured at 2.5 × 1.2 cm and penoscrotal
hypospadias. The left gonad was palpable in an incompletely fused
scrotum, whereas the right gonad was not palpable. Gonadal biopsy
revealed a testis on the left side and streak gonad on the right. The
diagnosis was mixed gonadal dysgenesis. (From Remeithi SA, Wherret
DK. Disorders of sexual development. In: Martin RJ, Fanaroff AA, Walsh
MC, eds. Fanaroff and Martin’s Neonatal-­Perinatal Medicine, 10th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015: Fig. 98–13)

diverse phenotypes. Pathogenic variants in SRY have been described in
some patients.
Children with a female phenotype present no problem in gender
of rearing. Patients who are only slightly virilized are usually assigned
a female gender of rearing before a diagnosis is established. Patients
with ambiguity of the genitals are often clinically indistinguishable
from patients with various types of 46,XY disorders of sex development (46,XY DSD). In some instances, there may need to be careful
consideration regarding gender of rearing. Factors that may influence this decision include short stature, the need for surgical genital
reconstruction, the presence of müllerian structures, and the need for
gonadectomy because of predisposition of the gonad to the development of malignancy. In some patients followed to adulthood, the putative normal testis proves to be dysgenetic with eventual loss of Leydig
and Sertoli cell function (see Chapter 623). In an analysis of 22 patients
with mixed gonadal dysgenesis, no significant associations or correlations were found between internal and external phenotypes or endocrine function and gonadal morphologic features. The appearance of
the external genitalia determined the gender of rearing. In 11 patients,
basal and human chorionic gonadotropin–stimulated testosterone levels were lower than in control subjects.
Gonadal tumors, usually gonadoblastomas, occur in approximately
25% of these children. A gonadoblastoma locus has been localized to a
region near the centromere of the Y chromosome (GBY). These germ
cell tumors are preceded by the changes of carcinoma in situ. Accordingly, both gonads should be removed in all patients reared as females,
and the undifferentiated gonad should be removed in the patients
reared as males.
There is no correlation among the proportion of 45,X/46,XY cell
lines in either blood or fibroblasts with the phenotype. In the past,
all patients came to clinical attention because of their abnormal

The 47,XXX (trisomy) chromosomal constitution is the most frequent
extra X chromosome abnormality in females, occurring in almost 1
in 1,000 liveborn females. In 68%, this condition is caused by maternal meiotic nondisjunction, but paternal sex chromosome errors cause
most 45,X and half of 47,XXY constitutions. The phenotype is that of a
normal female; affected infants and children are not recognized based
on the genital appearance.
Sexual development and menarche are normal. Most pregnancies
have resulted in normal infants. By 2 years of age, delays in speech and
language become evident, and some see a lack of coordination, poor
academic performance, and immature behavior. These females tend to
be tall, manifest behavior disorders, and often require special education classes. Using high-­resolution MRI, 47,XXX subjects have lower
amygdala volumes than euploid controls; 47,XXY subjects had even
lower amygdala volumes. In a review of 155 females, 62% were physically normal. There is marked variability within the syndrome, and a
small proportion of affected females are well coordinated, socially outgoing, and academically superior.

XXXX and XXXXX Females

The great majority of females with these rare karyotypes have intellectual disabilities. Commonly associated defects are epicanthal folds,
hypertelorism, clinodactyly, transverse palmar creases, radioulnar synostosis, and congenital heart disease. Sexual maturation is often incomplete and may not occur at all. Nevertheless, three women with tetra-­X
syndrome gave birth, but no pregnancies were reported in 49,XXXXX
women. Most 48,XXXX women tend to be tall, with an average height
of 169 cm, whereas short stature is a common feature of the 49,XXXXX
phenotype.

NOONAN SYNDROME

Females with Noonan syndrome show certain anomalies also seen in
females with 45,X Turner syndrome, but they have normal 46,XX chromosomes (see Chapter 101.1). The most common abnormalities are the
same as those described for males with Noonan syndrome (see Chapter
623). Short stature is one of the cardinal signs of this syndrome. The
phenotype differs from Turner syndrome in several respects. Cognitive
impairment is often present, the cardiac defect is most often pulmonary
valvular stenosis or an atrial septal defect rather than an aortic defect,
normal sexual maturation usually occurs but is delayed by 2 years on
average, and POF has been reported. The FDA approves growth hormone therapy for use in Noonan syndrome patients with short stature.

OTHER OVARIAN DEFECTS

Some young women with no chromosomal abnormalities are found
to have streak gonads that may contain only occasional or no germ
cells. Gonadotropins are increased. Cytotoxic drugs, especially alkylating agents such as cyclophosphamide and busulfan, procarbazine, etoposide, and exposure of the ovaries to irradiation for the treatment of
malignancy are frequent causes of ovarian failure. Young women with
Hodgkin disease demonstrate that combination chemotherapy and
pelvic irradiation may be more deleterious than either therapy alone.
Teenagers are more likely than older women to retain or recover ovarian function after irradiation or combined chemotherapy; normal pregnancies have occurred after such treatment. Treatment regimens may
result in some ovarian damage in most females treated for cancer. The
median lethal dose for the human oocyte is estimated to be approximately 4 Gy; doses as low as 6 Gy have produced primary amenorrhea. Ovarian transposition before abdominal and pelvic irradiation

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 626 u Hypofunction of the Ovaries 3501
in childhood can preserve ovarian function by decreasing the ovarian
exposure to less than 4-­7 Gy.
Autoimmune ovarian failure occurs in 60% of children older than
13 years of age with type I autoimmune polyendocrinopathy (Addison disease, hypoparathyroidism, mucocutaneous candidiasis). This
condition, also known as polyglandular autoimmune disease type 1,
is rare worldwide but not in Finland, where, as a result of a founder
gene effect, it occurs in 1 in 25,000 people. Affected females may not
develop sexually; secondary amenorrhea may occur in young women.
The ovaries may have lymphocytic infiltration or appear simply as
streaks. Most affected patients have circulating steroid cell antibodies
and autoantibodies to 21-­hydroxylase. Among patients with polyglandular autoimmune syndromes, 5% have hypogonadism.
The condition also occurs in young women as an isolated event
or in association with other autoimmune disorders, leading to
secondary amenorrhea (POF). It occurs in 0.2–0.9% of women
younger than 40 years of age. POF is a heterogeneous disorder with
many causes: chromosomal, genetic, enzymatic, infectious, and iatrogenic. When associated with autoimmune adrenal disease, steroid
cell autoantibodies are usually present. These antibodies react with
P450scc, 17α-­OH, or 21-­OH enzymes. Steroid cell autoantibodies
are rarely found when associated with an entire host of endocrine
and nonendocrine autoimmune diseases and not adrenal autoimmunity. A second autoimmune disorder, often subclinical, is found
in 10–39% of adult patients with POF, including autoimmune thyroid disease, type 1 diabetes, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE),
inflammatory bowel disease, immune thrombocytopenia or hemolytic anemia, celiac disease, myasthenia gravis, and rheumatoid
arthritis. One 17-­year-­old with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura and 47,XXX chromosomes had autoimmune POF. Patients
with POF do not have the neurocognitive defects found in Turner
syndrome patients.
Galactosemia, particularly the classical form of the disease, usually
results in ovarian damage, beginning during intrauterine life. Levels of
FSH and luteinizing hormone (LH) are elevated early in life. Ovarian
damage may be caused by deficient uridine diphosphate-­galactose (see
Chapter 107.2). Denys-­Drash syndrome caused by a WT1 pathogenic
variant can result in ovarian dysgenesis.
Ataxia-­telangiectasia may be associated with ovarian hypoplasia
and elevated gonadotropins; the cause is unknown. Gonadoblastomas
and dysgerminomas have occurred in a few females.
Hypergonadotropic hypogonadism occurs as a result of resistance of the ovary to both endogenous and exogenous gonadotropins
(Savage syndrome). This condition also occurs in women with POF.
Antiovarian antibodies or FSH receptor abnormalities may cause this
condition. The FSH receptor gene variants have been reported as an
autosomal recessive condition (see Chapter 622). A few females with
46,XX chromosomes presenting in primary amenorrhea with elevated
gonadotropin levels were found to have inactivating variants of the LH
receptor gene. This suggests that LH action is needed for normal follicular development and ovulation. Other genetic defects associated with
ovarian failure include pathogenic variants in SF-­1, FOXL2, GNAS,
CYP17, and CYP19.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

626.2 Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism
in the Female (Secondary
Hypogonadism)
Alvina R. Kansra and Patricia A. Donohoue
Hypofunction of the ovaries can result from failure to secrete normal
pulses of the gonadotropins LH and FSH. Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (HH) may occur if the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­gonadal axis is
interrupted either at the hypothalamic or pituitary level. The mechanisms that result in HH include failure of the hypothalamic LH–releasing hormone (also known as gonadotropin-­releasing hormone) pulse

generator or inability of the pituitary to respond with secretion of LH
and FSH. It is often difficult to distinguish between marked constitutional delay and HH.

HYPOPITUITARISM

Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism is most commonly seen with multiple pituitary hormone deficiencies resulting from malformations (e.g.,
septo-­optic dysplasia, other midline defects), pituitary transcription
factor defects such as in PROP-­1, or lesions of the pituitary that are
acquired postnatally. Familial isolated gonadotropin deficiency associated with anosmia (Kallmann syndrome) may occur in females. Many
other genetic causes for HH have been identified. A gene important in
LH-­releasing hormone secretion is named KISS (encoding the protein
kisspeptin), which is suggested to play a significant role in the development of the LH-­releasing hormone–secreting cells. Another set of
genes implicated in HH are the genes for neurokinin B (TAC3) and its
receptor (TAC3R).
In children with idiopathic hypopituitarism, the defect is usually found in the hypothalamus. In these patients, administration
of gonadotropin-­releasing hormone results in increased plasma
levels of FSH and LH, establishing the integrity of the pituitary
gland.
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism is less common than hypergonadotropic hypogonadism. Ovarian function may be abnormal when
associated with LH excess, a condition known as polycystic ovarian syndrome (polycystic ovary syndrome; see Chapter 589).

Isolated Deficiency of Gonadotropins

This heterogeneous group of disorders is evaluated more fully with
the use of the gonadotropin-­releasing hormone analog stimulation
test rather than a single measurement of gonadotropin levels. In most
children the pituitary gland is normal, and the defect causing gonadotropin deficiency resides in the hypothalamus. Patients with hyperprolactinemia, most often caused by a pituitary prolactin-­secreting
adenoma, often have suppression of gonadotropin secretion. If breast
development has occurred, then galactorrhea and amenorrhea are frequently seen.
Several sporadic instances of anosmia with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism have been reported. Anosmic hypogonadal females have
also been reported in kindreds with Kallmann syndrome, but hypogonadism more frequently affects the males in these families. Pathogenic variants in the gene for the β-­subunit of FSH and LH have been
reported.
Some autosomal recessive disorders, such as Laurence-­Moon-­
Biedl, multiple lentigines, and Carpenter syndromes, appear in
some instances to include gonadotropic hormone deficiency.
Patients with Prader-­Willi syndrome usually have some degree
of HH. Females with severe thalassemia may have gonadotropin
deficiency from pituitary damage caused by chronic iron overload
secondary to multiple transfusions. Anorexia nervosa frequently
results in HH. The rare patients described with leptin deficiency or
leptin receptor defects have failure of pubertal maturation because
of gonadotropin deficiency.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis may be apparent in patients with other deficiencies of
pituitary tropic hormones, but, as in males, it is difficult to differentiate isolated hypogonadotropic hypogonadism from physiologic delay
of puberty. Repeated measurements of FSH and LH, particularly during sleep, may reveal the rising levels that herald the onset of puberty.
Stimulation testing with gonadotropin-­releasing hormone analog may
help to establish the diagnosis. Morbidity for both men and women
with hypogonadism includes infertility and an increased risk of
osteoporosis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3502 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System

Chapter 627

Pseudoprecocity Resulting
from Lesions of the Ovary
Alvina R. Kansra and Patricia A. Donohoue
Females with signs of early puberty may, in rare circumstances, have
ovarian tumors or cysts that secrete estrogenic, androgenic, or both
types of hormones. In these patients, the sex steroid production is
not mediated by pituitary gonadotropin secretion; they produce
pseudoprecocity.
Ovarian tumors are rare in the pediatric population, occurring at
a rate of fewer than 3 in 100,000. Most ovarian masses are benign,
but 10–30% may be malignant. If they occur before 8 years of age,
they may cause signs of puberty. Ovarian malignancies, the most
common genital neoplasms in adolescence, account for only 1% of
childhood cancers. More than 60% are germ cell tumors, which are
dysgerminomas that can secrete tumor markers and sex hormones
(see Chapter 552). Five to 10% of germ cell tumors occur in phenotypic females, with abnormal gonads associated with the presence of a Y chromosome. The next most common are epithelial cell
tumors (20%), and nearly 10% are sex cord/stromal tumors (granulosa, Sertoli cell, and mesenchymal tumors). Multiple tumor markers can be seen in ovarian tumors, including α-­fetoprotein, human
chorionic gonadotropin, carcinoembryonic antigen, oncoproteins,
p105, p53, KRAS pathogenic variants, cyclin D1, epidermal growth
factor–related proteins and receptors, cathepsin B, and others. Variable levels of inhibin-­activin subunit gene expression have been
detected in ovarian tumors.
Functioning lesions of the ovary consist of benign cysts or malignant tumors. The majority synthesize estrogens; a few synthesize
androgens. The most common estrogen-­producing ovarian tumor
causing precocious puberty is the granulosa cell tumor. Other
tumors that can cause precocious puberty are thecomas, luteomas,
mixed types, theca-­lutein, follicular cysts, and other ovarian tumors
(i.e., teratoma, choriocarcinoma, and dysgerminoma).

ESTROGENIC LESIONS OF THE OVARY

These lesions cause isosexual precocious sexual development but
account for only a small percentage of all cases of precocity. Benign
ovarian follicular cysts are the most common tumors associated
with isosexual precocious puberty in females; they may rarely be
gonadotropin dependent. Gonadotropin-­
independent follicular
cysts that produce estrogen are often associated with McCune-­
Albright syndrome.

Juvenile Granulosa Cell Tumor

In childhood, the most common neoplasm of the ovary with estrogenic manifestations is the granulosa cell tumor, although it makes
up only 1–10% of all ovarian tumors. These tumors have distinctive histologic features that differ from those encountered in older
females (adult granulosa cell tumor). The cells have high mitotic
activity, follicles are often irregular, Call-­Exner bodies are rare, and
luteinization is frequent. The tumor may be solid or cystic or both.
It usually is benign. This tumor has been associated with multiple
enchondromas (Ollier disease) and with multiple subcutaneous
hemangiomas (Maffucci syndrome).

Clinical Manifestations and Diagnosis

The juvenile granulosa cell tumor has been observed in newborns
and may manifest with sexual precocity at 2 years of age or younger;

about half these tumors occurred before 10 years of age. The mean
age at diagnosis is 7.5 years. The tumors are almost always unilateral. The breasts become enlarged, rounded, and firm, and the nipples prominent. The external genitals resemble those of a normal
girl at puberty, and the uterus is enlarged. A white vaginal discharge
is followed by irregular or cyclic menstruation. However, ovulation
does not occur. The presenting manifestation may be abdominal
pain or swelling. Pubic hair is usually absent unless there is mild
virilization.
A mass is readily palpable in the lower portion of the abdomen in
most children by the time sexual precocity is evident. However, the
tumor may be small and escape detection even on careful rectal and
abdominal examination; ultrasonography may detect the tumors, but
CT or MRI scans are most sensitive. Most tumors are diagnosed at very
early stages of malignancy.
Plasma estradiol levels are markedly elevated. Plasma levels of
gonadotropins are suppressed and do not respond to gonadotropin-­
releasing hormone analog stimulation. Levels of antimüllerian hormone, inhibin B, and α-­
fetoprotein may be elevated. Activating
pathogenic variants of GSα are seen in 30%, and GATA-­4 expression
is retained in the more aggressive tumors, whereas antimüllerian
hormone levels are inversely proportional to tumor size. Bone age is
moderately advanced. Several case reports showing the association of
45,X/46,XY karyotype and ambiguous genitalia with ovarian granulosa
tumor have been published.

Treatment and Prognosis

The tumor should be removed as soon as the diagnosis is established. Prognosis is excellent because less than 5% of these tumors
in children are malignant. However, advanced-­stage tumors behave
aggressively and require difficult decisions regarding surgical
approaches and the use of irradiation and chemotherapy. In adults
with granulosa cell tumors, p53 expression is associated with unfavorable prognosis. Vaginal bleeding immediately after removal of
the tumor is common. Signs of precocious puberty abate and may
disappear within a few months after the operation. The secretion of
estrogens returns to normal.
Sex cord tumor with annular tubules is a distinctive tumor,
thought to arise from granulosa cells, that occurs primarily in
patients with Peutz-­Jeghers syndrome. These tumors are multifocal, bilateral, and usually benign. The presence of calcifications
aids ultrasonographic detection. Increased aromatase production
by these tumors results in gonadotropin-­independent precocious
puberty. Inhibin A and B levels are elevated and decrease after tumor
removal. In one study, 9 of 13 sex cord/stromal tumors exhibited
follicle-­stimulating hormone receptor pathogenic variants, suggesting a role for such mutation in the development of these tumors.
Chorioepithelioma has been reported only rarely. This highly
malignant tumor is thought to arise from a preexisting teratoma.
The usually unilateral tumor produces large amounts of human
chorionic gonadotropin, which stimulates the contralateral ovary
to secrete estrogen. Elevated levels of human chorionic gonadotropin are diagnostic.

Follicular Cyst

Small ovarian cysts (<0.7 cm in diameter) are common in prepubertal children. At puberty and in females with true isosexual
precocious puberty, larger cysts (1-­6 cm) are often seen; these are
secondary to stimulation by gonadotropins. Similar larger cysts
occur occasionally in young females with precocious puberty in the
absence of luteinizing hormone and follicle-­stimulating hormone.
Surgical removal or spontaneous involution of these cysts results
in regression of pubertal changes. The mechanism of production of
these autonomously functioning cysts is unknown. Such cysts may
form only once, or they may disappear and recur, resulting in waxing
and waning of the signs of precocious puberty. They may be unilateral or bilateral. The sexual precocity that occurs in young females

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 628 u Disorders of Sex Development
with McCune-­Albright syndrome is usually associated with autonomous follicular cysts caused by somatic-­
activating pathogenic
variants of the GSα-­protein occurring early in development (see
Chapter 600.6). Gonadotropins are suppressed, and estradiol levels
are often markedly elevated, but they may fluctuate widely and even
temporarily may return to normal. Gonadotropin-­releasing hormone analog stimulation fails to evoke an increase in gonadotropins. Ultrasonography is the method of choice for the detection and
monitoring of such cysts. Aromatase inhibitors are shown to be the
mainstay of therapy in females with McCune-­Albright syndrome
and persistent estradiol elevation. Estrogen receptor blockers have
also been used. A short period of observation to ascertain the lack
of spontaneous resolution is advisable before cyst aspiration or cystectomy is considered. Cystic neoplasms must be considered in the
differential diagnosis.

ANDROGENIC LESIONS OF THE OVARY

Virilizing ovarian tumors are rare at all ages but particularly so in prepubertal females. Arrhenoblastoma has been reported as early as 14
days of age, but few cases have been reported in females younger than
16 years of age.
The gonadoblastoma occurs exclusively in dysgenetic gonads,
particularly in phenotypic females who have a Y chromosome or a
Y fragment in their genotype (46,XY; 45,X/46,XY; 45,X/46,X-­fra).
There is a gonadoblastoma locus on the Y chromosome (GBY). The
tumors may be bilateral. Virilization occurs with some, but not all,
tumors. The clinical features are the same as those seen in patients
with virilizing adrenal tumors and include accelerated growth,
acne, clitoral enlargement, and growth of sexual hair. A palpable,
abdominal mass is found in about 50% of patients. Plasma levels of
testosterone and androstenedione are elevated, and gonadotropins
are suppressed. Ultrasonography, CT, and MRI usually localize the
lesion. The dysgenetic gonad of phenotypic females with a Y chromosome or fragment of Y chromosome containing GBY should be
removed prophylactically. When a unilateral tumor is removed, the
contralateral dysgenetic gonad should also be removed. Association of
gonadoblastoma and WAGR (Wilms tumor, aniridia, genitourinary
anomalies, mental retardation) syndrome is also reported. In an
immunohistochemical study of two gonadoblastomas, expressions
of WT1, p53, and MIS, as well as inhibin, were all demonstrated.
Virilizing manifestations occur occasionally in females with
juvenile granulosa cell tumors. Adrenal rests and hilum cell
tumors rarely lead to virilization. Activating pathogenic variants
of G protein genes have been described in ovarian (and testicular)
tumors. GSα variants, usually seen in gonadal tumors associated
with McCune-­Albright syndrome, were also noted in four of six
Leydig cell tumors (three ovarian, one testicular). Two granulosa
cell tumors and 1 thecoma of 10 ovarian tumors studied were found
to have GIP-­2 variants.
Sertoli-­L eydig cell tumors, rare sex cord/stromal neoplasms,
constitute less than 1% of ovarian tumors. The average age at diagnosis is 25 years; less than 5% of these tumors occur before puberty.
α-­Fetoprotein levels may be mildly elevated. In one 12-­month-­old
with Sertoli-­Leydig cell tumor presenting with isosexual precocity,
the only detectable tumor marker was the serum inhibin level, with
elevations in both A and B subunits. Five-­year survival rates are
70–90%.
Of 102 consecutive patients who underwent surgery because of
ovarian masses over a 15-­year period, the presenting symptoms were
acute abdominal pain in 56% and abdominal or pelvic mass in 22%. Of
nine children whose cause for surgery was presumed malignancy, three
had dysgerminomas, two had teratomas, two had juvenile granulosa
cell tumors, one had a Sertoli-­Leydig cell tumor, and one had a yolk
sac tumor.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

3503

Chapter 628

Disorders of Sex
Development
Patricia A. Donohoue
SEX DIFFERENTIATION

See also Chapter 622.
Differentiation and development of the gonads and genitalia are
largely complete in the first half of gestation. In normal differentiation, the final form of all sexual structures is consistent with normal
sex chromosomes (either XX or XY). A 46,XX complement of chromosomes, as well a genetic factors such as DAX1 (dosage-­sensitive/
sex-­reversal adrenal hypoplasia on the X chromosome), the signaling
molecule WNT-­4, and R-­Spondin1, are among the many needed for
the development of normal ovaries. Development of the male phenotype is potentially more complex. It requires a Y chromosome and, specifically, an intact SRY (sex-­determining region on the Y chromosome)
gene, which, in association with genes such as SOX9, SF-­1 (steroidogenic factor-­1), WT1 (Wilms tumor 1), and others (see Chapter 622),
directs the undifferentiated gonad to become a testis. Aberrant recombinations may result in X chromosomes carrying SRY, resulting in XX
males, or Y chromosomes that have lost SRY, resulting in XY females.
Antimüllerian hormone (AMH) causes the müllerian (paramesonephric) ducts to regress; in its absence, they persist as the uterus, fallopian
tubes, cervix, and upper vagina. AMH activation in the testes probably
requires the SF-­1 gene. By about 8 weeks of gestation, the Leydig cells of
the testis begin to produce testosterone. During this critical period of male
differentiation, testosterone secretion is stimulated by placental human
chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), which peaks at 8-­12 weeks. In the latter
half of pregnancy, lower levels of testosterone are maintained by luteinizing hormone (LH) secreted by the fetal pituitary. Testosterone produced
locally initiates development of the ipsilateral wolffian (mesonephric) duct
into the epididymis, vas deferens, and seminal vesicle. Complete development of the external genitalia also requires dihydrotestosterone (DHT),
the more active metabolite of testosterone. DHT is produced largely from
circulating testosterone and is necessary to fuse the genital folds to form
the penis and scrotum. DHT is produced from testosterone via the action
of the enzyme 5α-­reductase. DHT is also produced through an alternative biosynthetic pathway from androstanediol, and this pathway must
be intact for normal and complete prenatal virilization to occur. Figure
628.1 illustrates the production of steroid hormones in various glands and
the integrated pathways to the synthesis of DHT. A functional androgen
receptor, produced by an X-­linked gene, is required for testosterone and
DHT to induce these androgen effects.
In the XX fetus with normal long and short arms of the X chromosome, the bipotential gonad develops into an ovary by about the 10th
to 11th week. This occurs only in the absence of SRY, testosterone, and
AMH and requires a normal gene in the dosage-­sensitive/sex-­reversal
locus DAX1, the WNT-­4 molecule, and R-­Spondin1. A female external
phenotype develops in the absence of fetal gonads. However, the male
phenotype development requires androgen production and action.
Estrogen is unnecessary for normal prenatal sexual differentiation, as
demonstrated by 46,XX patients with aromatase deficiency.
Chromosomal aberrations may result in ambiguity of the external genitalia. Conditions of aberrant sex differentiation may also occur with the
XX or XY genotype. The appropriate term for what was previously called
intersex is disorders of sex development (DSD). This term defines a condition “in which development of chromosomal, gonadal, or anatomic sex
is atypical.” It is increasingly preferable to use the term atypical genitalia
rather than ambiguous genitalia. Tables 628.1 and 628.2 compare previous

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3504 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Sex Steroid Synthesis
Alternative Pathway
To DHT

Adrenal & Sex Steroid Synthesis
Cholesterol

CYP11A1  StAR

Pregnenolone

5DHP
AKR1C2/4

S
R
D
5
A
1

17-OH
allopregnanolone

Sex Steroid Synthesis
Standard Pathway

Adrenal Steroid Synthesis

Progesterone

C
Y
P
1
7
A
1

P
O
R

17-OH pregnenolone
HSD3B2
17-OH progesterone

CYP21A2  POR

DOC

11-Deoxycortisol
CYP11B1

CYP17A1  POR
HSD17B3

Corticosterone

C
Y
P
1
7
A
1

P
O
R

DHEA

A
R
O
HSD17B3 
HSD17B2
P
O
R

Androstenedione

Estrone

Testosterone

Estradiol

SRD5A2

Cortisol

DHT

CYP11B2
Androstanediol
AKR1C2/RoDH (ox)

Aldosterone

DHT

Fig. 628.1 Steroidogenic pathways enzyme names and activities. CYP11A1: cholesterol side-­
chain cleavage. Enzyme activities include
20-­hydroxylase, 22-­hydroxylase, and 20,22-­lyase. CYP17A1: activities include 17α-­hydroxylase and 17,20-­lyase. 3βHSD2 (HSD3B2): activities include 3β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (type 2) and D5D4-­isomerase. CYP21A2: activity is 21-­hydroxylase. CYP11B1: activity is 11β-­hydroxylase.
CYP11B2: activities include 18-­hydroxylase (CMOI) and 18-­dehydrogenase (CMOII). SRD5A1: activity is 5α-­reductase type 1. SRD5A2: activity is
5α-­reductase type 2. HSD17B2: activity is 17β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2. HSD17B3: activity is 17β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type
3. AKR1C2/4: activities are 3α-­reductase types 1 and 3. AKR1C2/RoDH (ox): activities are 3α-­reductase and 3-­hydroxyepimerase. ARO, aromatase;
CMOI, corticosterone methyl oxidase type 1; CMOII, corticosterone methyl oxidase type 2; DHEA, dehydroepiandrosterone; DHT, dihydrotestosterone; 5αDHP, 5α dihydroprogesterone. (Adapted from Kim MS, Donohoue PA. Adrenal disorders. In Kappy MS, Allen DB, Geffner ME, eds.
Pediatric Practice Endocrinology, 2nd ed. New York: McGraw Hill, 2014; and Flück CE, Meyer-­Böni M, Pandey AV, et al. Why boys will be boys: two
pathways of fetal testicular androgen biosynthesis are needed for male sexual differentiation. Am J Hum Genet. 2011;89:201–218.)

Table 628.1  Revised Nomenclature
PREVIOUS

CURRENTLY ACCEPTED

Intersex

Disorders of sex development
(DSDs)

Male pseudohermaphrodite

46,XY DSD

Undervirilization of an XY male

46,XY DSD

Undermasculinization of an XY
male

46,XY DSD

46,XY intersex

46,XY DSD

Female pseudohermaphrodite

46,XX DSD

Overvirilization of an XX female

46,XX DSD

Masculinization of an XX female

46,XX DSD

46,XX intersex

46,XX DSD

True hermaphrodite

Ovotesticular DSD

Gonadal intersex

Ovotesticular DSD

XX male or XX sex reversal

46,XX testicular DSD

XY sex reversal

46,XY complete gonadal
dysgenesis

From Lee PA, Houk CP, Ahmed SF, et al. Consensus statement on management of
intersex disorders. Pediatrics. 2006;118:e488–e500. Table 1.

terms with their revised etiologic classification nomenclature. Table 622.1
in Chapter 622 lists some of the many genes that may be abnormal in various forms of DSD. Gender fluidity (nonconformity) has become a socially
and, in New York State, legally accepted concept and is often expressed
by self-­identified people as intersex. New York State has an intersex category on its birth certificate. Partial androgen insensitivity, 5α-­reductase
deficiency, and mixed gonadal dysgenesis are often associated with gender dissatisfaction, and an intersex designation may help with future self-­
identification once the child is mature.
The definition of atypical or ambiguous genitalia, in a broad sense,
is any case in which the external genitalia do not appear completely
male or completely female. Although there are standards for genital
size dimensions, variations in size of these structures do not always
constitute ambiguity.
Development of the external genitalia begins with the potential to
be either male or female (Fig. 628.2). Virilization of a female, the most
common form of DSD, results in varying phenotypes (Fig. 628.3) that
develop from the basic bipotential genital appearances of the embryo
(see Fig. 628.2).

DIAGNOSTIC APPROACH TO THE PATIENT WITH
ATYPICAL OR AMBIGUOUS GENITALIA

The appearance of the external genitalia is rarely diagnostic of a particular disorder and thus does not often allow distinction among the
various forms of DSD. The most common forms of 46,XX DSD are
virilizing forms of congenital adrenal hyperplasia. It is important to
note that in 46,XY DSD, the specific diagnosis is not found in up to
50% of cases; partial androgen insensitivity syndrome (PAIS) and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 628 u Disorders of Sex Development
Table 628.2  Etiologic Classification of Disorders of Sex
Development
46,XX DSD
Androgen Exposure
Fetal/fetoplacental source
21-­Hydroxylase (P450c21 or CYP21) deficiency
11β-­Hydroxylase (P450c11 or CYP11B1) deficiency
3β-­Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase II (3β-­HSD II) deficiency
Cytochrome P450 oxidoreductase (POR deficiency)
Aromatase (P450arom or CYP19) deficiency
Glucocorticoid receptor gene pathogenic variant
Maternal source
Virilizing ovarian tumor
Virilizing adrenal tumor
Androgenic drugs
Disorder of Ovarian Development
XX gonadal dysgenesis
Testicular DSD (SRY+, SOX9 duplication)
Undetermined Origin
Associated with genitourinary and gastrointestinal tract defects
46,XY DSD
Defects in Testicular Development
Denys-­Drash syndrome (pathogenic variant in WT1)
WAGR syndrome (Wilms tumor, aniridia, genitourinary malformation,
retardation)
Deletion of 11p13
Campomelic syndrome (autosomal gene at 17q24.3-­q25.1) and
SOX9 pathogenic variant
XY pure gonadal dysgenesis (Swyer syndrome)
Pathogenic variant in SRY
XY gonadal agenesis
Unknown cause
Deficiency of Testicular Hormones
Leydig cell aplasia
Pathogenic variant in LH receptor
Lipoid adrenal hyperplasia (P450scc or CYP11A1) deficiency;
pathogenic variant in StAR (steroidogenic acute regulatory protein)
3β-­HSD II deficiency
17-­Hydroxylase/17,20-­lyase (P450c17 or CYP17) deficiency
Persistent müllerian duct syndrome because of antimüllerian
hormone gene variants or receptor defects for antimüllerian
hormone
Defect in Androgen Action
Dihydrotestosterone deficiency because of 5α-­reductase II
pathogenic variants or AKR1C2/AKR1C4 variants
Androgen receptor defects:
Complete androgen insensitivity syndrome
Partial androgen insensitivity syndrome
(Reifenstein and other syndromes)
Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz syndrome (defect in conversion of
7-­dehydrocholesterol to cholesterol, DHCR7)
OVOTESTICULAR DSD
XX
XY
XX/XY chimeras
SEX CHROMOSOME DSD
45,X (Turner syndrome and variants)
47,XXY (Klinefelter syndrome and variants)
45,X/46,XY (mixed gonadal dysgenesis, sometimes a cause of
ovotesticular DSD)
46,XX/46,XY (chimeric, sometimes a cause of ovotesticular DSD)
DSD, Disorders of sex development.
Data from Lee PA, Houk CP, Ahmed SF, et al. Consensus statement on management of
intersex disorders. Pediatrics. 2006;118:e488–e500.

3505

pure gonadal dysgenesis are common identifiable etiologies in XY
DSD. At one center with a large experience, the etiologies of DSD in
250 patients older than 25 years were compiled. The six most common diagnoses accounted for 50% of the cases. These included virilizing congenital adrenal hyperplasia (14%), androgen insensitivity
syndrome (AIS; 10%), mixed gonadal dysgenesis (8%), clitoral/labial
anomalies (7%), hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (6%), and 46,XY
small-­for-­gestational-­age males with hypospadias (6%). Potential diagnostic clues are noted in Tables 628.3 and 628.4.
The potential of not finding a diagnosis in patients with DSD and the
resulting lack of specific management emphasizes the need for thorough diagnostic evaluations. These include biochemical characterization of possible steroidogenic enzymatic defects in each patient with
genital ambiguity. The parents need counseling about the potentially
complex nature of the baby’s condition and guidance as to how to deal
with their well-­meaning but curious friends and family members. The
evaluation and management should be carried out by a multidisciplinary team of experts that includes pediatric endocrinology, pediatric surgery/urology, pediatric radiology, newborn medicine, genetics,
and psychology. Once the sex of rearing has been agreed on by the family and team, treatment can be organized. Genetic counseling should
be offered when the specific diagnosis is established.
After a complete history and physical exam, the common diagnostic
approach includes multiple steps, described in the following outline.
These steps are usually performed simultaneously rather than waiting
for results of one test before performing another, because of the sensitive and sometimes urgent nature of the condition. Careful attention to
the presence of physical features other than the genitalia is crucial to
determine if a diagnosis of a particular multisystem syndrome is possible (see Chapters 628.1, 628.2, and 628.3). Table 628.5 summarizes
many of the features of commonly encountered causes of DSD. Exome
sequencing or molecular testing using specific DSD DNA panels are
quite useful in the diagnostic evaluation, especially in 46,XY DSD, and
may become first-­line diagnostic tests.
Diagnostic tests include the following:
1.	Blood karyotype, with rapid determination of sex chromosomes (in
many centers this is available within 24-­48 hours)
2.	Other blood tests
a.	
Screen for congenital adrenal hyperplasia: cortisol biosynthetic precursors and adrenal androgens (particularly
17-­hydroxyprogesterone and androstenedione for 21-­hydroxylase
deficiency, the most common form). In the United States, all 50
states have a newborn screen for 21-­hydroxylase deficiency.
b.	Screen for androgen biosynthetic defects with serum levels of androgens and their precursors.
c.	
Assess for gonadal response to gonadotropin stimulation to
screen for the presence and function of testicular gonadal tissue:
obtain serum levels of testosterone and DHT before and after IM
injections of hCG.
d.	Molecular genetic analyses for SRY, other Y-­specific loci, and
when needed, other single-­gene defects associated with DSD.
e.	Gonadotropin (LH and follicle-­stimulating hormone [FSH]) levels.
3.	The internal anatomy of patients with ambiguous genitalia can be
defined with one or more of the following studies:
a.	Voiding cystourethrogram
b.	Endoscopic examination of the genitourinary tract
c.	Pelvic ultrasound; renal and adrenal ultrasound
d.	Pelvic MRI
e.	Exploratory laparoscopy to locate and characterize/biopsy the
gonads
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3506 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Sexual appearance of fetus at 3rd to 4th mo of pregnancy

Sexual appearance of fetus at 2nd to 3rd mo of pregnancy
Genital tubercle

Genital
tubercle
(penis)
Urethral fold

Genital
tubercle
(clitoris)
Inner labial fold

Urethral groove

Vulval groove

Scrotal swelling
Male

Anus

Female

Anus

Outer labial
swelling

Genital groove

Urethrolabial fold

Sexual appearance of fetus at time of birth

Labioscrotal fold

Anus

Male and female identical

Male

Penis
Urethral raphe
(joining line of
urethral fold)
Scrotal raphe
(joining line of
scrotal swelling)
Scrotum
Anus
Female

Clitoris
Urethral
opening
Labia minora
Labia majora
Vaginal opening
Anus

Fig. 628.2 Schematic demonstration of differentiation of normal male and female genitalia during embryogenesis. (From Zitelli BJ, Davis HW. Atlas
of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis, 4th ed. St. Louis: Mosby, 2002: p. 328.)

Table 628.3  Associations of Genital Abnormalities
ABNORMAL
CHARACTERISTICS

A

C

B

D

E

Fig. 628.3 Examples of atypical genitalia. These cases include

ovotesticular disorder of sexual development (A) and congenital virilizing adrenal hyperplasia (B-­E). (B-­D, Courtesy D. Becker, MD, Pittsburgh.
From Zitelli BJ, Davis HW. Atlas of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis, 4th ed.
St. Louis: Mosby, 2002: p. 329.)

628.1 46,XX DSD
Patricia A. Donohoue
The genotype is XX and the gonads are ovaries, but the external genitalia are virilized. There is no significant prenatal AMH production
because the gonads are ovaries. Thus the uterus, fallopian tubes, and
cervix develop. The varieties and causes of this condition are relatively
few. Most instances result from exposure of the female fetus to excessive exogenous or endogenous androgens during intrauterine life. The
changes consist principally of virilization of the external genitalia (clitoral hypertrophy and labioscrotal fusion).

CONGENITAL ADRENAL HYPERPLASIA
See Chapter 616.1.

EXAMPLES OF ASSOCIATED
DISORDERS

MALE-­APPEARING GENITALIA
Micropenis
Growth hormone or luteinizing hormone
deficiency
Testosterone deficiency (in second and
third trimesters)
Partial androgen insensitivity
Syndrome: idiopathic
Hypospadias (more
severe)

Disorders of gonadal development
46,XX DSD
Ovotesticular DSD
46,XX or 46,XY DSD
Syndrome: idiopathic

Impalpable gonads

Anorchia
Persistent müllerian duct syndrome
46,XX DSD with 21-­or 11β-­hydroxylase
deficiency
Cryptorchidism

Small gonads

47,XXY, 46,XX DSD
Dysgenetic or rudimentary testes

Inguinal mass (uterus
or tube)

Persistent müllerian duct syndrome,
dysgenetic testes

FEMALE-­APPEARING GENITALIA
Clitoromegaly
XX with 21-­or 11β-­hydroxylase or
3β-­hydroxy dehydrogenase deficiency
Other 46,XX DSD
Gonadal dysgenesis, dysgenetic testes,
ovotesticular DSD
46,XY DSD
Tumor infiltration of clitoris
Syndrome: idiopathic
Posterior labial fusion

As for clitoromegaly

Palpable gonad(s)

Gonadal dysgenesis, dysgenetic testes,
ovotesticular DSD
46,XY DSD

Inguinal hernia or mass

As for palpable gonad(s)

DSD, Disorders of sex development.
From Al Remeithi S, Wherrett DK. Disorders of sex development. In: Martin RJ, Fanaroff
AA, Walsh MC, eds. Fanaroff and Martin’s Neonatal-­Perinatal Medicine, 10th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015: Table 98.3.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 628 u Disorders of Sex Development
Table 628.4  Key Points in Evaluation of Infants with
Disorders of Sexual Development
Identification of
syndromic features in
physical exam

Evaluation of internal
genitalia to conclude
about exposure to
AMH using pelvic
ultrasound or MRI

• Craniosynostosis and other synostosis
in POR deficiency
• Cleft palate and second to third toe
syndactyly in Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz (SLO)
syndrome
• Pierre Robin sequence or campomelia
for SOX9 pathogenic variants
• Kidney abnormalities or dysfunction in
WTI or WNT4 pathogenic variants
• Cardiac abnormalities in Turner
syndrome, mixed gonadal dysgenesis
or GATA4 pathogenic variants
• Adrenal insufficiency in cases of SLO,
NR5A1 (SF-­1) pathogenic variants
• POR deficiency or congenital adrenal
hyperplasia or hypoplasia forms
• Polyneuropathy in DHH pathogenic
variants
• Chondrodysplasia in HHAT
pathogenic variants
• Blepharophimosis/ptosis in FOXL2
pathogenic variants
Normal Uterus In:
46,XY complete gonadal dysgenesis
(CGD)
46,XX CGD
46,XX with androgen exposure (i.e.,
virilizing forms of CAH)
Turner syndrome
Abnormal Uterus In:
46,XY PGD (partial gonadal dysgenesis)
Mixed gonadal dysgenesis
Absent Uterus In:
46,XY DSD with androgen synthesis
defects and androgen action defects
46,XX testicular DSD

POR, P450 oxidoreductase; AMH, anti-Mullerian hormone; CAH, congenital adrenal
hyperplasia.
Modified from Rodriguez-­Buritica D. Overview of genetics of disorders of sexual
development. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2015;27:675–684. Table 1.

This is the most common cause of atypical genitalia and of 46,XX
DSD. Females with the 21-­hydroxylase and 11-­hydroxylase defects are
the most highly virilized, although minimal virilization also occurs
with the type II 3β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase defect (see Fig.
628.3). Female patients with salt-­losing congenital adrenal hyperplasia
(CAH) caused by 21-­hydroxylase deficiency tend to have more virilization than do patients with the non–salt-­losing form. Masculinization
may be so complete that a penile urethra results, and the patient may
appear to be a male with bilateral cryptorchidism.

AROMATASE DEFICIENCY

In 46,XX females, the rare condition of aromatase deficiency during fetal life leads to 46,XX DSD and results in hypergonadotropic
hypogonadism at puberty because of ovarian failure to synthesize
estrogen.
Examples of this condition include two 46,XX infants who had
enlargement of the clitoris and posterior labial fusion at birth. In
one instance, maternal serum and urinary levels of estrogen were
very low and serum levels of androgens were high. Cord serum levels of estrogen were also extremely low, and levels of androgen were
elevated. The second patient also had virilization of unknown cause
since birth, but the aromatase deficiency was not diagnosed until
14 years of age, when she had further virilization and failed to go

3507

into puberty. At that time, she had elevated levels of gonadotropins and androgens but low estrogen levels, and ultrasonography
revealed large ovarian cysts bilaterally. These patients demonstrate
the important role of aromatase in the conversion of androgens
to estrogens. Additional female and male patients with aromatase
deficiency as a consequence of pathogenic variants in the aromatase gene (CYP19) are known. Two siblings with this gene defect
were described, both of whom had tall stature because of a lack of
estrogen-­mediated epiphyseal fusion. The 28-­year-­old XX proband
was 177.6 cm tall (+2.5 SD) after having received hormonal replacement therapy. Her 24-­year-­old brother was 204 cm tall (+3.7 SD)
and had a bone age of 14 years. Low-­dose estradiol replacement,
carefully adjusted to maintain normal age-­appropriate levels, may
be indicated for affected females, even prepubertally.

CORTISOL RESISTANCE CAUSED BY A
GLUCOCORTICOID RECEPTOR GENE PATHOGENIC
VARIANT

A 9-­
year-­
old female with 46,XX DSD, thought to be caused by
21-­hydroxylase deficiency (CAH) since the age of 5 years, had elevated
cortisol levels both at baseline and after dexamethasone, hypertension, and hypokalemia, suggestive of the diagnosis of generalized glucocorticoid resistance. A novel homozygous variant in exon 5 of the
glucocorticoid receptor was demonstrated. In this Brazilian family,
the condition was autosomal recessive. Virilization occurs because of
excess adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) stimulation of adrenal
steroid production because the glucocorticoid receptor defect is also
present in the pituitary gland, which senses inadequate cortisol effect
to provide negative feedback.

P450 Oxidoreductase Deficiency

Cytochrome P450 oxidoreductase (POR), encoded by a gene on
7q11.2, is a cofactor required for normal enzymatic activity of the
microsomal 21-­and 17-­hydroxylases. POR deficiency thus causes
partial combined P450C17 and P450C21 steroidogenic defects.
Females are born with ambiguous genitalia, but as opposed to classic CAH, the virilization does not progress postnatally and androgen levels are normal or low. Males may be born undervirilized.
Both may exhibit bony abnormalities seen in Antley-­Bixler syndrome. Conversely, in a series of Antley-­Bixler syndrome patients,
those with ambiguous genitalia and disordered steroidogenesis had
cytochrome POR deficiency. Those without genital ambiguity with
normal steroidogenesis had FGFR2 pathogenic variants. The cardinal features of Antley-­Bixler syndrome include craniosynostosis,
severe midface hypoplasia, proptosis, choanal atresia/stenosis, frontal bossing, dysplastic ears, depressed nasal bridge, radiohumeral
synostosis, long bone fractures and femoral bowing, and urogenital
abnormalities.

VIRILIZING MATERNAL TUMORS

Rarely, the female fetus has been virilized by a maternal androgen-­
producing tumor. In a few cases, the lesion was a benign adrenal
adenoma, but all others were ovarian tumors, particularly androblastomas, luteomas, and Krukenberg tumors (Table 628.6). Maternal virilization may be manifested by enlargement of her clitoris,
acne, deepening of the voice, decreased lactation, hirsutism, and
elevated levels of androgens. In the infant, there is enlargement
of the clitoris of varying degrees, often with labial fusion. Mothers of children with unexplained 46,XX DSDs should undergo
physical examination and measurements of their own levels of
plasma testosterone, dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) sulfate, and
androstenedione.

EXPOSURE TO ANDROGENIC DRUGS BY WOMEN
DURING PREGNANCY

Testosterone and 17-­methyltestosterone have been reported to cause
46,XX DSDs in some instances (see Table 628.6). The greatest number
of cases has resulted from the use of certain progestational compounds

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3508 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 628.5  Atypical Genitalia: Steps in Establishing the Diagnosis

21-­OH DEFICIENCY

GONADAL
DYSGENESIS WITH
Y CHROMOSOME

OVOTESTICULAR
DSD

PARTIAL
ANDROGEN
INSENSITIVITY

BLOCK IN
TESTOSTERONE
SYNTHESIS

CLINICAL FEATURE
Palpable gonad(s)

–

±

±

+

+

Uterus present*

+

+

Usually

–

–

Increased skin
pigmentation

±

–

–

–

–

Sick baby

±

–

–

–

±

Dysmorphic features

–

±

–

–

–

DIAGNOSTIC CONSIDERATIONS
Serum 17-­OHP
Elevated

Normal

Normal

Normal

Normal

Electrolytes

Possibly abnormal

Normal

Normal

Normal

Possibly abnormal

Karyotype

46,XX

45,X/46,XY or others

46,XX most common

46,XY

46,XY

Testosterone
response to hCG

NA

Positive

Normal or reduced

Positive response

Reduced or absent

Gonadal biopsy

NA

Dysgenetic gonad

Ovotestis

Normal testis with
± Leydig cell
hyperplasia

Normal testis

Genital skin fibroblast
culture
AR assay, OR blood
DNA screening for
AR gene variants

Measure testosterone
precursors

Other testing

*As determined by ultrasound, MRI, or rectal examination.
AR, Androgen receptor; DSD, disorder of sex development; hCG, human chorionic gonadotropin; 21-­OH, 21-­hydroxylase; 17-­OHP, 17-­hydroxyprogesterone; NA, not applicable.
Adapted from Donohoue PA, Saenger PH. Ambiguous genitalia. In Finberg L, Kleinman RE, eds. Saunders Manual of Pediatric Practice, Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2002: p. 874.

Table 628.6  Sources of Maternal-­Derived Androgens
ENDOGENOUS
Benign
Luteoma of pregnancy
Adrenal adenoma
Hyperreactio luteinalis
Thecoma/fibroma
Stromal hyperthecosis
Brenner tumor
Serous cystadenoma
Mature cystic teratoma (dermoid cyst)
Malignant
Metastatic carcinomas (Krukenberg tumor)
Sex-­cord stromal tumors—granulosa cell and Sertoli-­Leydig tumors
Adrenal cortical carcinoma
Cystadenocarcinoma
Hilar cell tumor
EXOGENOUS
Synthetic Androgens
Danazol
Progestins (medroxyprogesterone acetate)
Potassium-­sparing diuretics
From Auchus RJ, Chang AY. 46,XX DSD: the masculinised female. Best Pract Res Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 2010;24:219–242. Table 2.

for the treatment of threatened abortion. These progestins have since
been replaced by nonvirilizing ones.
Infants with virilization and 46,XX chromosomes and caudal
anomalies have been reported for whom no virilizing agent could be

identified. In such instances, the disorder is usually associated with
other congenital defects, particularly of the urinary and gastrointestinal tracts. Y-­specific DNA sequences, including SRY, are absent. In one
case, a scrotal raphe and elevated testosterone levels were found, but
the cause remains unknown.

SF-­1 Pathogenic Variants

In a worldwide study of patients with 46,XX ovotesticular DSD,
a specific variant in SF-­1 was identified: p.Arg92Trp. Functional
studies showed that the variant probably interfered with inhibition
of testicular development. In one family with a maternally transmitted variant, the mother had early menopause. Multiple other SF-­1
variants have been reported to cause isolated ovarian insufficiency,
some associated with 46,XY DSDs in their offspring.

46,XX Testicular DSD

In this condition, also known as XX male, the gonads are testicular and
virilization is typically incomplete. Infertility and/or gonadal failure
may develop after childhood. Many cases are caused by translocation
of SRY sequences onto one of the X chromosomes, often paired with
duplication of SOX-­9. The appropriate sex of rearing may be difficult
to determine.

46,XX Gonadal Dysgenesis

These females typically present at puberty with normal female genitalia
and lack of breast development and hypergonadotropic hypogonadism. Normal müllerian structures are present, but ovaries are absent
or streaked.

Undetermined/Unknown

Rarely, 46,XX DSDs can be associated with other congenital anomalies,
especially those of the GU or GI tract, and are thus multifactorial in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 628 u Disorders of Sex Development
origin. These include cloacal exstrophy and MURCS association (müllerian hypoplasia, renal agenesis, and cervicothoracic somite abnormalities). Isolated deficiency of müllerian development is known as
Meyer-­Rokitansky-­Küster-­Hauser syndrome.

3509

dysgenetic gonads. Wilms tumor usually occurs by 2 years of age.
Some cases also had unexplained obesity, raising the question of an
obesity-­associated gene in this region of chromosome 11 and naming the syndrome WAGRO.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Campomelic Syndrome

628.2 46,XY DSD
Patricia A. Donohoue
In this condition the genotype is XY but the external genitalia are
either not completely virilized, are ambiguous (atypical), or are
completely female. When gonads can be found, they typically contain testicular elements; their development ranges from rudimentary to normal. Because the process of normal virilization in the
fetus is so complex, it is not surprising that there are many varieties
and causes of 46,XY DSD. The etiology is not identified in up to
50% of cases.

DEFECTS IN TESTICULAR DIFFERENTIATION

The first step in male differentiation is conversion of the bipotential
gonad into a testis. In the XY fetus, if there is a deletion of the short
arm of the Y chromosome or of the SRY gene, male differentiation
does not occur. The phenotype is female; müllerian (paramesonephric) ducts are well developed because of the absence of AMH,
and gonads consist of undifferentiated streaks. By contrast, even
extreme deletions of the long arm of the Y chromosome (Yq−) have
been found in normally developed males, most of whom are azoospermic and have short stature. This indicates that the long arm of
the Y chromosome normally has genes that prevent these manifestations. In many syndromes in which the testes fail to differentiate,
Y chromosomes are morphologically normal on karyotyping.

Wilms Tumor-Suppressor Gene Pathogenic Variants:
Denys-­Drash, Frasier, and WAGR Syndromes

Denys-­Drash syndrome: The constellation of nephropathy with
atypical (ambiguous) genitalia and bilateral Wilms tumor is the major
phenotype of this syndrome. Most reported cases have been 46,XY.
Müllerian ducts are often present, indicating a global deficiency of
fetal testicular function. Patients with a 46,XX karyotype have normal
external genitalia. The onset of proteinuria in infancy progresses to
nephrotic syndrome and end-­stage renal failure by 3 years of age, with
focal or diffuse mesangial sclerosis being the most consistent histopathologic finding. Wilms tumor usually develops in children younger
than 2 years of age and is frequently bilateral. Gonadoblastomas have
also been reported.
Several pathogenic variants in WT1, located on chromosome 11p13,
have been found. WT1 functions as a tumor suppressor gene and a
transcription factor and is expressed in the genital ridge and fetal
gonads. Nearly all reported variants are near or within the zinc finger–coding region. One report found a zinc finger domain variant in
the WT1 alleles of a patient with no GU abnormalities, suggesting that
some cases of sporadic Wilms tumor may carry the WT1 pathogenic
variant.
Frasier syndrome: Different pathogenic variants in WT1, constitutional heterozygote variants at intron 9, have been described in Frasier
syndrome, a condition of nonspecific focal and segmental glomerulosclerosis, 46,XY gonadal dysgenesis, and frequent gonadoblastoma, but without Wilms tumor.
WAGR syndrome: This acronym refers to a contiguous gene syndrome consisting of Wilms tumor, aniridia, GU malformations, and
retardation (WAGR). These children have a deletion of one copy
of chromosome 11p13, which may be visible on karyotype analysis. The deleted region encompasses the aniridia gene (PAX6) and
the Wilms tumor suppressor gene (WT1). Only the 46,XY patients
have genital abnormalities, ranging from cryptorchidism to severe
deficiency of virilization. Gonadoblastomas have developed in the

See Chapter 735.
This form of short-­limbed skeletal dysplasia is characterized by
anterior bowing of the femur and tibia, small, bladeless scapulae,
small thoracic cavities, and 11 pairs of ribs, along with malformations of other organs. It is usually lethal in early infancy. Approximately 75% of reported 46,XY patients exhibit a completely female
phenotype; the external and internal genitalia are female. Some
46,XY patients have ambiguous genitalia. The gonads appear to be
ovaries but histologically may contain elements of both ovaries and
testes.
The gene responsible for the condition is SOX9 and is on 17q24-­
q25. This gene is structurally related to SRY and directly regulates
development of the type II collagen gene (COL2A1). The same variants may result in different gonadal phenotypes. Gonadoblastoma
was reported in a patient with this condition. The inheritance is
autosomal dominant.

SF-­1 (Also Known as Ad4BP and NR5A1) Defects and
46,XY DSD

Adrenal insufficiency and 46,XY gonadal dysgenesis have been
described in patients with pathogenic variants in SF-­1. In some of
these patients, if the mother shares the SF-­1 variant, she has premature
ovarian insufficiency. SF-­1–related 46,XY DSD may also occur in the
absence of adrenal insufficiency and may resemble PAIS.
46,XY sex reversal has also been described in patients with deletions
of parts of autosomal loci on chromosomes 2q, 9p, and 10q.

XY Pure Gonadal Dysgenesis (Swyer Syndrome)

The designation pure distinguishes this condition from forms of
gonadal dysgenesis that are of chromosomal origin and associated with somatic anomalies. Affected patients have normal stature and a female phenotype, including vagina, uterus, and fallopian
tubes, but at pubertal age, breast development and menarche fail to
occur. None of the other phenotypic features associated with 45,X
(Turner syndrome) are present. Patients present at puberty with
hypergonadotropic primary amenorrhea. Familial cases suggest an
X-­linked or a sex-­limited dominant autosomal transmission. Most
of the patients examined have had pathogenic variants in SRY. The
gonads consist of almost totally undifferentiated streaks despite the
presence of a cytogenetically normal Y chromosome. The primitive
gonad cannot accomplish any testicular function, including suppression of müllerian (paramesonephric) ducts. There may be hilar
cells in the gonad capable of producing some androgens; accordingly, some virilization, such as clitoral enlargement, may occur
at the age of puberty. The streak gonads may undergo neoplastic
changes, such as gonadoblastomas and dysgerminomas, and should
be removed as soon as the diagnosis is established, regardless of the
age of the patient.
Pure gonadal dysgenesis also occurs in XX individuals.

XY Gonadal Agenesis Syndrome (Embryonic
Testicular Regression Syndrome)

In this rare syndrome, the external genitalia are slightly ambiguous but more nearly female. Hypoplasia of the labia; some degree
of labioscrotal fusion; a small, clitoris-­like phallus; and a perineal
urethral opening are present. No uterus, no gonadal tissue, and usually no vagina can be found. At the age of puberty, no sexual development occurs and gonadotropin levels are elevated. Most children
have been reared as females. In several patients with XY gonadal
agenesis in whom no gonads could be found on exploration, significant rises in testosterone followed stimulation with hCG, indicating

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3510 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Leydig cell function somewhere. Siblings with the disorder are
known.
It is presumed that testicular tissue was active long enough during fetal life for AMH to inhibit development of müllerian ducts but
not long enough for testosterone production to result in virilization. In one patient, no deletion of the Y chromosome was found by
means of Y-­specific DNA probes. Testicular degeneration seems to
occur between the 8th and 12th fetal week. Regression of the testis
before the 8th week of gestation results in Swyer syndrome; between
the 14th and 20th weeks of gestation, it results in the rudimentary
testis syndrome; and after the 20th week, it results in anorchia.
In bilateral anorchia, sometimes referred to as vanishing testes
syndrome, testes are absent, but the male phenotype is complete;
it is presumed that tissue with fetal testicular function was active
during the critical period of genital differentiation but that sometime later it was damaged. Bilateral anorchia in identical twins
and unilateral anorchia in identical twins and in siblings suggest a
genetic predisposition. Coexistence of anorchia and gonadal agenesis syndrome in a sibship is evidence for a relationship between the
disorders. A retrospective review of urologic explorations revealed
absent testes in 21% of 691 testes. Of those, 73% had blind-­ending
cord structures with the suggested site of the vanishing testes being
the inguinal canal (59%), abdomen (21%), superficial inguinal ring
(18%), and scrotum (2%). It was suggested that the presence of
cord structures on laparoscopy should prompt inguinal exploration
because viable testicular tissue was found in four of these children.

DEFICIENCY OF TESTICULAR HORMONE
PRODUCTION

Several genetic defects have been delineated in the enzymatic synthesis
of testosterone by the fetal testis, and a defect in Leydig cell differentiation has been described. These defects produce 46,XY males with inadequate masculinization. Because levels of testosterone are normally low
before puberty, an hCG stimulation test may be needed in children to
assess the ability of the testes to synthesize testosterone.

Leydig Cell Aplasia

Patients with aplasia or hypoplasia of the Leydig cells usually have
female phenotypes, but there may be mild virilization. Testes, epididymis, and vas deferens are present; the uterus and fallopian
tubes are absent because of normal production of AMH. There is
no breast development at puberty, but pubic hair development may
be normal because of the production of adrenal androgens. Plasma
levels of testosterone are low and do not respond to hCG; LH levels
are elevated. The Leydig cells of the testes are absent or markedly
deficient. The defect may involve a lack of functional receptors for
LH. In children, hCG stimulation is necessary to differentiate the
condition from the AISs. There is male-­limited autosomal recessive
inheritance. The human LH/chorionic gonadotropin (CG) receptor is a member of the G-­protein–coupled superfamily of receptors
that contains seven transmembrane domains. Several inactivating
pathogenic variants of the LH/CG receptor have been described in
males with hypogonadism suspected of having Leydig cell hypoplasia or aplasia.
High serum LH and low FSH were noted in one male with hypogonadism owing to a pathogenic variant in the gene for the β-­subunit of
FSH (see Table 622.1).

Lipoid Adrenal Hyperplasia

See Chapter 616.
This is the most severe form of CAH; enlarged adrenal glands
result from accumulation of cholesterol and cholesterol esters. The
rate-­limiting process in steroidogenesis is the transport of free cholesterol through the cytosol to the inner mitochondrial membrane,
where the P450 side-­chain cleavage enzyme (P450scc; CYP11A1)
acts. Cholesterol transport into mitochondria is mediated by the
steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR). StAR is a 30-­kDa

protein essential for steroidogenesis and is encoded by a gene on
chromosome 8p11.2. The mitochondrial content of StAR increases
between 1 and 5 hours after ACTH stimulation, long after the acute
ACTH-­induced increase in steroidogenesis. This has led some to
suggest that extramitochondrial StAR might also be involved in
the acute response to ACTH. Most patients with lipoid CAH have
pathogenic variants in the gene encoding StAR, and a few have variants in CYP11A1.
All serum steroid levels are low or undetectable, whereas ACTH and
plasma renin levels are quite elevated. The phenotype is female in both
genetic females and males. Genetic males have no müllerian structures
because the testes can produce normal AMH but no steroid hormones.
These children present with acute adrenal crisis and salt wasting in
infancy. Most patients are 46,XY. In a few patients, ovarian steroidogenesis is present at puberty.
The regulatory role of StAR-­independent steroidogenesis is illustrated by 46,XX 4-­month-­old twins with lipoid adrenal hyperplasia.
One died at 15 months because of cardiac complications related to
coarctation of the aorta. The adrenal glands had characteristic lipid
deposits. The surviving twin had spontaneous puberty with feminization at 11.5 years and menarche at 13.8 years. When restudied at
the age of 15 years, a homozygous frameshift-­inactivating variant
in StAR was discovered. This supports the hypothesis that StAR-­
independent steroidogenesis was able to proceed until enough
intracellular lipid accumulated to damage steroidogenic activity.
Partial defects in only partially virilized males and delayed onset
of salt wasting have been described. Complete CYP11A1 defects
may be incompatible with life because only this enzyme can convert
cholesterol to pregnenolone, which then becomes progesterone,
a hormone essential for the maintenance of normal mammalian
pregnancy. Heterozygous variants in CYP11A1 were described in
a 4-­year-­old with 46,XY sex reversal and late-­onset form of lipoid
adrenal hyperplasia. At 6-­7 weeks of gestation, when maternal corpus luteum progesterone synthesis stops, the placenta, which does
not express StAR, produces progesterone by StAR-­independent steroidogenesis using the CYP11A1 enzyme system.

3β-­Hydroxysteroid Dehydrogenase Deficiency

Males with this form of CAH (see Chapter 616) have various degrees
of hypospadias, with or without bifid scrotum and cryptorchidism,
and, rarely, a complete female phenotype. Affected infants usually
develop salt-­losing manifestations shortly after birth. Incomplete
defects, occasionally seen in males with premature pubarche, as well
as late-­onset nonclassic forms, have been reported. These children
have pathogenic variants of the gene for type II 3β-­hydroxysteroid
enzyme, resulting in impairment of steroidogenesis in the adrenals
and gonads; the impairment may be unequal between adrenals and
gonads. Normal pubertal changes in some males could be explained
by the normally present type I 3β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase
present in many peripheral tissues. Infertility is frequent. There is
no correlation between degree of salt wasting and degree of phenotypic abnormality.

Deficiency of 17-­Hydroxylase/17,20-­Lyase

A single enzyme (CYP17A1) encoded by a single gene on chromosome 10q24.3 has both 17-­hydroxylase and 17,20-­lyase activities
in adrenal and gonadal tissues (see Chapter 616). Many different
pathogenic gene variants have been reported. Genetic males usually
have a complete female phenotype or, less often, various degrees of
undervirilization, from labioscrotal fusion to perineal hypospadias
and cryptorchidism. Pubertal development fails to occur in both
genetic sexes.
In the classical disorder, there is decreased synthesis of cortisol by
the adrenals and of sex steroids by the adrenals and gonads. Levels
of the steroid precursor with mineralocorticoid activity, deoxycorticosterone and corticosterone, are markedly increased and lead to the
hypertension and hypokalemia characteristic of this form of 46,XY

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 628 u Disorders of Sex Development

3511

DSD. Although levels of cortisol are low, the elevated ACTH and corticosterone levels prevent symptomatic cortisol deficiency. The renin-­
aldosterone axis is suppressed because of the strong mineralocorticoid
effect of elevated deoxycorticosterone. Virilization does not occur at
puberty; levels of testosterone are low and those of gonadotropins are
increased. Because fetal production of AMH is normal, no müllerian
duct remnants are present. In XY phenotypic females, gonadectomy
and replacement therapy with hydrocortisone and sex steroids are
indicated.
The defect follows autosomal recessive inheritance. Affected XX
females are usually not detected until young adult life, when they fail to
experience normal pubertal changes and are found to have hypertension and hypokalemia. This condition should be suspected in patients
presenting with primary amenorrhea and hypertension whose chromosomal complement is either 46,XX or 46,XY.
Some patients originally described as having isolated 17,20 lyase
deficiency were subsequently shown to have a defect in the production
of DHT because of deficiency of enzymes in the alternative pathway of
DHT synthesis.

Deficiency of 17-­Ketosteroid Reductase

This enzyme, also called 17β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, catalyzes
the final step in testosterone biosynthesis. It is necessary to convert
androstenedione to testosterone, DHEA to androstenediol, and estrone
to estradiol. Deficiency of 17-­ketosteroid reductase in the fetal testis
causes the male fetus to have complete or near-­complete female phenotype. Müllerian ducts are absent, and a shallow vagina is present. The
diagnosis is based on the ratio of androstenedione to testosterone. In
prepubertal children, stimulation with hCG may be necessary to make
the diagnosis.
The defect is inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion. At least
four different types of 17β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase are recognized, each coded by genes on different chromosomes. Type III
is the enzyme responsible for testicular production of testosterone.
This defect is more common in a highly inbred Arab population in
Gaza than it is in other populations. The gene for the disorder is at
9q22 and is expressed only in the testes, where it converts androstenedione to testosterone. Most patients are diagnosed at puberty
because of virilization and the failure to menstruate. Testosterone
levels at puberty may approach normal, presumably as a result of
peripheral conversion of androstenedione to testosterone; at this
time, some patients may spontaneously adopt a male gender role.
Type I 17β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, encoded by a gene on
chromosome 17q21, converts estrone to estradiol and is found in the
placenta, ovary, testis, liver, prostate, adipose tissue, and endometrium.
Type II, whose gene is on chromosome 16q24, reverses the reactions of
types I and III (converting testosterone to androstenedione and estrone
to estradiol, respectively). Type IV is similar in action to type II. A late-­
onset form of 17-­ketosteroid reductase deficiency presents as gynecomastia in young adult males.

Persistent Müllerian Duct Syndrome

In this disorder, there is persistence of müllerian (paramesonephric) duct derivatives in otherwise completely virilized males. Cases
have been reported in siblings and identical twins. Cryptorchidism
is present in 80% of affected males, and during surgery for this or
inguinal hernia, the condition is discovered when a fallopian tube
and uterus are found. The degree of müllerian development is variable and may be asymmetric. Testicular function is normal in most,
but testicular degeneration has been reported. Some affected males
acquire testicular tumors after puberty. In a study of 38 families,
16 families had defects in the AMH gene, located on the short arm
of chromosome 19. Affected patients had low AMH levels. In 16
families with high AMH levels, the defect was in the AMH type
II receptor gene, with 10 of 16 having identical 27-­bp deletions on
exon 10 in at least one allele.

Fig. 628.4 5α-­Reductase deficiency. (From Wales JKH, Wit JM, Rogol

AD. Pediatric Endocrinology and Growth, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2003: p. 165.)

Treatment consists of removal of as many of the müllerian structures as possible without causing damage to the testis, epididymis, or
vas deferens.

DEFECTS IN ANDROGEN ACTION
Dihydrotestosterone Deficiency

Decreased production of DHT in utero results in marked ambiguity of
external genitalia of affected males. Biosynthesis and peripheral action
of testosterone are normal.
The phenotype commonly associated with this condition results in
males who have a small phallus, bifid scrotum, urogenital sinus with
perineal hypospadias, and a blind vaginal pouch (Fig. 628.4). Testes are
in the inguinal canals or labioscrotal folds and are normal histologically. There are no müllerian structures. Wolffian (mesonephric) structures—the vas deferens, epididymis, and seminal vesicles—are present.
Most affected patients have been identified initially as females but at
puberty, virilization occurs; the phallus enlarges, the testes descend and
grow normally, and spermatogenesis occurs. There is no gynecomastia.
Beard growth is scanty, acne is absent, the prostate is small, and recession of the temporal hairline fails to occur. Virilization of the wolffian
duct is caused by the action of testosterone itself, although masculinization of the urogenital sinus and external genitals depends on the action
of DHT during the critical period of fetal masculinization. Growth of
facial hair and of the prostate also appears to be DHT dependent.
The adult height reached is close to that of the father and other male
siblings. There is significant phenotypic heterogeneity. This has led to
a classification of such patients into five types of steroid 5α-­reductase
deficiency (SRD).
Several different gene defects of SRD5A2 (the 5α-­reductase type 2
gene leading to SRD) have been identified, located on the short arm of
chromosome 2, in patients from throughout the world. Familial clusters have been reported from the Dominican Republic, Turkey, Papua
New Guinea, Brazil, Mexico, and the Middle East. There is no reliable
correlation between genotype and phenotype.
The disorder is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait but is limited to males; normal homozygous females with normal fertility indicate that in females DHT has no clinically significant role in sexual
differentiation or in ovarian function later in life. The clinical diagnosis

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3512 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
should be made as early as possible in infancy. It is important to distinguish this from PAIS because patients with PAIS are far less sensitive
to androgen than are patients with SRD. The biochemical diagnosis of
SRD is based on finding normal serum testosterone levels, normal or
low DHT levels with markedly increased basal and especially hCG-­
stimulated testosterone:DHT ratios (>17), and high ratios of urinary
etiocholanolone to androsterone. Children with androgen insensitivity have normal hepatic 5α reduction and thus a normal ratio of tetrahydrocortisol to 5α-­tetrahydrocortisol, as opposed to those with SRD.
It is important to note that many, but not all, children with SRD
reared as females in childhood have changed to a male role around
the time of puberty. It appears that exposures to testosterone in utero,
neonatally, and at puberty have variable contributions to the formation
of male gender identity. Infants with this condition should be reared as
males whenever practical. Treatment of male infants with DHT results
in phallic enlargement.
Another cause of DHT deficiency is a block in an alternative pathway of DHT synthesis. Patients previously thought to have 46,XY DSD
because of isolated 17,20-­lyase deficiency have subsequently been characterized as having pathogenic variants in AKR1C2 (3α-­reductase type
3) or both AKR1C2 and AKR1C4 (3α-­reductase type 4) (see Fig. 628.1).
These findings showed that both the classical and alternative pathways
to DHT must be intact for normal prenatal virilization.

Androgen Insensitivity Syndromes

The AISs are the most common forms of male DSDs, occurring with
an estimated frequency of 1/20,000 genetic males. This group of heterogeneous X-­linked recessive disorders is caused by more than 150
different pathogenic variants in the androgen receptor gene, located
on Xq11-­12: single point variants result in amino acid substitutions or
premature stop codons, frameshift and premature terminations, gene
deletions, and splice-­site variants.

testes and normal or elevated testosterone and LH levels are common
to all such children (Figs. 628.5 and 628.6).
In complete androgen insensitivity syndrome (CAIS), an extreme
form of failure of virilization, genetic males appear female at birth and
are invariably reared accordingly. The external genitalia are female. The
vagina ends blindly in a pouch, and the uterus is absent because of the
normal production and effect of AMH by the testes. In ∼30% of patients,
unilateral or bilateral fallopian tube remnants are found. The testes are usually intraabdominal but may descend into the inguinal canal; they consist
largely of seminiferous tubules. At puberty, there is normal development
of breasts and the habitus is female, but menstruation does not occur and
sexual hair is absent. Adult heights are commensurate with those of normal males despite profound congenital deficiency of androgenic effects.
The testes of affected adult patients produce normal male levels of
testosterone, which are converted to normal levels of DHT. Failure
of normal male differentiation during fetal life reflects a defective
response to androgens at that time. The absence of androgenic effects
is caused by a striking resistance to the action of endogenous or exogenous testosterone at the cellular level.
Prepubertal phenotypic females with this disorder are often detected
when inguinal masses prove to be testes or when a testis is unexpectedly found during herniorrhaphy. Approximately 1–2% of females with
an inguinal hernia prove to have this disorder. In infants, elevated LH
levels should suggest the diagnosis. In older children and adults, amenorrhea is the usual presenting symptom. In prepubertal children, the
condition must be differentiated from other types of XY undervirilized males in which there is complete feminization. These include XY
gonadal dysgenesis (Swyer syndrome), true agonadism, Leydig cell
aplasia including LH receptor defects, and 17-­ketosteroid reductase
deficiency. All these conditions, unlike CAIS, are characterized by low

Clinical Manifestations

The clinical spectrum of patients with AISs, all of whom have a 46,XY
chromosomal complement, range from phenotypic females (in complete AIS), to males with various forms of ambiguous genitalia and
undervirilization (partial AIS, or clinical syndromes such as Reifenstein syndrome), to phenotypically normal-­
appearing males with
infertility. In addition to normal 46,XY chromosomes, the presence of

A

B

Fig. 628.5 A, Partial androgen insensitivity with descended testes in
bifid labioscrotal folds. B, Less severe partial androgen insensitivity with
severe hypospadias and maldescent of testes. (From Wales JKH, Wit
JM, Rogol AD. Pediatric Endocrinology and Growth, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2003: p. 165.)

Fig. 628.6 Partial androgen insensitivity syndrome at adolescence,

male sex of rearing. Note gynecomastia from peripheral aromatase
conversion of testosterone to estrogen. Abundant pubic hair implies
only partial resistance. (From Wales JKH, Wit JM, Rogol AD. Pediatric
Endocrinology and Growth, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2003: p.
165.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 628 u Disorders of Sex Development
Table 628.7  Causes of a Partial Androgen Insensitivity
Syndrome–Like Phenotype
DEFECTS IN ANDROGEN PRODUCTION
Partial gonadal dysgenesis
Pathogenic variants in SRY, NR5A1, WT1
Pathogenic variants of the luteinizing hormone receptor
Biosynthetic enzyme deficiencies
17,20-­Lyase deficiency
P450 oxidoreductase deficiency
17β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency type 3
5α-­Reductase deficiency type 2
GENETIC
Klinefelter syndrome
Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz syndrome
Denys-­Drash syndrome
Frasier syndrome
PAIS
Pathogenic variants of the androgen receptor gene
Normal androgen receptor gene with fetal growth restriction
NR5A1, Nuclear receptor subfamily 5 A1; PAIS, partial androgen insensitivity syndrome;
SRY, sex-­determining region Y; WT1, Wilms tumor 1.
From Hughes IA, Davies JD, Bunch TI, et al. Androgen insensitivity syndrome. Lancet.
2012;380:1419–1428. Panel 1.

3513

activity in addition to the production of estradiol contributes to the
feminization of these women.
The psychosexual and surgical management of patients with PAIS is
extremely complex and depends in large part on the presenting phenotype. Osteopenia is recognized as a late feature of AIS.
Molecular analyses have suggested that phenotype may depend in
part on somatic mosaicism of the androgen receptor gene. The presence of mosaicism shifts the phenotype to a higher degree of virilization than expected from the genotype of the mutant allele alone.
Genetic counseling is difficult in families with androgen receptor
gene variants. In addition to lack of genotype-­phenotype correlations,
there is a high rate (27%) of de novo pathogenic variants in families.
Sex hormone–binding globulin reduction after exogenous androgen
administration (stanozolol) correlates with the severity of the receptor
defect and may become a useful clinical tool. Successful therapy with
supplemental androgens has been reported in patients with PAIS and
various variants of the androgen receptor in the DNA-­binding domain
and the ligand-­binding domain.
Pathogenic variants in androgen receptors are also reported in
patients with spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy in whom clinical
manifestations including testicular atrophy, infertility, gynecomastia,
and elevated LH, FSH, and estradiol levels usually manifest between
the third and fifth decades of life.

UNDETERMINED CAUSES
levels of testosterone as neonates and during adult life and by failure to
respond to hCG during the prepubertal years.
Although patients with CAIS have unambiguously female external
genitals at birth, those with PAIS have a wide variety of phenotypic presentations, ranging from perineoscrotal hypospadias, bifid scrotum, and
cryptorchidism to extreme undervirilization appearing as clitoromegaly
and labial fusion. Some forms of PAIS are known as specific syndromes.
Patients with Reifenstein syndrome have incomplete virilization characterized by hypogonadism, severe hypospadias, and gynecomastia (see Fig.
628.6). Gilbert-­Dreyfus and Lubs syndromes are also classified as PAISs.
In all cases, abnormalities in the androgen receptor gene have been identified. Table 628.7 lists other causes of a PAIS-­like syndrome.

Diagnosis

The diagnosis of patients with PAIS may be particularly difficult in
infancy. The postnatal surge in testosterone and LH is diminished
in those with CAIS but not in those with PAIS. In some, especially
those sufficiently virilized in infancy, the diagnosis is not suspected
until puberty, when there is inadequate virilization with lack of facial
hair or voice change and the appearance of gynecomastia. Azoospermia and infertility are common. Androgen receptor defects are
recognized in adults who have a small phallus and testes and infertility. A single–amino acid substitution in the androgen receptor was
reported in a large Chinese family in whom some affected members
were fertile whereas others had gynecomastia and/or hypospadias.

Treatment and Prognosis

In patients with CAIS whose sexual orientation is unambiguously
female, the testes should be removed because they have malignant
potential. Historically, they were removed as soon as they were discovered. However, there is a trend to allow the testes to remain because
they are the source of estradiol (through conversion from testosterone),
and this results in normally timed puberty with the individual’s endogenous hormones. Careful monitoring for testicular masses should be
performed, and removal of the testes is advised in early adulthood.
Laparoscopic removal of Y chromosome–bearing gonads has been
performed in patients with AIS and in those with gonadal dysgenesis.
In ∼30% of patients, malignant tumors, usually seminomas, develop
by 50 years of age. Several teenage females developed seminomas.
Replacement therapy with estrogens is indicated at the age of puberty
in those whose testes were removed in childhood.
Normal breasts develop in affected females who have not had their
testes removed by the age of puberty. The absence of androgenic

Other XY undervirilized males display great variability of the external and internal genitalia and various degrees of phallic and müllerian development. The testes may be histologically normal or
rudimentary, or there may only be one. No recognized cause is identified in up to 50% of children with 46,XY DSDs. Some ambiguity of
the genitalia is associated with a wide variety of chromosomal aberrations, which must always be considered in the differential diagnosis, the most common being 45,X/46,XY syndrome (see Chapter
626.1). It may be necessary to karyotype several tissues to establish
mosaicism. Other complex genetic syndromes, many resulting from
single-­gene variants, are associated with varying degrees of ambiguity of the genitalia, particularly in the male. These entities must be
identified by the associated extragenital malformations.
Smith-­L emli-­Opitz syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by pathogenic variants in the sterol Δ7-­reductase gene
located on chromosome 11q12-­q13. It is characterized by prenatal
and postnatal growth restriction, microcephaly, ptosis, anteverted
nares, broad alveolar ridges, syndactyly of the second to third toes,
and severe cognitive impairment (see Chapter 106.3). Its incidence
is 1 in 20,000-­30,000 live births in populations of Northern and
Central European origin; 70% are male. Genotypic males usually
have genital ambiguity and, occasionally, partial sex reversal with
female genital ambiguity or complete sex reversal with female external genitalia. Müllerian duct derivatives are usually absent. Affected
46,XX patients have normal genitalia. Two types of Smith-­Lemli-­
Opitz syndrome have been recognized: the classical form (type I)
described earlier and the acrodysgenital syndrome, which is usually
lethal within 1 year and is associated with severe malformations,
postaxial polydactyly, and extremely abnormal external genitalia
(type II). Pyloric stenosis is associated with Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz
syndrome type I and Hirschsprung disease with type II. Cleft palate, skeletal abnormalities, and one case of a lipoma of the pituitary
gland have been seen in type II cases. Some authors believe in a
spectrum of disease severity rather than in the previous classification. Low plasma cholesterol with elevated 7-­dehydrocholesterol, its
precursor, are found in types I and II, and the levels do not correlate with severity. Maternal apolipoprotein E values do seem to
correlate with severity. The most common prenatal expression of
Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz syndrome is intrauterine growth retardation
(see Chapter 106.3 for treatment).
46,XY DSD subjects also have been described in siblings with α-­
thalassemia/mental retardation syndrome.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3514 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System

628.3 Ovotesticular DSD
Patricia A. Donohoue
In ovotesticular DSD, both ovarian and testicular tissues are present,
either in the same or in opposite gonads. Affected patients have ambiguous genitalia, varying from normal female genitalia with only slight
enlargement of the clitoris to almost normal male external genitalia
(see Fig. 628.3A).
Approximately 70% of all patients have a 46,XX karyotype.
Ninety-­
seven percent of affected patients of African descent
are 46,XX. Less than 10% of persons with ovotesticular DSD are
46,XY. Approximately 20% have 46,XX/46,XY mosaicism. Half of
these are derived from more than one zygote and are chimeras (chi
46,XX/46,XY). The presence of paternal and both maternal alleles
for some blood groups is demonstrated. An ovotesticular DSD chimera, 46,XX/46,XY, was reported as resulting from embryo amalgamation after in vitro fertilization. Each embryo was derived from
an independent, separately fertilized ovum.
Examination of 46,XX ovotesticular DSD patients with Y-­specific
probes has detected less than 10% with a portion of the Y chromosome, including the SRY gene. Ovotesticular DSD is usually sporadic,
but several siblings have been reported. The cause of many cases of
ovotesticular DSD is unknown.
The most frequently encountered gonad in ovotesticular DSD is
an ovotestis, which may be bilateral. If unilateral, the contralateral
gonad is usually an ovary but may be a testis. The ovarian tissue
is normal, but the testicular tissue is dysgenetic. The presence and
function of testicular tissue can be determined by measuring basal
and hCG-­stimulated testosterone levels along with AMH levels.
Patients who are highly virilized and have had adequate testicular function with no uterus are usually reared as males. If a uterus
exists, virilization is often mild and testicular function minimal;
assignment of female sex may be indicated. Selective removal of
gonadal tissue inconsistent with sex of rearing may be indicated. In
a few families, 46,XY ovotesticular DSD subjects and 46,XX males
have been described in the same sibship.
Defects in R-­Spondin1, encoded by the RSPO1 gene, have been
described in 46,XX ovotesticular DSD. Defects in SF-­1 have been
described in both XX and XY ovotesticular DSD.
Pregnancies with living offspring have been reported in 46,XX ovotesticular DSD individuals reared as females, but very few males with
ovotesticular DSD have fathered children. Approximately 5% of patients
will develop gonadoblastomas, dysgerminomas, or seminomas.

DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF DISORDERS
OF SEX DEVELOPMENT

In the neonate, ambiguity of the genitals requires immediate attention to decide on the sex of rearing as early in life as possible. The
family of the infant needs to be informed of the child’s condition as
early, completely, compassionately, and honestly as possible. Caution must be used to avoid feelings of guilt, shame, and discomfort.
Guidance needs to be provided to alleviate both short-­term and
long-­term concerns and to allow the child to grow up in a completely supportive environment. The initial care is best provided by
a team of professionals that includes neonatologists and pediatric
specialists, endocrinologists, radiologists, surgeons/urologists, psychologists, and geneticists, all of whom remain focused foremost
on the needs of the child. Management of the potential psychologic
upheaval that these disorders can generate in the child or the family is of paramount importance and requires physicians and other
healthcare professionals with sensitivity, training, and experience
in this field.
While awaiting the results of chromosomal analysis, pelvic ultrasonography is indicated to determine the presence of a uterus and

ovaries. Presence of a uterus and absence of palpable gonads usually suggest a virilized XX female; however, as described previously,
these structures may also be found in 46,XY DSD. A search for the
source of virilization should be undertaken; this includes studies of
adrenal hormones to rule out varieties of congenital adrenal hyperplasia, and studies of androgens and estrogens occasionally may be
necessary to rule out aromatase deficiency. Virilized XX females
are generally (but not always) reared as females even when highly
virilized.
The absence of a uterus, with or without palpable gonads, often indicates an undervirilized male and an XY karyotype. Measurements of
levels of gonadotropins, testosterone, AMH, and DHT are necessary
to determine whether testicular production of androgen is present
and is normal. Undervirilized males who are totally feminized may be
reared as females. Certain significantly feminized infants, such as those
with 5α-­reductase deficiency, may be reared as males because these
children virilize normally at puberty. Sixty percent of individuals with
5α-­reductase deficiency assigned as female in infancy live as males as
adults. An infant with a comparable degree of feminization resulting
from an androgen receptor defect, such as CAIS, may be successfully
reared as a female.
When receptor disorders are suspected in the XY male with a
small phallus (micropenis), a course of three monthly IM injections
of testosterone enanthate (25-­50 mg) may assist in the differential
diagnosis of androgen insensitivity and in the treatment of the small
phallus.
In some mammals, the female exposed to androgens prenatally or
in early postnatal life exhibits nontraditional sexual behavior in adult
life. Most, but not all, females who have undergone fetal masculinization from CAH or from maternal progestin therapy have female sexual
identity, although during childhood they may appear to prefer male
playmates and activities over female playmates and feminine play with
dolls in mothering roles.
In the past it was thought that surgical treatment of ambiguous
genitalia to create a female appearance, particularly when a vagina
is present, was more successful than construction of male genitalia.
Considerable controversy exists regarding these decisions. Sexual
functioning is to a large extent more dependent on neurohormonal
and behavioral factors than the physical appearance and functionality of the genitalia. Similarly, controversy exists regarding the timing of the performance of invasive and definitive procedures, such
as surgery. Whenever possible without endangering the physical or
psychologic health of the child, an expert multidisciplinary team
should consider deferring elective surgical repairs and gonadectomies until the child can participate in the informed consent for
the procedure. One study of children (59 males and 18 females)
with gender dysphoria but without documentation of genomic or
enzymologic abnormalities indicated that most of these children no
longer have gender dysphoria after completion of puberty. Among
those who do, homosexuality and bisexuality are the most frequent
diagnoses.
For patients with DSD who have Y-­
chromosome material
and intraabdominal gonads, gonadectomy is generally recommended because of the risk of gonadal tumors, many of which are
malignant.
The pediatrician, pediatric endocrinologist, and psychologist, along
with the appropriate additional specialists, should provide ongoing
compassionate, supportive care to the patient and the patient’s family
throughout childhood, adolescence, and adulthood. Support groups
are available for families and patients with many of the conditions
discussed.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 629 u Diabetes Mellitus

Section 6

Diabetes Mellitus in
Children
Chapter 629

Diabetes Mellitus

3515

expressing human leukocyte antigens (HLAs). Autoantibodies to β-­
cell antigens, including islet cell cytoplasm (ICA), insulin autoantibody
(IAA), glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD), islet antigen 2 (IA-­2A, formerly ICA512), and zinc transporter 8 (ZnT8A), are detected in serum
from affected subjects. These can be detected months to years before the
clinical onset of T1DM. In some children and adolescents with apparent
T1DM, the β-­cell destruction is not immune mediated. This subtype of
diabetes occurs in patients of African or Asian origin and is distinct from
known causes of β-­cell destruction such as drugs or chemicals, viruses,
mitochondrial gene defects, pancreatectomy, and ionizing radiation.
These individuals may have ketoacidosis, but they have extensive periods of remission with variable insulin deficiency, similar to patients with
T2DM. Patients with T1DM require lifelong treatment with insulin.

TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS

629.1 Classification of Diabetes Mellitus
David R. Weber
Diabetes mellitus (DM) is a common chronic metabolic disease characterized by hyperglycemia as a cardinal biochemical feature. The major forms
of diabetes are differentiated by insulin deficiency versus insulin resistance: type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM) results from deficiency of insulin
secretion because of pancreatic β-­cell damage; type 2 diabetes mellitus
(T2DM) is a consequence of insulin resistance occurring at the level of
skeletal muscle, liver, and adipose tissue, with various degrees of β-­cell
impairment. T1DM is the most common endocrine metabolic disorder
of childhood and adolescence, with important consequences for physical and emotional development. Individuals with T1DM confront serious
lifestyle alterations, including an absolute daily requirement for exogenous insulin, the need to monitor their own glucose level, and the need
to pay attention to dietary intake. Morbidity and mortality stem from a
constant potential for acute metabolic derangements and from long-­term
complications. Potential acute complications include the development
of hypoglycemia related to insulin excess or hyperglycemic ketoacidosis
from insulin deficiency. Long-­term complications typically manifest in
adulthood and are related to the adverse effects of chronic hyperglycemia and associated metabolic abnormalities on tissues and organ systems.
This can result in microvascular diseases such as retinopathy, nephropathy, and neuropathy and macrovascular complications such as ischemic
heart disease and arterial obstruction with gangrene of the extremities.
DM is not a single entity, but rather a heterogeneous group of disorders in which there are distinct genetic patterns and other etiologic
and pathophysiologic mechanisms that lead to impairment of glucose
tolerance through deficient insulin production or action. The American Diabetes Association (ADA) has proposed a diabetes classification
system that includes four categories: type 1 diabetes, type 2 diabetes,
other specific types, and gestational diabetes. An expanded list of diabetes etiologies is provided in Table 629.1. The current criteria for the
diagnosis of diabetes are provided in Table 629.2. A thorough clinical
history and physical exam are often sufficient to determine the etiology; however, in some cases additional testing may be required.

TYPE 1 DIABETES MELLITUS

Formerly called insulin-­dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM) or juvenile
diabetes, T1DM is characterized by low or absent levels of endogenously
produced insulin and by dependence on exogenous insulin to prevent
development of ketoacidosis, an acute life-­threatening complication of
T1DM. The natural history includes four distinct stages: (1) preclinical β-­
cell autoimmunity with progressive defect of insulin secretion, (2) onset
of clinical diabetes, (3) transient remission honeymoon period, and (4)
established diabetes during which there may occur acute and/or chronic
complications and decreased life expectancy. The onset occurs predominantly in childhood, with a median age of 7-­15 years, but it may present
at any age. The incidence of T1DM varies markedly across the world but
has increased in nearly all parts of the world over recent decades (Fig.
629.1). Both genetic susceptibility and environmental factors contribute
to the pathogenesis. Susceptibility to T1DM is genetically controlled by
alleles of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II genes

Formerly known as adult-­
onset diabetes mellitus or non–insulin-­
dependent diabetes mellitus, T2DM develops because of insulin resistance
and progressive non-­autoimmune β-­cell failure. There is a strong heritable component to T2DM, although the genetic basis remains poorly
understood. Population-­based studies have linked T2DM risk with polymorphisms in a large number of genes related to insulin secretion, insulin action, energy expenditure, and birthweight; however, the collective
contribution of these variants to overall T2DM risk remains low at <20%.
Although T2DM has long been the most prevalent form of diabetes in
adults, the rise in childhood obesity over the past few decades has led to a
markedly increased incidence of this disease in children and adolescents.
Pediatric T2DM accounts for most of the new cases of diabetes in high-­
risk populations such as obese adolescents of Black or Hispanic population ancestry (see Chapter 65). Childhood-­onset T2DM differs from adult
disease in that it is associated with a more rapid decline in β-­cell function
and the earlier development of T2DM-­related complications.
The presentation of T2DM is typically more insidious than that with
T1DM. In contrast to patients with T1DM, who are usually ill at the time
of diagnosis and whose presentation rarely spans more than a few weeks,
children with T2DM often seek medical care because of excessive weight
gain and fatigue as a result of insulin resistance and/or the incidental
finding of glycosuria during routine physical examination. A history of
polyuria and polydipsia is not always a cardinal clinical feature in these
patients. Acanthosis nigricans (dark pigmentation of skin creases in
the nape of the neck especially), a sign of insulin resistance, is present
in the majority of patients with T2DM and is accompanied by a relative
hyperinsulinemia at the time of the diagnosis. However, as the disease
progresses, β-­cell function becomes increasingly impaired such that children with advanced T2DM often present in diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA).
Healthy lifestyle interventions and treatment with metformin remain
the cornerstones of T2DM treatment in children and adolescents. Liraglutide (a glucagon-­like peptide-­1 receptor agonist) is approved in children ≥10 years and may have an additional benefit of slowing weight gain.
Insulin therapy is required for patients who present with severe hyperglycemia and for those patients in whom hyperglycemia worsens in spite of
lifestyle modification and noninsulin pharmacologic management.

OTHER SPECIFIC TYPES OF DIABETES
Monogenic Diabetes

The term monogenic diabetes is used to refer to a heterogeneous group of
single-­gene disorders resulting in impaired insulin secretion. This category encompasses maturity-­onset diabetes of the young (MODY) and
transient and permanent neonatal diabetes (TND or PND). Characteristics of monogenic diabetes can include age of onset before 6 months
(for TND or PND), development of hyperglycemia before 25 years of
age, and strong family history of diabetes. Monogenic etiologies are
estimated to comprise anywhere from 1% to 10% of all diabetes cases,
with the uncertainty related to the clinical difficulty in differentiating
these cases from T1DM and T2DM. Monogenic forms of diabetes may
present with hyperglycemia, and consequent polyuria and polydipsia, or
may be diagnosed simply by routine screening. Extrapancreatic manifestations vary by genetic defect (see Table 629.1 and Chapter 629.4) and
can include hepatic, renal, and central nervous system (CNS) manifestations. Treatment is guided by genetic diagnosis and clinical course, with

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3516 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 629.1  Etiologic Classifications of Diabetes Mellitus
I. TYPE 1 DIABETES (Β-­CELL DESTRUCTION ULTIMATELY LEADING
TO COMPLETE INSULIN DEFICIENCY)
A. Immune Mediated
B. Idiopathic
II. TYPE 2 DIABETES (VARIABLE COMBINATIONS OF INSULIN
RESISTANCE AND INSULIN DEFICIENCY)
A. Typical
B. Atypical
III. OTHER SPECIFIC TYPES
A. Genetic Defects Of β-­Cell Function (Monogenic Diabetes)
1.	Neonatal diabetes
a.	Pathogenic variants leading to transient neonatal diabetes
(KCNJ11, ABCC8, 6q24 overexpression, INS, ZFP57,
SLC2A2 HNF1β)
b.	Pathogenic variants leading to permanent neonatal
diabetes (KCNJ11, ABCC8, INS, GATA6, EIF2AK3, GCK,
PTF1A, FOXP3, GLIS3, PDX1, SLC2A2, SLC19A2, GATA4,
NEUROD1, NEUROG3, NKX2-­2, RFX5, IER3IP1, MNX1)
2.	MODY (maturity-­onset diabetes of the young) syndromes
a.	MODY 1 chromosome 20, HNF4α
b.	MODY 2 chromosome 7, GCK
c.	MODY 3 chromosome 12q24.2, HNF1α, TCF-­1
d.	MODY 4 chromosome 13q12.1, IPF-­1 (PDX1)
e.	MODY 5 chromosome 17, HNF1β, TCF-­2
f.	MODY 6 chromosome 2q32, NEUROD1
g.	MODY 7 chromosome 2p25, KLF11
h.	MODY 8 chromosome 9q34, CEL
i.	MODY 9 chromosome 7q32, PAX4
j.	MODY 10 chromosome 11p15.5, INS
k.	MODY 11 chromosome 8p23, BLK
l.	MODY 12 chromosome 11p15, ABCC8
m.	MODY 13 chromosome 11p15, KCNJ11
n.	MODY 14 chromosome 3p14, APPL1
3.	Mitochondrial DNA pathogenic variants (includes one form
of Wolfram syndrome, Pearson syndrome, Kearns-­Sayre, and
maternally inherited diabetes and deafness)
4. Wolfram syndrome—DIDMOAD (diabetes insipidus, diabetes
mellitus, optic atrophy, deafness):
a. WFS1-­Wolframin—chromosome 4p
b. Wolfram locus 2—chromosome 4q22-­24
c. Wolfram mitochondrial
5.	Thiamine-­responsive megaloblastic anemia and diabetes

D. Other Autoimmune Syndromes Associated With Diabetes
1.	IPEX (immunodysfunction, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy,
X-­linked)
2.	Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndromes (APS)
a.	APS-­1 (APCED)
b.	APS-­2
3.	Stiff person syndrome
4.	Anti-­insulin receptor antibodies
E. Drug Or Chemical Induced
1.	Antirejection—cyclosporine, sirolimus
2.	Glucocorticoids (with impaired insulin secretion; e.g., cystic
fibrosis)
3.	l-­Asparaginase
4.	β-­Adrenergic blockers
5.	Vacor (rodenticide)
6.	Phenytoin (Dilantin)
7.	α-­Interferon
8.	Diazoxide
9.	Nicotinic acid
10.	Pentamidine
11.	Immune checkpoint inhibitors (immune mediated)
F. Diseases of Exocrine Pancreas
1.	Cystic fibrosis
2.	Trauma/pancreatectomy
3.	Pancreatitis/ionizing radiation
4.	Hemochromatosis
5.	Fibrocalculous pancreatopathy
G. Infections
1.	Congenital rubella
2.	Cytomegalovirus
3.	Hemolytic-­uremic syndrome
H. Endocrinopathies Associated With Diabetes
1.	Cushing (hypercortisolism)
2.	Acromegaly (growth hormone excess)
3.	Pheochromocytoma
4.	Glucagonoma
5.	Somatostatinoma
6.	Aldosteronoma
IV. GESTATIONAL DIABETES

B. Genetic Defects of Insulin Action
1.	Type A insulin resistance
2.	Donohue syndrome
3.	Rabson-­Mendenhall syndrome
4.	Lipoatrophic diabetes syndromes
C. Other Genetic Syndromes Associated With Diabetes (Insulin
Resistance Or Deficiency)
1.	Down syndrome
2.	Turner syndrome
3.	Klinefelter syndrome
4. Prader-­Willi syndrome
5.	Bardet-­Biedl syndrome
6.	Alström syndrome
7. Werner syndrome
8.	Friedreich ataxia
Modified from Sperling MA, Tamborlane WV, Battelino T, et al. Diabetes mellitus. In: Sperling MA. Pediatric Endocrinology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2014: Box 19-­1.

some forms being responsive to oral sulfonylureas and others requiring
insulin replacement. Children diagnosed with diabetes before 6 months of
age should have genetic testing for TND/PND, and older individuals with
diabetes not characteristic of T1DM or T2DM in the setting of a family
history of diabetes should have genetic testing for monogenic forms of diabetes. A comparison of the four types of diabetes is noted in Table 629.3.

In organ transplantation survivors, there is a linkage between cyclosporine and tacrolimus and post-­transplantation DM, ascribed to a number of mechanisms. Certain genetic syndromes, including those with
abnormalities of the insulin receptor or the immune system, are also
included in this category.

OTHER ETIOLOGIES OF DIABETES

The term prediabetes is used to identify individuals with abnormalities in blood glucose homeostasis who are at increased risk for the
development of diabetes (see Table 629.2). Prediabetes is defined
by impaired fasting glucose (IFG, fasting glucose 100-­125 mg/dL

Examples include diabetes secondary to exocrine pancreatic diseases
(cystic fibrosis), other endocrine diseases (Cushing syndrome), infection, and ingestion of certain drugs or poisons (the rodenticide Vacor).

PREDIABETES

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 629 u Diabetes Mellitus
Table 629.2  Diagnostic Criteria for Dysglycemia and
Diabetes Mellitus
DYSGLYCEMIA

DIABETES MELLITUS

IMPAIRED FASTING GLUCOSE
Fasting (at least 8 hr) plasma
glucose 100-­125 mg/dL (5.6-­
7.0 mmol/L)

Fasting (at least 8 hr) plasma
glucose ≥126 mg/dL
(7.0 mmol/L)
Or

IMPAIRED GLUCOSE TOLERANCE
2-­hr plasma glucose during
2-­hr plasma glucose during
OGTT ≥140 mg/dL
OGTT ≥200 mg/dL
(7.8 mmol/L), but <200 mg/dL
(11.1 mmol/L)
(11.1 mmol/L)
Or
PREDIABETES
Hemoglobin A1c 5.7–6.4% (39-­
47 mmol/mol)

Hemoglobin A1c ≥6.5% (48 mmol/
mol)
Or
Symptoms* of diabetes mellitus
plus random or casual
plasma glucose ≥200 mg/dL
(11.1 mmol/L)†

*Symptoms include polyuria, polydipsia, and unexplained weight loss with glucosuria
and ketonuria.
†Results should be confirmed by repeat testing if in absence of unequivocal

hyperglycemia.
OGTT, Oral glucose tolerance test.
Adapted from the Report of the Expert Committee on the Diagnosis and Classification
of Diabetes Mellitus. Diabetes Care. 1999;20(Suppl 1):S5; with data from American
Diabetes Association. Standards in Medical Care of Diabetes – 2017. Diabetes Care.
2017;40(Suppl 1):S11–S24.

<5 per 100,000

10 to <20 per 100,000

≥30 per 100,000

5 to <10 per 100,00

20 to <30 per 100,000

No data available

Fig. 629.1 Map of age-­sex standardized incidence rates (per 100,000)

from publications of type 1 diabetes in children age under 15 yr. (From
Patterson CC, Karuranga S, Salpea P, et al. Worldwide estimates of incidence, prevalence and mortality of type 1 diabetes in children and
adolescents: results from the International Diabetes Federation Diabetes Atlas, 9th edition. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2019;157:107842. Fig 1.)

[5.6-­6.9 mmol/L]), impaired glucose tolerance (IGT, 2 hours postprandial glucose 140-­199 mg/dL [7.8-­11 mmol/L]), or hemoglobin A1c
(HbA1c) values of 5.7–6.4% (39-­47 mmol/mol). A fasting glucose concentration of 99 mg/dL (5.5 mmol/L) is the upper limit of normal. This
choice is near the level above which acute-­phase insulin secretion is
lost in response to intravenous administration of glucose and is associated with a progressively greater risk of the development of microvascular and macrovascular complications. Many individuals with IFG are
euglycemic in their daily lives and may have normal or nearly normal
HbA1c levels. Individuals with IFG often manifest hyperglycemia only
when challenged with the oral glucose load used in the standardized
oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT).

3517

Prediabetes is not a clinical entity, but rather a risk factor for future
diabetes and cardiovascular disease. This may be observed as an intermediate stage in any of the disease processes listed in Table 629.1. Prediabetes is often associated with insulin resistance syndrome (also
known as metabolic syndrome), which consists of insulin resistance,
compensatory hyperinsulinemia to maintain glucose homeostasis,
obesity (especially abdominal or visceral obesity), dyslipidemia of the
high-­triglyceride or low-­or high-­density lipoprotein type, or both in
addition to hypertension. Insulin resistance is directly involved in the
pathogenesis of T2DM.

629.2 Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus (Immune
Mediated)
David R. Weber

EPIDEMIOLOGY

T1DM accounts for approximately 10% of all cases of diabetes in all
ages, affecting up to 2 million people in the United States and more
than 15 million people in the world; approximately 15,000 youths are
diagnosed with T1DM each year. Although T1DM accounts for most
cases of diabetes in childhood, it is not limited to this age-­group; new
cases continue to present in adult life, and up to 50% of individuals
with T1DM present as adults. The incidence of T1DM is highly variable among different racial and ethnic groups (see Fig. 629.1). The
overall age-­adjusted incidence of T1DM varies from <5 in 100,000
per year in parts of Asia, Africa, and South America to more than 30
in 100,000 per year in Northern Europe. The incidence of T1DM is
increasing in most (but not all) populations, and this increase appears
to be most marked in populations where the incidence of autoimmune
diseases was historically low. Data from Western European diabetes
centers suggest that the annual rate of increase in T1DM incidence is
2–5%, whereas some Central and Eastern European countries demonstrate an even more rapid increase—up to 9%. Data from the United
States have shown that the incidence of T1DM in children increased
by 1.9% per year from 2002 to 2015 from 19.5/100,000 to 22.3/100,000.
Steeper increases in annual incidence were seen in people of Asian/
Pacific Islander (4.4%), Hispanic (4%), and Black (2.7%) versus those
of White (0.7%) racial/ethnic background.
Females and males are almost equally affected, with a modest male
preponderance in some populations (Western European/United
States and a female preponderance in others (Japanese); there is no
apparent correlation with socioeconomic status. Peaks of presentation occur in two age-­groups: at 5-­7 years of age and at the time of
puberty. The first peak may correspond to the time of increased exposure to infectious agents coincident with the beginning of school; the
second peak may correspond to the pubertal growth spurt induced by
gonadal steroids and the increased pubertal growth hormone secretion (which antagonizes insulin). The understanding of the cause
of diabetes or of its increased incidence remains elusive. A growing
number of cases are presenting between 1 and 2 years of age, especially in high-­risk groups; the average age of presentation is older in
low-­risk populations. Low-­risk groups that migrate to a high-­risk
country seem to acquire the increased risk of that country. There can
be marked differences in incidence rates in various ethnic groups
within the same country; incidence rates (per 100,000) in the 10-­to
14-­year-­old age-­group in the United States range from a low of 7.1 in
Native Americans to 17.6 in Hispanics, 19.2 in Black Americans, and
32.9 in Whites.

GENETICS

There is a clear familial clustering of T1DM, with prevalence in siblings approaching 8%, whereas the prevalence in the general population in the United States is only 0.4%. Risk of T1DM is also increased
when a parent has T1DM, and this risk differs between the two parents;
the risk is 3–4% if the mother is affected but 5–6% when the father is
affected. In monozygotic twins, the concordance rate ranges from 30%
to 65%, whereas dizygotic twins have a concordance rate of 6–10%.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3518 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 629.3  Key Features of Diabetes in Pediatric Patients
MONOGENIC DIABETES
(MATURITY-­ONSET
DIABETES IN THE YOUNG) NEONATAL DIABETES

TYPE 1 DIABETES

TYPE 2 DIABETES

Age at diagnosis

6 mo-­18 yr

Puberty; rarely younger
than 10 yr

Younger than 25 yr

Younger than 6 mo

Causes and genetic factors

Autoimmune; genetic
predisposition (HLA and
other genes)

Obesity; genetic and
ethnic predisposition

Autosomal dominant;
HNF1A, HNF4A, GCK,
HNF1B (see Table 629.1)

KCNJ11, ABCC8, INS (see
Table 629.1)

Associated features

Lean or mildly overweight
at diagnosis, often with
weight loss; thyroid
autoimmunity; celiac
disease

Obesity; acanthosis
nigricans; polycystic
ovarian syndrome;
hypertension;
hyperlipidemia; fatty liver
disease; family history

Lean or weight loss at
diagnosis; GCK variants
are asymptomatic

Failure to thrive

Diabetic ketoacidosis at
presentation

Yes; about 25%

Yes; 5–20%

No

Yes; frequency not
described

Treatment

Insulin

Lifestyle modification;
metformin; liraglutide;
insulin; bariatric surgery

Sulfonylurea; no treatment
for GCK variants

Sulfonylurea for KCJN11
and ABCC8 variants;
insulin for other variants

Adapted from Cameron FJ, Wherrett DK. Care of diabetes in children and adolescents: controversies, changes, and consensus. Lancet. 2015;385:2096–2104. Table 1.

Because the concordance rate of dizygotic twins is higher than the sibling risk, factors other than the shared genotypes (e.g., the shared intrauterine environment) may play a role in increasing the risk in dizygotic
twins. Furthermore, the genetic susceptibility for T1DM in the parents
of an affected child is estimated at 3%. It should be kept in mind that
although there is a large genetic component in T1DM, 85% of newly
diagnosed patients with T1DM do not have an affected family member.

Monogenic Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus

Classic single-­gene defects are an extremely rare cause of autoimmune-­
mediated T1DM. IPEX (immune dysfunction, polyendocrinopathy,
enteropathy, X-­linked) syndrome is caused by pathogenic variants in
FOXP3 and other genes. The FOXP3 is a gene involved in immune system responses. A member of the FOX protein family, FOXP3 appears
to function as the master regulator in the development and function of
regulatory T cells. These variants lead to the lack of a major population
of regulatory T lymphocytes, with resulting overwhelming autoimmunity and development of diabetes (as early as 2 days of age) in approximately 80% of the children with this disorder.
Wolfram syndrome (DIDMOD: diabetes insipidus, diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy, deafness) is an autosomal recessive disease caused
predominantly by pathogenic variants in WFS1 and is a progressive
neurodegenerative disease. Case definition requires the presence of
T1DM and optic atrophy. This syndrome may be present in ∼5% of
patients with T1DM.
Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndrome type 1 (APS-­1) is
caused by pathogenic variants in AIRE leading to abnormalities in
expression of peripheral antigens within the thymus and/or abnormalities of negative selection in the thymus. This results in widespread
autoimmunity. Approximately 18% of children with this syndrome
develop T1DM.

Genes Altering the Risk of Autoimmune Type 1
Diabetes Mellitus

The risk of developing T1DM is modified by the influence of several
risk loci. The genomic region with by far the greatest contribution to
the risk of T1DM is the MHC on chromosome 6p21. Outside of the
MHC, genome-­wide association studies have identified T1DM to be
associated with at least 100 different single-­nucleotide polymorphisms,
from which about 50 genes have emerged as potentially causal. Notable
high-­risk loci include INS, PTPN22, IL2RA, CTLA4, IFIH1, ERBB3,
and BAD. The contribution of each non-­MHC locus to T1DM risk is
small, making individual variants less useful for predicting the genetic

risk of T1DM in a patient. The known functions of these genes suggest the primary etiologic pathways of diabetes, namely, HLA class II
and class I molecules binding, T-­and β-­cell activation, innate pathogen
viral responses, chemokine and cytokine signaling, and T-­regulatory
and antigen-­presenting cell functions.

Major Histocompatibility Complex/Human Leukocyte
Antigen–Encoded Susceptibility to Type 1 Diabetes
Mellitus

The MHC is a large genomic region that contains a number of genes
related to immune system function in humans. These genes are further
divided into HLA classes I, II, III, and IV. Class II genes are the ones
most strongly associated with risk of T1DM, but some of the risk associated with various HLA types is a result of variation in genes in HLA
classes other than class II. Overall, genetic variation in the HLA region
can explain 40–50% of the genetic risk of T1DM.
Some of the known associations include the HLA DR3/4-­DQ2/8
genotype; compared to a population prevalence of T1DM of approximately 1 in 300, DR3/4-­DQ2/8 newborns from the general population
have a 1 in 20 genetic risk. This risk of development of T1DM is even
higher when the high-­risk HLA haplotypes are shared with a sibling or
parent with T1DM. If one sibling has T1DM and shares the same high-­
risk DR3/4-­DQ2/8 haplotype with another sibling, the risk of autoimmunity in the other sibling is 50%. Moreover, this risk approaches 80%
when siblings share both HLA haplotypes identical by descent. This
is known as the relative paradox and points to the existence of other
shared genetic risk factors (most likely in the extended HLA haplotype).
With advances in genotyping, further discrimination is possible and
we can identify more specific risk ratios for specific haplotypes. For
example, the DRB1*0401-­
DQA1*0301g-­
DQB1*0302 haplotype has
an odds ratio (OR) of 8.39, whereas the DRB1*0401-­DQA1*0301g-­
DQB1*0301 haplotype has an OR of 0.35, implicating the DQB1*0302
allele as a critical susceptibility allele. There are some dramatically protective DR-­DQ haplotypes (e.g., DRB1*1501-­DQA1*0102-­DQB1*0602
[OR = 0.03], DRB1*1401-­DQA1*0101-­DQB1*0503 [OR = 0.02], and
DRB1*0701-­DQA1*0201-­DQB1*0303 [OR = 0.02]). The DR2 haplotype (DRB1*1501-­DQA1*0102-­DQB1*0602) is dominantly protective
and is present in 20% of the general population but is seen in only 1%
of patients with T1DM.

Role of Aspartate at Position 57 in DQB1

DQB1*0302 (high risk for diabetes) differs from DQB1*0301 (protective against diabetes) only at position 57, where it lacks an aspartic acid

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 629 u Diabetes Mellitus
residue. The DQB1*0201 allele (increased risk for diabetes) also lacks
aspartic acid at position 57, and it has been proposed that the presence of aspartate at this position alters the protein-­recognition and
protein-­binding characteristics of this molecule. Although the absence
of aspartate at this position appears to be important in most studies
on White individuals, it does not have the same role in Korean and
Japanese populations. Moreover, certain low-­risk DQB1 genotypes also
lack aspartic acid at position 57, including DQB1*0302/DQB1*0201
(DR7) and DQB1*0201 (DR3)/DQB1*0201 (DR7). Thus the presence
of aspartate at this position is usually, but not always, protective in
White populations but not necessarily in other populations.

Role of Human Leukocyte Antigen Class I

Although the alleles of class II HLA genes appear to have the strongest associations with diabetes, recent genotyping studies and analyses of pooled data have identified associations with other elements in
the HLA complex, especially HLA-­A and HLA-­B. The most significant
association is with HLA-­B39, which confers high risk for T1DM in
three different populations, makes up the majority of the signal from
HLA-­B, and is associated with a lower age of onset of the disease.

Non-­MHC/HLA Genes Associated with T1DM Risk

The second locus found to be associated with risk of T1DM was localized to a region upstream of the INS. Susceptibility in this region has
been primarily mapped to a variable number of tandem repeats approximately 500 base pairs (bp) upstream of the insulin gene. This highly
polymorphic region consists of anywhere from 30 to several hundred
repeats of a 14-­to 15-­bp unit sequence (ACAGGGGTCTGGGG). The
high-­risk allele has been found to be associated with lower insulin and
messenger RNA (mRNA) production in the thymus, suggesting a possible mechanism for decreased immune tolerance to insulin. A number
of candidate genes linked to T1DM susceptibility have also been associated with increased risk of other autoimmune disease. These include
the genes PTPN22, IL2RA, CTLA4, and IFIH1, which are involved
in immune system regulation. Others, such as ERBB3 and BAD, are
thought to be associated with cell apoptosis.

ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS

That ∼45–70% of monozygotic twins are discordant for T1DM, the
variation seen in urban and rural areas populated by the same ethnic
group, the change in incidence that occurs with migration, the increase
in incidence that has been seen in almost all populations in the last few
decades, and the occurrence of seasonality all provide evidence that
environmental factors also play a significant role in the causation of
T1DM.

Viral Infections

It is possible that various viruses play a role in the pathogenesis of
T1DM, but no single virus, and no single pathogenic mechanism,
stands out in the environmental etiology of T1DM. Instead, a variety of viruses and mechanisms may contribute to the development of
diabetes in genetically susceptible hosts. Invoked mechanisms involve
direct infection of β cells by viruses resulting in lysis and release of
self-­antigens, direct viral infection of antigen-­presenting cells causing
increased expression of cytokines, and molecular mimicry, which is the
notion that viral antigens exhibit homology to self-­epitopes.
The clearest evidence of a role for viral infection in human T1DM is
seen in congenital rubella syndrome. Prenatal infection with rubella is
associated with β-­cell autoimmunity in up to 70%, with development
of T1DM in up to 40% of infected children. The time lag between infection and development of diabetes may be as large as 20 years. T1DM
after congenital rubella is more likely in patients who carry the higher-­
risk genotypes. Interestingly, there appears to be no increase in risk of
diabetes when rubella infection develops after birth or when live-­virus
rubella immunization is used.
Studies have shown an increase in evidence of enteroviral infection in patients with T1DM and an increased prevalence of enteroviral RNA in prenatal blood samples from children who subsequently
develop T1DM. It has been reported that mumps infection leads to

3519

the development of β-­cell autoimmunity with high frequency and to
T1DM in some cases. Although mumps may play a role in some cases,
the fact that T1DM incidence has increased steadily in several countries after universal mumps vaccination was introduced and that the
incidence is extremely low in several populations where mumps is still
prevalent indicates that mumps alone is not a major causal factor in
diabetes.

The Hygiene Hypothesis: Possible Protective Role of
Infections

Although some viral infections may increase the risk of T1DM, infectious agents may also play a protective role against diabetes. The
hygiene hypothesis states that T1DM risk is increased in industrialized
countries, where the observation that there are fewer infections implies
that the immune system is less well trained for its main task, namely
host defense. Some call this theory the microbial deprivation hypothesis.
The hygiene hypothesis states that lack of exposure to childhood infections may increase an individual’s chances of developing autoimmune
diseases, including T1DM. Rates of T1DM and other autoimmune
disorders are generally lower in underdeveloped nations with a high
prevalence of childhood infections and tend to increase as these countries become more developed. The incidence of T1DM differs almost
sixfold between Russian Karelia and Finland, even though both are
populated by genetically related populations and are adjacent to each
other and at the same latitude. The incidence of autoimmunity in the
two populations varies inversely with immunoglobulin (Ig) E antibody
levels, and IgE is involved in the response to parasitic infestation. All
these observations suggest that decreased exposure to certain parasites
and other microbes in early childhood may lead to an increased risk of
autoimmunity in later life, including autoimmune diabetes. Nonetheless, retrospective case-­control studies have been equivocal at best, and
direct evidence of protection by childhood infections is still lacking.

Gastrointestinal Microbiome

There is emerging evidence that the intestinal microbiome is altered
in T1DM; however, a cause-­and-­effect relationship has yet to be established. Human studies have found that the intestinal microbiome in
T1DM has decreased diversity of microbial species and contains fewer
butyrate-­producing organisms compared to healthy controls. Butyrate
is a short-­chain fatty acid that is thought to be antiinflammatory and
may have a role in protecting the intestinal epithelium, either directly
or indirectly, through an effect to increase mucin production. Theoretically, a disruption in epithelial integrity (the so-­called leaky gut) could
trigger inflammation and an enhanced autoimmune response because
of increased entry of pathogenic or dietary antigens into the bloodstream. Early, small-­scale prospective studies in infants and children at
high risk for T1DM have shown an imbalance favoring species including Bacteroides dorei and Bacteroides vulgatus among individuals who
went on to develop T1DM autoantibodies or disease compared with
those who did not. A larger study across six different study sites in The
Environmental Determinants of Diabetes in the Young (TEDDY) study
identified significant geographic differences in fecal microbiome composition, highlighting the challenges in this field of study.

Diet

Dietary exposure may modify T1DM risk; a definitive link between
any single dietary exposure and T1DM development has not been
found. The majority of interventional studies have not shown an effect
of delayed gluten exposure or the use of hydrolyzed formula to reduce
the risk for development of T1DM autoantibodies of disease. A meta-­
analysis of both interventional and observational studies concluded
that there was no association between early exposure of gluten or milk
protein and risk of T1DM. Some, but not all, studies have suggested
that breastfeeding lowers the risk of T1DM. The potential mechanism
for a protective effect of breast milk is not well understood but could be
related to a beneficial effect of breast milk on the infant immune system
or an indirect effect such as reduced exposure to other dietary antigens early in life. Timing of solid food introduction may modify T1DM
risk, as seen in a report from the Diabetes Autoimmunity Study in the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3520 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Young (DAISY), which found that both early (before 4 months of age)
and late (after 6 months of age) introduction of solid foods predicted
development of T1DM.
Other dietary factors that have been suggested at various times as
playing a role in T1DM risk include omega-­3 fatty acids, vitamin D,
ascorbic acid, zinc, and vitamin E. Vitamin D is biologically plausible
(it has a role in immune regulation), and deficiency is more common
in northern countries like Finland where T1DM incidence is highest;
however, most observational studies have failed to find associations
between vitamin D level or supplementation and T1DM risk. Interventional studies to assess the effect of vitamin D supplementation on
T1DM risk are lacking.

PATHOGENESIS AND NATURAL HISTORY OF TYPE
1 DIABETES MELLITUS

In T1DM, a genetically susceptible host develops autoimmunity against
the host’s own β cells. What triggers this autoimmune response is complex and multifactorial. In some (but not all) patients, this immune-­
mediated process results in progressive destruction of β cells until a
critical mass of β cells is lost and insulin deficiency develops. Insulin
deficiency, in turn, leads to the onset of clinical signs and symptoms of
T1DM. At the time of diagnosis, if viable β cells are still present and
produce some insulin, there may be a partial remission of the disease
(honeymoon period), but over time, more β-­cell mass is destroyed,
despite any regeneration and/or persistence of β cells, and the patient
becomes totally dependent on exogenous insulin for survival (Fig.
629.2). Over time, some of these patients develop secondary complications of diabetes that appear, in part, to be related to how well-­
controlled the diabetes has been. The natural history of T1DM involves
some or all of the following stages, with two distinct identifiable stages
before onset of symptoms:
1.	Persistence of one or more islet autoantibodies with normoglycemia
and presymptomatic; can last years to decades (onset of autoimmune
islet disease AID])
2.	β-­cell autoimmunity with dysglycemia and presymptomatic; shorter
3.	Onset of symptomatic disease; usually quite brief, weeks, rarely
months
4.	Transient remission, usually within weeks of onset, may last 6-­12
months (“honeymoon”)

1. Precipitating
events might
occur in utero

5.	Established disease, lifelong
6.	Development of complications, quite variable

Initiation of Autoimmunity

Genetic susceptibility to T1DM is determined by several genes, with
the largest contribution coming from variants in the HLA system.
Nonetheless even with the highest-­risk haplotypes, most carriers will
not develop T1DM. In monozygotic twins, the concordance of the
development of T1DM is reported to be 30–65%. The observed rise
in incidence of T1DM, and particularly so in younger children with
an essentially genetically stable patient population, implies that something has accordingly changed in the environment. A number of factors, including maternal and intrauterine environmental influences,
route of neonatal delivery, foods and diet in infancy, viral infections,
lack of exposure to certain infections and antibiotic use, host microbiome, and even psychologic stress, are implicated in the pathogenesis of T1DM, but their exact role and the mechanism by which they
trigger or aggravate autoimmunity remain uncertain. What is clear is
that markers of autoimmunity are much more prevalent than clinical
T1DM, indicating that initiation of autoimmunity is a necessary, but
not a sufficient, condition for T1DM. Although no conclusive triggering factor has been identified, it seems that in most cases of T1DM
that are diagnosed in childhood, the onset of autoimmunity occurs
very early in life. In most children diagnosed before age 10 years, the
first signs of autoimmunity appear before age 2 years. Development of
autoimmunity is associated with the appearance of several autoantibodies. IAAs are usually the first to appear in young children, followed
by GAD, and later by IA-­2 and ZnT8 antibodies. The earliest antibodies
are predominantly of the IgG1 subclass. Not only is there spreading of
autoimmunity to more antigens (IAA, GAD, IA-­2A, ZnT8) but there
is also epitope spreading within one antigen. Initial GAD antibodies
tend to be against the middle region or the carboxyl-­terminal region,
whereas amino terminal antibodies usually appear later and are less
common in children.

Preclinical Autoimmunity with Progressive Loss of
β-­Cell Function

In nearly all patients, the appearance of autoimmunity is followed by
progressive or eventual destruction of β cells (Figs. 629.3 and 629.4).

2. Genetic predisposition
probably the key driver or
linkage to immune
abnormalities
(Precipitating event)
5. Presence of two or
more islet autoantibodies
might represent
asymptomatic type 1
diabetes

3. Beyond precipitating,
environment might
influence entire natural
history
Genetic
predisposition

β-cell mass

Overt
immunologic
abnormalities
Normal insulin
release

Progressive
loss of
insulin
release

Glucose
normal

4. Although overall loss of β
cells is potentially linear, it
could show a relapsing or
remitting pattern

6. Increasing glucose
excursions as individual
approaches symptomatic
onset

Overt
diabetes
C-peptide
present

7. Some patients produce
low concentrations of
C-peptide long after onset
No C-peptide
8. β-cell mass not always
zero in long-standing
disease

Age (yr)

Fig. 629.2 The natural history of T1DM—a 25-­yr-­old concept revisited. A re-­creation of the model of T1DM, originally proposed in 1986, is shown

in black. Additions and conjectures based on recent knowledge gains are shown in green boxes. (From Atkinson MA, Eisenbarth GS, Michels AW.
Type 1 diabetes. Lancet. 2014;383:69–78. Fig. 4.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

15

Merged genetic score
> 14.4
13.1 - 14.4
< 13.1

10
5
0
0

A

1

2

3
4
Age (years)

5

6

20

3521

20
Cumulative risk for
type 1 diabetes (%)

20

Cumulative risk for multiple
islet autoantibodies (%)

Cumulative risk for one or more
islet autoantibodies (%)

Chapter 629 u Diabetes Mellitus

15
10
5
0

15
10
5
0

0

1

2

3
4
Age (years)

5

6

0

2

Number at risk

Number at risk

Number at risk

907 858 755 687 635 598 550
1713 1639 1457 1318 1233 1175 1084
878 831 750 692 650 620 581

907 875 777 707 657 625 580
1713 1651 1480 1343 1268 1209 1120
878 841 764 709 668 638 600

907
1713
878

897
1694
874

4
6
Age (years)

8

10

876
1679
868

522
996
505

167
305
164

835
1603
822

The stages to type 1 diabetes

Genetic
risk
Immune
activation
Immune
response

Starting point
15 x increased
Stage 1
Stage 2
Stage 3
Stage 4
risk of T1D in
those with
Immune
relatives with
activation
Clinical
Immune
Normal blood Abnormal
Longdisease
blood sugar
diagnosis
sugar
standing
Beta cells are response
T1D
attacked
≥2
≥2
Development ≥ 2
autoantibodies autoantibodies autoantibodies
of single
autoantibody
B

Fig. 629.3 Contributing factors and disease progression in type 1 diabetes. A, Cumulative risks of one or more islet autoantibodies, multiple islet

autoantibodies, and type 1 diabetes development in TEDDY children with the HLA DR3/DR4-­DQ8 or DR4-­DQ8/DR4-­DQ8 genotype stratified by
their merged score. The cumulative risk of developing one or more islet autoantibodies (left graph), multiple islet autoantibodies (middle graph),
and type 1 diabetes (right graph, y axis) is shown relative to age in yr (x axis) and was calculated using the Kaplan ± Meier method. Curves are shown
for children with genetic scores in the upper (orange line), lower (green line), and two middle (blue line) quartiles. The shaded areas represent the
95% confidence interval of the cumulative risk. The numbers at risk indicate the number of children included in the analysis at each age. B, Type
1 diabetes progression and stages of type 1 diabetes. Stage 1 is the start of type 1 diabetes, marked by individuals having two or more diabetes-­
related autoantibodies and normal blood sugar concentrations. In stage 2, individuals have dysglycemia without symptoms. Stage 3 is the time
of clinical diagnosis. T1D, type 1 diabetes. (A from Bonifacio E, Beyerlein A, Hippich M, et al. Genetic scores to stratify risk of developing multiple
islet autoantibodies and type 1 diabetes: A prospective study in children. PLoS Med. 2018;15:e1002548. Fig. 4; B from Greenbaum CJ, Speake C,
Krischer J, et al. Strength in numbers: opportunities for enhancing the development of effective treatments for type 1 diabetes—the TrialNet experience. Diabetes. 2018;67:1216–1225.)

Antibodies are a marker for the presence of autoimmunity, but the
actual damage to the β cells is primarily T-­cell mediated (see Fig. 629.4).
Histologic analysis of the pancreas from patients with recent-­onset
T1DM reveals insulitis, with an infiltration of the islets of Langerhans
by mononuclear cells, including T and B lymphocytes, monocytes/
macrophages, and natural killer cells. The process in human T1DM is
not necessarily linear, and there may be an undulating downhill course,
with remissions and relapses, in the development of T1DM.

Role of Autoantibodies

Even though T1DM does not occur as a direct consequence of autoantibody formation, the risk of developing clinical disease increases
dramatically with an increase in the number of antibodies; only 15%
of children with one antibody will progress to diabetes in 10 years, but
this risk increases to 70% when two antibodies are present and 90%
when three are present. The risk of progression also varies with the
intensity of the antibody response, and those with higher antibody
titers are more likely to progress to clinical disease. Another factor that
appears to influence progression of β-­cell damage is the age at which
autoimmunity develops; children in whom IAAs appeared within the
first 2 years of life rapidly developed anti–islet cell antibodies and progressed to diabetes more frequently than children in whom the first
antibodies appeared between ages 5 and 8 years.

Role of Genetics in Disease Progression

In a large study of healthy children, the appearance of single antibodies
is relatively common and usually transient and does not correlate with
the presence of high-­risk HLA alleles; those carrying high-­risk HLA
alleles are more likely to develop multiple antibodies and progress to
disease. Similarly, the appearance of antibodies is more likely to predict
diabetes in those with a family history of diabetes versus those with no
family history of T1DM. Environmental factors may induce transient
autoimmunity in many children, but those with genetic susceptibility
are more likely to see progression of autoimmunity and eventual development of diabetes.

Role of Environmental Factors

Environmental factors may also act as accelerators of T1DM after the
initial appearance of autoimmunity. This is evident from the fact that
the incidence of T1DM can vary several-­fold between populations that
have the same prevalence of autoimmunity. The incidence of T1DM in
Finland is almost fourfold higher than in Lithuania, but the incidence
of autoimmunity is similar in both countries.
The fact that all children with evidence of autoimmunity and of
autoreactive T cells do not progress to diabetes indicates that there
are checkpoints at which the autoimmune process can be halted or
reversed before it progresses to full-­blown diabetes.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3522 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
function if the autoimmune destructive process could be halted and if
islet cell regeneration could occur.

A
B cell

CD4

PREDICTION

APC
Regulatory
T cell

D

E

Macrophage

C
B

CD8

Neutrophil

Natural killer cell

Pancreatic islet

Fig. 629.4 The immunopathogenesis of type 1 diabetes. The de-

velopment of type 1 diabetes is thought to be initiated by the presentation of β-­cell peptides by antigen-­presenting cells (APCs). APCs
bearing these autoantigens migrate to the pancreatic lymph nodes,
where they interact with autoreactive CD4+ T lymphocytes, which in
turn mediate the activation of autoreactive CD8+ T cells (A). These activated CD8+ T cells return to the islet and lyse β cells expressing immunogenic self-­antigens on major histocompatibility complex class I
surface molecules (B). β-­Cell destruction is further exacerbated by the
release of proinflammatory cytokines and reactive oxygen species from
innate immune cells (macrophages, natural killer cells, and neutrophils)
(C). This entire process is amplified by defects in regulatory T lymphocytes, which do not effectively suppress autoimmunity (D). Activated T
cells within the pancreatic lymph node also stimulate B lymphocytes to
produce autoantibodies against β-­cell proteins. These autoantibodies
can be measured in circulation and are considered a defining biomarker
of type 1 diabetes (E). (From DiMeglio LA, Evans-­Molina C, Oram RA.
Type 1 diabetes. Lancet. 2018;391:2449–2458. Fig. 3.)

Onset of Clinical Disease

Patients with progressive β-­cell destruction will eventually present
with clinical T1DM. It was thought that 90% of the total β-­cell mass is
destroyed by the time clinical disease develops, but other studies have
revealed that this is not always the case. It appears that β-­cell destruction is more rapid and more complete in younger children, whereas
in older children and adults, the proportion of surviving β cells is
greater (10–20% in autopsy specimens), and some β cells (about 1%
of the normal mass) survive up to 30 years after the onset of diabetes. Because autopsies are usually done only on patients who died of
DKA, these figures may underestimate the actual β-­cell mass present
at diagnosis. Functional studies indicate that up to 40% of the insulin
secretory capacity may be preserved in adults at the time of presentation of T1DM. Ultrasensitive assays indicate that C-­peptide production
is measurable decades after the onset of T1DM. The fact that newly
diagnosed diabetic individuals may still have a significant surviving
β-­cell mass is important because it raises the possibility of secondary
prevention of T1DM. Similarly, the existence of viable β cells years
or decades after initial presentation indicates that even patients with
long-­standing diabetes may be able to exhibit some recovery of β-­cell

Autoimmunity precedes clinical T1DM, and indicators of autoimmune
responses may be useful markers for disease prediction. Individuals at
risk for T1DM can be identified by a combination of genetic, immunologic, and metabolic markers. The most informative genetic locus,
HLA class II, confers about half of the total genetic risk but has a low
positive predictive value (PPV) when used in the general population.
Autoantibodies provide a practical readout of β-­cell autoimmunity,
are easily sampled in venous blood, and have become the mainstay of
T1DM prediction efforts. By comparison, and even though T lymphocytes mediate β-­cell destruction, T cells are rare in blood, and assays
of their function have been difficult to standardize and validate. In the
first-­degree relatives of patients with T1DM, the number of positive
autoantibodies can help estimate the risk of developing T1DM: low risk
(single autoantibodies: PPV of 2–6%), moderate risk (2 autoantibodies:
PPV of 21–40%), and high risk (>2 autoantibodies: PPV of 59–80%)
over a 5-­year period. In children carrying the T1DM highest-­risk genotype (HLA-­DQB1*0201-­DQA1*05/DQB1*0302-­DQA1*03), insulitis
is almost 10 times more frequent (PPV 21%) than in children with other
genotypes (PPV 2.2%). But although autoantibodies are useful for the
prediction of T1DM in the relatives of patients with T1DM, outside of
that obvious population, the screening of the general population would
be required to identify healthy subjects at risk of T1DM. Indeed, ∼90%
of individuals with new-­onset T1DM have no family background of
T1DM. Screening the general population is difficult to justify, in part,
because the observed autoantibody prevalence greatly exceeds the low
disease prevalence in nonrelatives, leading to high false-­positive rates.

PREVENTION

Strategies for the prevention of T1DM are focused primarily on slowing progression of β-­cell loss after the onset of autoimmune islet disease through targeted immunosuppression of autoreactive regulatory T
cells. Numerous compounds are under investigation for this purpose,
including agents that could modulate regulatory T cells via stimulating
interleukin (IL)-­2, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-­α signaling, or CTLA
signaling and by inhibiting IL-­17 or T-­cell receptor (TCR) signaling.
Teplizumab, a humanized anti-­CD3 monoclonal antibody that inhibits
TCR signaling, has been shown to delay the onset of clinical diabetes
in high-­risk children and young adults. It is approved for use in the
United States for patients 8 years and older with stage 2 T1DM, defined
by at least two positive pancreatic islet cell autoantibodies and dysglycemia without hyperglycemia.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF T1DM

Insulin performs a critical role in the storage and retrieval of cellular
fuel. Its secretion in response to feeding is exquisitely modulated by
the interplay of neural, hormonal, and substrate-­related mechanisms
to permit controlled disposition of ingested foodstuff as energy for
immediate or future use. Insulin levels must be lowered to then mobilize stored energy during the fasted state. Thus in normal metabolism,
there are regular swings between the postprandial, high-­insulin anabolic state and the fasted, low-­insulin catabolic state that affect liver,
muscle, and adipose tissue (Table 629.4). T1DM is a progressive low-­
insulin catabolic state in which feeding does not reverse, but rather
exaggerates, these catabolic processes. With moderate insulinopenia,
glucose use by muscle and fat decreases and postprandial hyperglycemia appears. At even lower insulin levels, the liver produces excessive
glucose via glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis, and fasting hyperglycemia begins. Hyperglycemia produces an osmotic diuresis (glycosuria) when the renal threshold is exceeded (180 mg/dL; 10 mmol/L).
The resulting loss of calories and electrolytes, as well as the worsening
dehydration, produces a physiologic stress with hypersecretion of stress
hormones (epinephrine, cortisol, growth hormone, and glucagon).
These hormones, in turn, contribute to the metabolic decompensation
by further impairing insulin secretion (epinephrine), by antagonizing
its action (epinephrine, cortisol, growth hormone), and by promoting

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 629 u Diabetes Mellitus
Table 629.4  Influence of Feeding (High Insulin) or of
Fasting (Low Insulin) on Some Metabolic
Processes in Liver, Muscle, and Adipose
Tissue*

Liver

Muscle

HIGH PLASMA INSULIN
(POSTPRANDIAL STATE)

LOW PLASMA INSULIN
(FASTED STATE)

Glucose uptake
Glycogen synthesis
Absence of
gluconeogenesis
Lipogenesis
Absence of ketogenesis

Glucose production
Glycogenolysis
Gluconeogenesis

Glucose uptake

Absence of glucose
uptake
Fatty acid and ketone
oxidation
Glycogenolysis
Proteolysis and amino
acid release

Glucose oxidation
Glycogen synthesis
Protein synthesis
Adipose
tissue

Glucose uptake
Lipid synthesis
Triglyceride uptake

Absence of lipogenesis
Ketogenesis

Absence of glucose
uptake
Lipolysis and fatty acid
release
Absence of triglyceride
uptake

*Insulin is considered to be the major factor governing these metabolic processes.
Diabetes mellitus may be viewed as a permanent low-­insulin state that, if untreated,
results in exaggerated fasting.

glycogenolysis, gluconeogenesis, lipolysis, and ketogenesis (glucagon,
epinephrine, growth hormone, and cortisol) while decreasing glucose
use and glucose clearance (epinephrine, growth hormone, cortisol).
The combination of insulin deficiency and elevated plasma values
of the counterregulatory hormones is also responsible for accelerated
lipolysis and impaired lipid synthesis, with resulting increased plasma
concentrations of total lipids, cholesterol, triglycerides, and free fatty
acids. The hormonal interplay of insulin deficiency and glucagon excess
shunts the free fatty acids into ketone body formation; the supranormal
rate of formation of these ketone bodies, principally β-­hydroxybutyrate
and acetoacetate, exceeds the capacity for peripheral use and renal
excretion. Accumulation of these keto acids results in metabolic acidosis (DKA) and compensatory rapid, deep, nondyspneic breathing
to excrete excess CO2 (Kussmaul respiration). Acetone, formed by
nonenzymatic conversion of acetoacetate, is responsible for the characteristic fruity odor of the breath. Ketones are excreted in the urine
in association with cations and thus further increase losses of water
and electrolyte and bicarbonate regenerating ability. With progressive
dehydration, acidosis, hyperosmolality, and diminished cerebral oxygen use, consciousness becomes impaired, and the patient ultimately
becomes comatose.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The classic clinical manifestations of new-­onset diabetes in children
reflect the hyperglycemic and catabolic physiologic state and include
polyuria, polydipsia, polyphagia, and weight loss. Other common
symptoms include fatigue, weakness, and a general feeling of malaise.
Patients presenting with more advanced disease will exhibit signs of
DKA, including dehydration, nausea, vomiting, lethargy, altered mental status, and in extreme cases, coma. If the diagnosis is not recognized, the progression of symptoms follows a predictable course from
early intermittent polyuria, to sustained polyuria and weight loss, followed by development of DKA. In most cases, this initial progression
occurs over a period of weeks rather than months.
Initially, when only insulin reserve is limited, occasional asymptomatic postprandial hyperglycemia occurs. When insulin secretory

3523

capacity declines, blood glucose levels begin to rise. When the blood
glucose increases above the renal threshold, intermittent polyuria
and/or nocturia begins. With further β-­cell loss, chronic hyperglycemia causes a more persistent diuresis, which often includes nocturnal
enuresis in younger children. Female patients may develop vulvovaginal candidiasis from the chronic glycosuria. Eventually, daily losses of
water and glucose may be as high as 5 L and 250 g, respectively, representing 1,000 calories, or 50%, of the average daily caloric intake. These
losses trigger compensatory polydipsia and polyphagia; however, progressive dehydration and weight loss will inevitably ensue unless treatment is initiated.
When the disease continues to progress, ketoacids begin to accumulate. At this stage in the disease, rapid clinical deterioration is possible.
Ketoacids produce abdominal pain, anorexia, nausea, and emesis and
thereby impede the patient’s ability to maintain sufficient oral replacement of urinary water losses. Dehydration accelerates, as manifested by
weakness, orthostasis, and further weight loss. As in any hyperosmotic
state, the degree of dehydration may be clinically underestimated
because intravascular volume is conserved at the expense of intracellular volume. Signs and symptoms of advanced ketoacidosis include
Kussmaul respirations (deep, heavy, nonlabored, rapid breathing),
fruity breath odor (acetone), prolonged corrected Q-­T interval, diminished neurocognitive function, and coma. Approximately 20–40% of
children with new-­onset diabetes progress to DKA before diagnosis;
data from the United States suggest that the prevalence of DKA at onset
of T1DM is increasing.
Clinical progression typically happens more quickly in younger
children, owing to either more aggressive autoimmune destruction of
β-­cells and/or to lower β-­cell mass. Disease onset in infancy is associated with a greater likelihood of DKA at presentation. Weight loss in
younger children and individuals with more rapidly progressive disease will be composed mostly of acute fluid loss, whereas weight loss
in adolescents and individuals with slowly progressive disease will also
include significant fat and lean mass deficits as a result of prolonged
starvation. In any child, the progression of symptoms may be accelerated by the stress of an intercurrent illness or trauma, when counterregulatory (stress) hormones counter the limited insulin secretory
capacity.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of T1DM is usually straightforward (see Table 629.2).
Although most symptoms are nonspecific, the most important clue is
an inappropriate polyuria in any child with signs of dehydration and
poor weight gain. Hyperglycemia can be identified quickly from capillary blood by use of a glucometer; glycosuria and ketonuria can readily be determined by urine dipstick. Nonfasting blood glucose greater
than 200 mg/dL (11.1 mmol/L) with typical symptoms is diagnostic
with or without ketonuria. In the obese child, T2DM must be considered (see Chapter 629.3). Once hyperglycemia is confirmed, it is prudent to determine whether DKA is present (especially if ketonuria is
found) by checking a venous blood sample for bicarbonate and pH and
also to evaluate for electrolyte abnormalities—even if signs of dehydration are minimal. A baseline HbA1c will be confirmatory and allows an
estimate of the duration of hyperglycemia and provides an initial value
by which to compare the effectiveness of subsequent therapy. Falsely
low HbA1c levels are noted in hemolytic anemias (sickle cell anemia,
others), pure red cell aplasia, blood transfusions, and anemias associated with hemorrhage, cirrhosis, myelodysplasias, or renal disease
treated with erythropoietin.
Testing for autoimmunity (T1DM autoantibodies) (see Chapter
629.1) should be considered in cases where the differentiation between
T1DM and T2DM is not apparent and in cases where there is a strong
family history suggestive of monogenic and syndromic diabetes. The
presence of other autoimmune diseases associated with T1DM should
be sought at or shortly after diagnosis, including celiac disease (by
tissue transglutaminase immunoglobulin A [IgA] and total IgA) and
autoimmune hypothyroidism (by thyroid-­stimulating hormone [TSH]
and free or total thyroxine). Because significant physiologic perturbations can affect thyroid and celiac screening tests, individuals with

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3524 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
only mild abnormalities should have tests repeated after several weeks
before instituting therapy. In addition, because there is an increased
risk of cardiovascular disease associated with diabetes, it is also recommended to obtain a fasting lipid profile in children ≥10 years of age
once glucose control has been established.
Rarely, a child has transient hyperglycemia with glycosuria while
under substantial physical stress or illness. This usually resolves permanently during recovery from the stressors. Stress-­produced hyperglycemia can reflect a limited insulin reserve temporarily revealed
by elevated counterregulatory hormones. A child with temporary
hyperglycemia should therefore be monitored for the development of
symptoms of persistent hyperglycemia and be tested with an HbA1c if
such symptoms occur. Formal testing in a child who remains clinically
asymptomatic is not necessary.
Routine screening procedures, such as postprandial determinations
of blood glucose or screening OGTTs, have yielded low detection rates
in healthy, asymptomatic children, even among those considered at
risk, such as siblings of diabetic children. Accordingly, such screening
procedures are not recommended in children.

TREATMENT

Therapy is tailored to the degree of insulinopenia at presentation.
Most children with new-­onset T1DM have mild to moderate symptoms, have minimal dehydration with no history of emesis, and have
not progressed to ketoacidosis. They can be started on subcutaneous insulin therapy directly. About 20–40% of children with new-­
onset diabetes present in DKA, which can be arbitrarily classified as
mild, moderate, or severe (Table 629.5), and the range of symptoms
depends on the degree of ketoacidosis. Cardinal biochemical abnormalities include elevations in blood and urine ketones, an increased
anion gap, a decreased serum bicarbonate (or total CO2) and pH,
and an elevated effective serum osmolality. Hyponatremia is commonly present with hyperglycemia and is the result of an osmotic
dilution as water shifts into the extracellular fluid. Potassium and
phosphate depletion is common after prolonged polyuria but may
be masked by acidosis, which leads to extracellular shifting of these
ions.

Treatment of Diabetic Ketoacidosis

Severe insulinopenia (or lack of effective insulin action) results in a
physiologic cascade of events in three general pathways:
1.	Excessive glucose production coupled with reduced glucose use raises serum glucose. This triggers an osmotic diuresis, with urinary loss
of fluid and electrolytes, dehydration, and activation of the renin-­
angiotensin-­aldosterone axis with accelerated potassium loss. When
glucose elevation and dehydration are severe and persist for several
hours, the risk of cerebral edema increases.
2.	Increased catabolic processes result in cellular losses of sodium, potassium, and phosphate.
3.	Increased release of free fatty acids from peripheral fat stores supplies substrate for hepatic ketoacid production. When ketoacids
accumulate, buffer systems are depleted, and a metabolic acidosis
ensues.
Therapy must address both the initiating event in this cascade (insulinopenia) and the subsequent physiologic disruptions.

Reversal of DKA is associated with inherent risks that include hypoglycemia, hypokalemia, and cerebral edema. Any protocol must be
used with caution and close monitoring of the patient. Adjustments
based on sound medical judgment may be necessary for any given level
of DKA (Figs. 629.5 and 629.6).

Dehydration and Hyperglycemia

Judicious fluid resuscitation is the first step in the medical management
of DKA. Correction of fluid deficits must be tempered by the potential
risk of cerebral edema. It is prudent to approach any child in any hyperosmotic state with cautious rehydration. The effective serum osmolality
(Eosm = 2 × [Nauncorrected] + [glucose]) is an accurate index of tonicity of
the body fluids, reflecting intracellular and extracellular hydration better
than measured plasma osmolality. It is calculated with sodium and glucose
in mmol/L. This value is usually elevated at the beginning of therapy and
should steadily normalize. A rapid decline, or a slow decline to a subnormal range, may indicate an excess of free water entering the vascular space
and an increasing risk of cerebral edema. Therefore patients should not be
allowed oral fluids until rehydration is well underway and significant electrolyte shifts are no longer likely. Limited ice chips may be given as a minimal oral intake. All fluid intake and output should be closely monitored.
Calculation of fluid deficits using clinical signs is difficult in children
with DKA because intravascular volume is better maintained in the hypertonic state. For any degree of tachycardia, delayed capillary refill, decreased
skin temperature, or orthostatic blood pressure change, the child with
DKA will be more dehydrated than the child with a normotonic fluid
deficit. Typically, an initial intravenous bolus of 10-­20 mL/kg of glucose-­
free isotonic sodium salt solution such as Ringer lactate or 0.9% sodium
chloride is given over 1 to 2 hours. Further fluid boluses should be given
only for hemodynamically unstable patients. This bolus is given as isotonic
saline because the patient is inevitably hypertonic, keeping most of the
initial infusion in the intravascular space. Subsequent fluid replacement
then consists of 0.45% or 0.9% sodium chloride infused at a rate calculated
to replace the fluid deficit (after subtracting initial fluid bolus) over 24-­
48 hours plus maintenance. The fluid deficit can be calculated empirically
if a recent weight is available, estimated at 5–10% of body weight based
upon clinical severity, or by assuming a standard water deficit (85 mL/kg).
Practically, this is generally equivalent to a rate of ∼1.5 times maintenance,
which can be substituted for simplicity in most situations.
The optimal fluid protocol to prevent CNS complications (cerebral
edema) of DKA remains uncertain. When children with DKA were
randomly assigned to one of four treatment arms consisting of fast or
slow fluid deficit repletion of 0.9% or 0.45% sodium chloride, there
were no differences in short-­or long-­term neurocognitive outcomes
among any of the treatment arms. In general, after reestablishing the
intravascular volume and avoiding rapid declines of blood glucose
levels and hyponatremia, fluid replacement rates or fluid composition
may subsequently be administered per protocol (see Fig. 629.5). It is
possible that cerebral injury preceded therapy and is the result of DKA
and not rates or composition of IV fluids.
Insulin must be given to promote movement of glucose into cells, to
subdue hepatic glucose production, and to halt the movement of fatty
acids from the periphery to the liver. An initial IV insulin bolus does not
speed recovery and may increase the risk of hypokalemia and hypoglycemia. Therefore insulin infusion is typically begun without an insulin bolus at

Table 629.5  Classification of Diabetic Ketoacidosis
NORMAL

MILD

MODERATE

SEVERE*

HCO2 (mEq/L, venous)†

20-­28

16-­20

10-­15

<10

pH (venous)†

7.35-­7.45

7.25-­7.35

7.15-­7.25

<7.15

Clinical

No change

Oriented, alert but
fatigued

Kussmaul respirations;
oriented but sleepy;
arousable

Kussmaul or depressed respirations;
sleepy to depressed sensorium
to coma

*Severe hypernatremia (corrected Na >150 mEq/L) would also be classified as severe diabetic ketoacidosis.
†HCO and pH measurement are method dependent; normal ranges may vary.
2

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 629 u Diabetes Mellitus

3525

Immediate assessment
Clinical history
Polyuria, polydipsia,
nocturia, enuresis
Weight loss
Nausea, vomiting,
abdominal pain
Weakness, fatigue
Confusion, ↓ level of
consciousness

Clinical signs
Dehydration
Deep sighing
respiration (Kussmaul)
Smell of ketones
Lethargy/drowsiness

Biochemical features and
investigations
Ketones in urine
↑ blood glucose
Acidemia (vpH <7.3, HCO3 <15 mmol/L)
Urea, electrolytes
Other investigations as indicated

Diagnosis confirmed
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Contact senior staff

Shock (reduced peripheral pulses)
Reduced conscious level/coma

Dehydration >5%
Not in shock
Acidotic (hyperventilation)
Vomiting

Minimal dehydration
Tolerating oral fluid

Resuscitation
Airway ± NG tube
Breathing (100% oxygen)
Circulation (0.9% saline
10–20 mL/kg over 1–2 hr
and repeat until circulation
is restored)
See CE management below

IV therapy
Saline 0.9% 10 mL/kg over 1 hr; may repeat
Calculate fluid requirements
Correct fluid deficit over 24–48 hr
ECG for abnormal T-waves
Add KCI 40 mmol per liter fluid

Therapy
Start with SC insulin
Continue oral hydration

No improvement
Continuous insulin infusion at 0.05–0.1 unit/kg/hr
starting 1 hr after fluids initiated

Critical observations
Hourly blood glucose
Hourly fluid input and output
Neurologic status at least hourly
Electrolytes every 2 hr after starting IV fluid therapy
Monitor ECG for T-wave changes

Acidosis not improving

Blood glucose ≤17 mmol/L (300 mg/dL)
or
Blood glucose falls >5 mmol/L/hr (90 mg/dL)

Re-evaluate
IV fluid calculations
Insulin delivery system and dose
Need for additional resuscitation
Consider sepsis

IV therapy
Change to 0.45% or 0.9% saline; add glucose
to fluids (5%–12.5%) to prevent hypoglycemia
Adjust sodium infusion to promote an
increase in measured serum sodium

Improved
Clinically well, ketoacidosis resolved, tolerating oral fluids
Transition to SC insulin
Start SC insulin then stop IV insulin after an
appropriate interval

Neurologic deterioration

WARNING SIGNS:
Severe or progressive
headache, slowing heart rate,
irritability, confusion, decreased
consciousness, incontinence,
specific neurologic signs

Exclude hypoglycemia
Is it cerebral edema?

CE management
Give mannitol 0.5–1 g/kg or 3%
hypertonic saline
Adjust IV fluids to maintain
normal BP, but avoid overhydration
Call senior staff
Move to ICU
Consider cranial imaging
only after patient stabilized

Fig. 629.5 Algorithm for the management of diabetic ketoacidosis. CE, cerebral edema; ECG, electrocardiogram; KCl, potassium chloride; SC,

subcutaneous. (Adapted from Pinhas-Hamiel O, Sperling M. Diabetic ketoacidosis. In: Hochberg Z, ed. Practical Algorithms in Pediatric Endocrinology. 3rd ed. Basel, Switzerland: Karger; 2017:112–113.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3526 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Fluids

Electrolytes

Bolus 0.9% saline 20 cc/kg, repeat
until perfusion established

Maintenance fluids plus
deficit replacement
over 24–48 hours;
0.45–0.75% saline

Replace urine
output

Insulin
HHS

Hyperosmolar DKA

When serum K+ <5 mEq/L,
start replacement
with K 40 mEq/L

Start insulin infusion
when BG no longer
decreases with fluid alone

Start insulin after
initial fluid bolus

Monitor electrolytes,
calcium, magnesium,
phosphate every 2–4
hours

IV regular insulin
0.025–0.05 unit/kg/hr

IV regular insulin
0.05–0.1 unit/kg/hr
depending on degree
of acidosis

Frequently assess circulatory status
Adjust rate and electrolyte composition of fluids as needed

Titrate insulin dose to
decrease blood glucose
4–5.5 mmol/L (75–100
mg/dL) per hour

Fig. 629.6 Algorithm for the treatment of hyperglycemic hyperosmolar syndromes (HHS). BG, blood glucose. (From Zeitler P, Haqq A, Rosenbloom A,

Glaser N. Hyperglycemic hyperosmolar syndrome in children: pathophysiological considerations and suggested guidelines for treatment.
J Pediatr. 2011;158(1):9–14, 14.e1–2.)

a rate of 0.05 to 0.1 units/kg/hr after initial fluid resuscitation is complete.
This approximates maximal insulin output in normal subjects during an
OGTT. Rehydration alone also lowers glucose levels by improving renal
perfusion and enhancing renal excretion. The combination of these therapies usually causes a rapid initial decline in serum glucose levels. Persistent decreases in serum glucose of >100 mg/dL/hr may increase the risk
of cerebral edema; therefore careful monitoring of serum glucose and
adjustment of the dextrose concentration of the IV fluids is essential. The
dextrose concentration of the IV fluids should be 5% (D5) once serum
glucose falls below ∼300 mg/dL and 10% once glucose is below 200 mg/
dL. The use of a two-­bag system is the preferred approach for managing
the dextrose concentrations of the infused IV fluid during DKA. A two-­
bag system consists of two IV bags of identical electrolyte concentrations,
where one bag contains 0% dextrose and the other contains 10% dextrose.
The fluids are administered via a Y-­site and can be easily titrated to infuse
fluids ranging from 0% to 10% dextrose.
Once the blood glucose level decreases below ∼180 mg/dL (10
mmol/L), the osmotic diuresis stops and rehydration accelerates without
further increase in the infusion rate. Repair of hyperglycemia occurs well
before correction of acidosis. Therefore insulin is still needed to control
fatty acid release and ketosis after normal glucose levels are reached. If
serum glucose levels fall below 100 mg/dL despite an infusion of D10-­
containing IV fluids, the glucose infusion rate can be increased by
increasing dextrose to 12.5% or by increasing the infusion rate. Alternatively, the IV insulin rate can be decreased if ketosis continues to improve.
The initial serum sodium is usually normal or low because of the
osmolar dilution caused by hyperglycemia and the effect of an elevated sodium-­free lipid fraction. An estimate of the reconstituted, or
“true,” serum sodium for any given glucose level above 100 mg/dL (5.6
mmol/L) is calculated as follows:

or

 1.6 mEq / L Na  for every 100 mg / dL glucose in 
 Na    

 excess of 100


1.6 mEq





LNa
for
every
5.6
mmol
 Na    
in excess of 5.6 


L glucos e





The sodium should increase by approximately 1.6 mmol/L for each
100 mg/dL decline in the glucose. The corrected sodium is usually

normal or slightly elevated and indicates moderate hypernatremic
dehydration. If the corrected value is greater than 150 mmol/L, severe
hypernatremic dehydration may be present and may require slower
fluid replacement. The sodium should steadily increase with therapy.
Declining sodium may indicate excessive free water accumulation and
increased risk of cerebral edema.
Both the metabolic shift to a catabolic predominance and the acidosis move potassium and phosphate from the cell to the serum. The
osmotic diuresis, the kaliuretic effect of the hyperaldosteronism, and
the ketonuria then accelerate renal losses of potassium and phosphate.
Sodium is also lost with the diuresis, but free water losses are greater
than isotonic losses. With prolonged illness and severe DKA, total
body losses can approach 10-­13 mEq/kg of sodium, 5-­6 mEq/kg of
potassium, and 4-­5 mEq/kg of phosphate. These losses continue for
several hours during therapy until the catabolic state is reversed and
the diuresis is controlled. For example, 50% of infused sodium may
be lost in the urine during IV therapy. Even though the sodium deficit
may be repaired within 24 hours, intracellular potassium and phosphate may not be completely restored for several days.
Although patients with DKA have a total body potassium deficit,
the initial serum level is often normal or elevated. This is caused by the
movement of potassium from the intracellular space to the serum, both
as part of the ketoacid buffering process and as part of the catabolic
shift. These effects are reversed with therapy, and potassium returns to
the cell. Improved hydration increases renal blood flow, allowing for
increased excretion of potassium in the elevated aldosterone state. The
net effect is often a dramatic decline in serum potassium levels, especially in severe DKA. This can precipitate changes in cardiac conductivity, flattening of T waves, and prolongation of the QRS complex and
can cause skeletal muscle weakness or ileus. The risk of myocardial dysfunction is increased with shock and acidosis. Potassium levels must be
closely followed and electrocardiographic monitoring continued until
DKA is substantially resolved. Potassium should be added to the IV fluids once serum potassium declines below 5.5 mEq/L and titrated. A 1:1
mixture of potassium chloride (or acetate) and potassium phosphate is
typically used. Rarely, the IV insulin must be temporarily held if serum
potassium levels drop below 3 mEq/L. It is unclear whether phosphate
deficits contribute to symptoms of DKA such as generalized muscle
weakness. In pediatric patients, a deficit has not been shown to compromise oxygen delivery via a deficiency of 2,3-­diphosphoglycerate. In
most cases, the inclusion of potassium phosphate as outlined earlier
will be sufficient; however, additional IV supplementation with potassium phosphate can be used if needed.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 629 u Diabetes Mellitus
Pancreatitis (usually mild) is occasionally seen with DKA, especially if prolonged abdominal distress is present; serum amylase and
lipase may be elevated. If the serum lipase is not elevated, the amylase
is likely nonspecific or salivary in origin. Serum creatinine adjusted
for age may be falsely elevated owing to interference by ketones in the
autoanalyzer methodology. An initial elevated value rarely indicates
renal failure and should be rechecked when the child is less ketonemic. Blood urea nitrogen may be elevated with prerenal azotemia and
should be rechecked as the child is rehydrated. Mildly elevated creatinine or blood urea nitrogen is not a reason to withhold potassium
therapy if good urinary output is present.

Ketoacid Accumulation

Low insulin infusion rates (0.02-­0.05 units/kg/hr) are usually sufficient
to stop peripheral release of fatty acids, thereby eliminating the flow of
substrate for ketogenesis. Ketogenesis continues until fatty acid substrates already in the liver are depleted, but this production declines
much more quickly without new substrate inflow. Bicarbonate buffers,
regenerated by the distal renal tubule and by metabolism of ketone
bodies, steadily repair the acidosis once ketoacid production is controlled. Bicarbonate therapy may increase the risk of hypokalemia and
cerebral edema; it should be considered only in rare situations with severe
acidosis unresponsive to standard DKA management.
There should be a steady increase in pH and serum bicarbonate as
therapy progresses. Kussmaul respirations should abate and abdominal pain resolve. Persistent acidosis may indicate inadequate insulin or
fluid therapy, infection, or rarely lactic acidosis. Urine ketones may be
positive after ketoacidosis has resolved because the nitroprusside reaction routinely used to measure urine ketones by dipstick measures only
acetoacetate. During DKA, most excess ketones are β-­hydroxybutyrate,
which increases the normal ratio to acetoacetate from 3:1 to as high
as 8:1. With resolution of the acidosis, β-­hydroxybutyrate converts to
acetoacetate, which is excreted into the urine and detected by the dipstick test. Therefore persistent ketonuria may not accurately reflect the
degree of clinical improvement and should not be relied on as an indicator of therapeutic failure. β-­Hydroxybutyrate can be measured from
serum and even by bedside capillary ketometer and is used in some
protocols to monitor the resolution of DKA and help determine when
to transition from IV to subcutaneous insulin administration.
All patients with known diabetes presenting in DKA should be
checked for precipitating events (infection, poor compliance, trauma)
that may have triggered the metabolic decompensation.

Diabetic Ketoacidosis Protocol

See Figure 629.5.
Even though DKA can be of variable severity, a common approach
to all cases simplifies the therapeutic regimen and can be safely used for
most children. Fluids are best calculated based on weight, not body surface area (m2), because heights are rarely available for the acutely critically ill child. Children with milder DKA recover in 10-­20 hours (and
need less total IV fluid before switching to oral intake), whereas those
with more severe DKA may require up to 36 hours with this protocol.
Any child can be transitioned to oral intake and subcutaneous insulin
when DKA has resolved (total CO2 >15 mEq/L; pH >7.30; sodium is
stable between 135 and 145 mEq/L; anion gap closed; no emesis). A
dose of long-­acting insulin is given (or continuous subcutaneous infusion is started via pump) and the insulin drip is discontinued approximately 30 minutes later. Typically, transition is timed to occur around
mealtime so that short-­acting insulin can be given as well. Frequent
(every 2-­3 hours) short-­acting insulin bolusing may need to be given
until ketosis resolves.
A flow sheet is mandatory for accurate monitoring of changes in
acidosis, electrolytes, fluid balance, and clinical status, especially if the
patient is transferred from the emergency department to an inpatient
setting with new caretakers. This flow sheet is best implemented by a
central computer system, which allows for rapid update and wide availability of results, as well as rule-­driven highlighting of critical values. A
paper flow sheet suffices if it stays with the patient, is kept current, and
is reviewed frequently by the physician. Any flow sheet should include

3527

columns for serial electrolytes, pH, glucose, and fluid balance. Blood
glucose should be tested every hour and electrolytes should be tested
every 1-­2 hours for children with severe DKA and every 3-­4 hours for
those with mild to moderate DKA.

Cerebral Edema

Cerebral edema is an important cause of morbidity and mortality in
children and adolescents with T1DM. Despite the clinical significance
of this complication, its etiology remains incompletely understood. A
case control study of DKA suggested that baseline acidosis and abnormalities of sodium, potassium, and blood urea nitrogen concentrations
were important predictors of risk of cerebral edema. Early bolus administration of insulin and high volumes of fluid were also identified as risk
factors. The incidence of cerebral edema in children with DKA has not
changed over the past 15-­20 years, despite the widespread introduction
of gradual rehydration protocols during this interval. Radiographic
imaging is frequently unhelpful in making the diagnosis of cerebral
edema. Consequently, each patient must be closely monitored (see
Fig. 629.5). For all but the mildest cases, this includes frequent neurologic checks for any signs of increasing intracranial pressure, such as a
change of consciousness, depressed respiration, worsening headache,
bradycardia, apnea, pupillary changes, papilledema, ptosis, posturing,
and seizures. In the event of the development of cerebral edema, immediate interventions should include elevation of the head of the bed,
reduction in IV fluid rate, and administration of mannitol (typically 1
g/kg infused intravenously over 20 minutes). Children with moderate
to severe DKA have a higher overall risk of cerebral edema and should
be treated in a hospital environment where appropriate monitoring can
occur.

Nonketotic Hyperosmolar Coma

This syndrome is characterized by severe hyperglycemia (blood glucose >800 mg/dL; 44 mmol/L), absence of or only slight ketosis, nonketotic acidosis, severe dehydration, depressed sensorium or frank
coma, and various neurologic signs that may include grand mal seizures, hyperthermia, hemiparesis, and positive Babinski signs. Respirations are usually shallow, but coexistent metabolic (lactic) acidosis
may be manifested by Kussmaul breathing. Serum osmolarity is commonly 350 mOsm/kg or greater. This condition is uncommon in children, although it may be increasing in frequency with the rise in the
incidence of T2DM. Among adults, mortality rates are high, possibly
in part because of delays in recognition and institution of appropriate therapy. In children, there has been a high incidence of preexisting
neurologic injury. Profound hyperglycemia may develop over a period
of days, and initially, the obligatory osmotic polyuria and dehydration may be partially compensated for by increasing fluid intake. In
some cases, consumption of excessive sugar-­sweetened beverages may
further exacerbate hyperglycemia. With progression of disease, thirst
becomes impaired, possibly because of alteration of the hypothalamic
thirst center by hyperosmolarity and, in some instances, because of a
preexisting defect in the hypothalamic osmoregulating mechanism.
The low production of ketones is attributed mainly to the hyperosmolarity, which in vitro blunts the lipolytic effect of epinephrine and
the antilipolytic effect of residual insulin; blunting of lipolysis by the
therapeutic use of β-­adrenergic blockers may contribute to the syndrome. Depression of consciousness is closely correlated with the
degree of hyperosmolarity in this condition and in DKA. Hemoconcentration may also predispose to cerebral arterial and venous thromboses before therapy is initiated.
Treatment of nonketotic hyperosmolar coma is directed at rapid
repletion of the vascular volume deficit with normal saline and very
slow correction of the hyperosmolar state (see Fig. 629.6). The fluid
deficit should be estimated at 12–15% of body weight. Additional normal saline boluses may be required to reduce tachycardia and poor
perfusion. One-­half isotonic saline (0.45% NaCl; may use normal
saline) is administered at a rate estimated to replace 50% of the volume
deficit in the first 12 hours, and the remainder is administered during
the ensuing 24 hours. The rate of infusion and the saline concentration are titrated to result in a slow decline of serum osmolality. When

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3528 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
the blood glucose concentration approaches 300 mg/dL, the hydrating
fluid should be changed to 5% dextrose in 0.45% NaCl. Approximately
20 mEq/L of potassium chloride should be added to each of these fluids
to prevent hypokalemia. Serum potassium and plasma glucose concentrations should be monitored at 2-­hour intervals for the first 12 hours
and at 4-­hour intervals for the next 24 hours to permit appropriate
adjustments of administered potassium and insulin.
Insulin can be given by continuous intravenous infusion only after
serum glucose levels no longer decline with fluid administration. The
IV insulin should be initiated at a low dose of 0.025-­0.05 units/kg/hr
and titrated to achieve a slow decline in serum glucose of 50-­75 mg/dL/
hr (2.8-­4.2 mmol/L/hr). The presence of ketosis or more severe acidosis
may necessitate earlier insulin initiation.

INITIATION OF SUBCUTANEOUS INSULIN THERAPY

Excellent diabetes control involves many goals: to maintain blood
glucose and HbA1c levels as close to normal without causing hypoglycemia, to eliminate polyuria and nocturia, to prevent ketoacidosis, to
permit normal growth and development, and to avoid development
of diabetes-­related complications—all while minimizing the impact
on lifestyle. The specific components of therapy include initiation
and adjustment of insulin, extensive teaching of the child and caretakers, and reestablishment of the life routines. Each aspect should be
addressed early in the overall care.

Table 629.6  Approach to Calculating Initial
Subcutaneous Insulin Doses at Diagnosis
of Type 1 Diabetes (or Type 2 Diabetes
Requiring Intensive Insulin Therapy) for
Patients Starting on a Basal-­Bolus Regimen
CALCULATE TOTAL DAILY DOSE (TDD) OF INSULIN*
Minimum starting dose:
0.2 units/kg/day
Add to the minimum dose as
follows:
-­Initial blood glucose >200 mg/
+ 0.2 units/kg/day
dL
-­Ketosis at presentation
+ 0.2 units/kg/day
-­Acidosis (by pH or serum
+ 0.2 units/kg/day
bicarbonate)
-­Puberty (Tanner stage 2 or
+ 0.2 units/kg/day
greater)†
CALCULATE DOSES OF BASAL AND BOLUS INSULIN‡
Basal dose (long-­acting insulin)
x = 50% of TDD
(x = daily dose of basal insulin,
typically given as one dose
before bedtime)
Carbohydrate coverage (short-­
acting insulin)

y = 450 / TDD
(1 unit of insulin for every “y”
grams of carbohydrates
consumed at snacks/meals)

Insulin sensitivity factor (short-­
acting insulin)

z = 1800 / TDD
(1 unit of insulin will lower blood
glucose by “z” mg/dL)

Insulin Therapy

Insulin therapy is initiated at the time of diagnosis for all patients with
T1DM. The starting dose may range from 0.4 to 1.2 units/kg/day and is
calculated based on a number of factors, including age, pubertal stage,
and presence or absence of DKA. Typically, prepubertal children presenting without DKA can be started on a dose of 0.4-­0.6 units/kg/day.
Overweight pubertal adolescents presenting with DKA may need up to
1-­1.2 units/kg/day. Insulin requirements in infancy vary tremendously,
from <0.2 units/kg/day to >1 unit/kg day. Table 629.6 shows typical
starting ranges for total daily insulin dose (units/kg/day) in children.
The precise optimal insulin dose can only be determined empirically, after beginning with the previously mentioned starting doses,
with frequent self-­monitored blood glucose levels and insulin adjustment by the diabetes team. Many children with new-­onset diabetes
have some residual β-­cell function (the honeymoon period), which is
associated with reduced exogenous insulin needs shortly after starting
treatment. Residual β-­cell function usually fades within a few months
and is reflected as a steady increase in insulin requirements and wider
glucose excursions.
The initial insulin schedule should be directed toward the optimal degree of glucose control in an attempt to duplicate the activity of
the β cell. There are inherent limits to our ability to mimic the β cell.
Exogenous insulin does not have a first pass to the liver, whereas 50%
of pancreatic portal insulin is taken up by the liver, a key organ for the
disposal of glucose. Absorption of an exogenous dose continues despite
hypoglycemia, whereas endogenous insulin secretion ceases and serum
levels quickly lower with a normally rapid clearance. The absorption
rate from an injection varies by injection site and patient activity level,
whereas endogenous insulin is secreted directly into the portal circulation. Despite these fundamental physiologic differences, acceptable glucose control can be obtained with insulin analogs used in a basal-­bolus
regimen. Basal-­bolus regimens can be accomplished with multiple daily
injections (MDIs), where a slow-­onset, long-­duration background insulin is given once or twice daily for between-­meal glucose control (basal)
and a rapid-­onset insulin is given with meals to provide carbohydrate
coverage and correct hyperglycemia. Alternatively, an insulin pump can
be used, where a rapid-­onset insulin is used to provide both basal (via
continuous infusion) and bolus (at mealtimes and as needed for hyperglycemia) coverage. The doses of short-­acting insulin include two components: carbohydrate ratio (typically expressed as 1 unit of insulin for
a set number of grams of carbohydrates) and insulin sensitivity factor
(ISF), also referred to as the correction factor, and typically expressed as
1 unit of insulin will decrease blood sugar by a set number of mg/dL to
achieve a target blood glucose level). Target blood glucose levels should

*Patients with obesity or severe insulin resistance may require an additional 0.2 units/
kg/day (or more) of insulin.
†For example, a prepubertal child presenting with hyperglycemia only with a blood
glucose of 325 mg/dL would be started on a TDD of insulin of 0.4 units/kg/day,
whereas a pubertal adolescent presenting in DKA would be started on 1 units/kg/day.
‡Other equations for calculating basal and bolus insulin doses have been proposed
and can be found in the literature. All equations provide only an estimate of insulin
requirements. All patients need frequent monitoring of blood glucose after initiation
of insulin, and most will require dose adjustments.

be individualized according to factors including age, duration of diabetes, history of hypoglycemia, time of day, and physical activity, but will
generally range between 90 and 180 mg/dL. Formulas for calculating the
basal dose, carbohydrate ratio, and ISF from the total daily insulin dose
are provided in Table 629.6
All preanalog insulins form hexamers, which must dissociate into
monomers subcutaneously before being absorbed into the circulation.
Thus a detectable effect for regular insulin is delayed by 30-­60 minutes
after injection. This, in turn, requires delaying the meal 30-­60 minutes after
the injection for optimal effect—a delay rarely attained in a busy child’s life.
Regular insulin has a wide peak and a long tail for bolus insulin. This profile
limits postprandial glucose control, produces prolonged peaks with excessive hypoglycemic effects between meals, and increases the risk of nighttime hypoglycemia. Neutral protamine Hagedorn (NPH, also known as
insulin isophane) is an intermediate-­acting insulin with inherent limitations as a basal insulin because it does not achieve a peakless background
insulin level. This produces a significant hypoglycemic effect during the
midrange of the duration. Thus it is often difficult to predict its interaction
with fast-­acting insulins. When regular insulin is combined with NPH,
the composite insulin profile poorly mimics normal endogenous insulin
secretion. Lente and ultralente insulins were other intermediate-­acting
insulins that have since been discontinued.
Lispro, aspart, and glulisine insulin are rapid-­onset analogs that
are absorbed much more quickly because they do not form hexamers. They provide discrete pulses, with onset of action in as little as 10
minutes, with little, if any, overlap and short tail effect. This allows better control of postmeal glucose increase and reduces between-­meal or
nighttime hypoglycemia. Other ultra-­fast-­acting insulin analogs are
being developed that promise even faster onset of action, a feature that

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 629 u Diabetes Mellitus
may make these insulins especially useful in insulin pumps and closed-­
loop systems.
The long-­
acting analogs glargine, detemir, and degludec are
designed to provide longer duration of action, ranging from ∼20 hours
(glargine) to ∼40 hours (degludec). Glargine forms a precipitate after
subcutaneous injection, detemir binds to circulating albumin, and
degludec forms dihexamers—all of which lead to stabilization of the
hexameric structure, slower disassociation into insulin monomers, and
prolonged duration of action. The result is a flatter 24-­hour profile,
making it easier to predict the combined effect of a rapid bolus (lispro,
aspart, or glulisine) on top of the basal insulin and thereby create a
more physiologic pattern of insulin effect. Postprandial glucose elevations are better controlled, and between-­meal and nighttime hypoglycemia are reduced. An illustration of the insulin effect profiles of the
currently available short-­and long-­acting insulins is provided in Figures 629.7 and 629.8.
At diagnosis, the basal dose of long-­acting insulin is typically calculated to provide around 50% of the total daily dose, with the remainder
provided with bolus doses of short-­acting insulin at mealtimes (calculations used to determine insulin doses are provided in Table 629.6).
Over time the ratio of basal to bolus will typically shift downward and
will be affected by the magnitude of carbohydrate intake (especially
during adolescence). Some infants and toddlers may do well with a
higher percentage of their daily insulin provided as basal. There is considerable individual variability in the duration of action of long-­acting
insulins, and some younger children and obese adolescents will require
twice-­daily dosing of glargine. Both long-­and short-­acting insulins
are available for administration via multidose insulin pens, which are
generally easier to use compared with a traditional syringe and vial
approach.
Some families may be unable to administer four daily injections.
In these cases, a compromise may be needed. A three-­injection
regimen combining NPH with a rapid analog bolus at breakfast, a
rapid-­acting analog bolus at supper, and glargine at bedtime may
provide fair glucose control and eliminate the need for an injection at school. Further compromise to a two-­injection regimen may
occasionally be needed and frequently involves use of premixed
insulin preparations that include both rapid-­and intermediate-­
acting insulins (e.g., 70/30). For this regimen, 70% of the total daily
dose (TDD) is typically provided with breakfast and 30% of TDD
with dinner. An illustration of commonly used insulin regimens is
shown in Figure 629.8.

Insulin Pump Therapy

Continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion (CSII) via battery-­
powered pumps provides a closer approximation of normal plasma
insulin profiles and increased flexibility regarding timing of meals
and snacks compared with conventional insulin injection regimens.
Insulin pump models can be programmed with a patient’s personal

Lispro/aspart/glulisine
Regular
NPH
Detemir/glargine

0

20

Degludec

40

Duration of action (hours)

Fig. 629.7 Approximate insulin effect profiles. The following relative

peak effect and duration units are used: lispro/aspart/glulisine, peak 20
for 4 hr; regular, peak 15 for 7 hr; neutral protamine Hagedorn (NPH)
peak 12 for 12 hr; detemir/glargine, peak 5 for 20-­24 hr; degludec peak
5 for 42 hr.

3529

insulin dose algorithms, including the ISF and carbohydrate ratios
for premeal glucose levels. At mealtimes, the patient enters the blood
glucose level (or it is automatically transmitted from a linked glucometer) and the carbohydrate content of the meal, and the pump
computer will calculate the proper insulin bolus dose. Although
CSII frequently improves metabolic control, this may not always
be the case. The degree of glycemic control is mainly dependent on
how closely patients adhere to the principles of diabetes self-­care,
regardless of the type of intensive insulin regimen. One benefit of
pump therapy may be a reduction in severe hypoglycemia and associated seizures. Randomized trials comparing multiple daily insulin
regimens using glargine insulin and CSII in children with T1DM
demonstrate similar metabolic control and frequency of hypoglycemic events. Most patients will initiate therapy with insulin pens;
timing of transition to an insulin pump can be individualized per
patient preference as soon as 6-­12 months after diagnosis.

Continuous Glucose Monitoring Systems

Continuous glucose monitoring systems (CGMs) consist of a subcutaneous glucose sensor that continuously measures interstitial fluid
glucose levels and a receiver to collect and display glucose data. CGMs
reduce, but do not eliminate, the need for finger stick blood glucose
checking, as calibrations with capillary blood glucose readings are
required at least every 12 hours. CGMs report blood glucose levels to
the patient/caregiver in real time and can be integrated with smartphones/watches for remote monitoring. To avoid hypoglycemia, the
CGM system sounds an alarm once a critical low blood sugar threshold
is reached. Additional alerts can be set to notify users of hyperglycemia
or rapid rates of change in glucose levels. Short-­term studies indicate
clinical benefits of these devices as compared to conventional methods of blood glucose monitoring when used by motivated and well-­
informed patients. CGMs also allow for the determination of time
in range, where the amount of time in and out of the target glycemic
range (defined by international consensus as glucose between 70 and 180
mg/dL) can be determined and tracked. Glycemic control has been traditionally monitored by HbA1c, which provides an estimate of average
blood glucose over the prior 2 to 3 months. Time in range allows for
a more granular assessment of glucose excursions within and between
days and may prove to be a more clinically significant metric of diabetes control. A limitation of CGM-­only systems is that they require the
user to respond to the alert, interpret the data, and intervene to prevent
hypoglycemic or hyperglycemic episodes. This limitation is mitigated
when the CGM is combined with an insulin pump in a closed-­loop
system.

Closed-­Loop Systems

A closed-­loop system allows for direct communication between the
continuous glucose sensor and insulin pump for automatic adjustment
of insulin infusion rates in response to glucose levels (Fig. 629.9). A
fully closed-­loop system would be completely independent of the user
and theoretically could improve glycemic control through the early
identification and response to glucose perturbation and by minimizing the opportunity for human error in insulin dosing. Both single-­
hormone (insulin only) and bihormone (insulin and glucagon) systems
are undergoing clinical investigation.
Several hybrid closed-­loop systems with integrated insulin pumps
and continuous glucose sensors have gained regulatory approval and
entered clinical practice. There is emerging evidence from short-­term
clinical trials that the use of hybrid closed-­loop systems can improve
time in range and reduce hyperglycemia and hypoglycemia compared
to sensor-­augmented systems. Current issues hampering full implementation of this technology include limitations in the accuracy and
precision of interstitial fluid glucose sensing, the need for short-­acting
insulins with more rapid onset of action, and complexity of day-­to-­day
use.

Adjunct Pharmacotherapy

Pramlintide acetate, a synthetic injectable analog of amylin, may be of
therapeutic value combined with insulin therapy. However, it has not

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3530 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System

L/A/G

L/A/G

advantage of eliminating the need for an injection at lunchtime. C,
Twice-­daily injection regimen: The use of a premixed insulin containing
a short-­and an intermediate-­acting insulin that is given twice daily is
sometimes necessary for families who are unable to manage more complex dosing regimens. Insulin 70/30 is one such product that combines
regular and NPH insulins. This produces the least physiologic profile,
with large excesses before lunch and during the early night, combined
with poor coverage before supper and breakfast.

L/A/G

Detemir/glargine/degludec

8:00

20:00

L/A/G

L/A/G

A

8:00

L/A/G

Detemir/glargine/degludec

Time of day
L/A/G

L/A/G

Basic and Advanced Diabetes Education

NPH
Detemir/glargine/degludec

8:00

20:00

L/A/G+NPH

B

L/A/G

8:00
Detemir/glargine/degludec

Time of day
Regular

NPH

gained widespread use. Metformin, an oral antihyperglycemic commonly used to treat T2DM, is sometimes used clinically as an adjunct
therapy in T1DM patients with evidence of significant insulin resistance (i.e., obesity, insulin requirements >1.2 units/kg/day, acanthosis
nigricans on exam). A clinical trial investigating the addition of metformin in overweight adolescents with T1DM did not find a sustained
effect of metformin to lower HbA1c but did show a reduction in daily
insulin dose and body mass index (BMI). Reports from observational
studies are likewise mixed. These agents would typically not be started
at diagnosis of T1DM.

Regular

NPH

Therapy consists not only of initiation and adjustment of insulin dose
but also of education of the patient and family. Teaching is most efficiently provided by experienced diabetes educators and dietitians.
In the acute phase, the family must learn the basics, which includes
monitoring the child’s blood glucose and urine and/or blood ketones,
preparing and injecting the correct insulin dose subcutaneously at the
proper time, recognizing and treating low blood glucose reactions, and
having a basic meal plan. Most families are trying to adjust psychologically to the new diagnosis of diabetes in their child and thus have
a limited ability to retain new information. Written materials covering
these basic topics help the family during the first few days.
Children and their families are also required to complete advanced
self-­management classes to facilitate implementation of flexible insulin management. These educational classes will help patients and their
families acquire skills for managing diabetes during athletic activities
and sick days. Likewise, further patient and caregiver education with a
diabetes educator familiar with diabetes technology is imperative when
adding a CGM or transitioning to an insulin pump.

Nutritional Management
8:00
Insulin 70/30

C

20:00

8:00

Insulin 70/30
Time of day

Fig. 629.8 Approximate composite insulin effect profiles of various

insulin dosing strategies. Meals are shown as rectangles below the
time axis. Injections are shown as labeled triangles; L/A/G, lispro, aspart, glulisine. All profiles are idealized using average absorption and
clearance rates. In typical clinical situations, these profiles vary among
patients. A given patient has varying rates of absorption depending on
the injection site, physical activity, and other variables. A, Basal-­bolus
regimen: A short-­acting insulin (Lantus/aspart/glulisine) is injected before meals, and a long-­acting basal insulin (glargine/detemir/degludec)
is injected at bedtime. Additional short-­acting insulin is given to cover
between-­meal snacks as needed (not shown). For patients on insulin
pumps, the composite insulin profile is similar; however, the basal insulin coverage is provided by a continuous infusion of short-­acting insulin. B, Thrice-­daily injection regimen: A short-­acting insulin (Lantus/
aspart/glulisine) and neutral protamine Hagedorn (NPH) are injected
with breakfast (the two types of insulin can be drawn up into one syringe for administration with a single injection), a short-­acting insulin is
injected with dinner, and a long-­acting basal insulin (glargine/detemir/
degludec) is injected at bedtime. Because NPH is not a peakless insulin,
this regimen is associated with greater risk of hypoglycemia compared
with the basal-­bolus regimen show in Figure 629.6A but does offer the

Nutrition plays an essential role in the management of patients with
T1DM. This is of critical importance during childhood and adolescence, when appropriate energy intake is required to meet the needs for
energy expenditure, growth, and pubertal development. There are no
special nutritional requirements for the diabetic child other than those
for optimal growth and development. Nutritional requirements for the
child are outlined on the basis of age, sex, weight, activity, and food
preferences. Cultural ethnic considerations must also be integrated
into the nutrition plan.
Total recommended caloric intake is based on size or surface area
and can be obtained from standard tables (Tables 629.7 and 629.8).
The caloric mixture should comprise approximately 55% carbohydrate,
30% fat, and 15% protein, but must be individualized to meet specific
patient needs. Approximately 70% of the carbohydrate content should
be derived from complex carbohydrates such as starch; intake of sucrose
and highly refined sugars should be limited. Complex carbohydrates
require prolonged digestion and absorption and thereby raise plasma
glucose levels slowly, whereas glucose from refined sugars, including
carbonated beverages, is rapidly absorbed and may cause wide swings
in the metabolic pattern. The consumption of sugar-­sweetened beverages, including soda and juice, should be discouraged. Priority should
be given to total calories and total carbohydrates consumed rather than
the source. Carbohydrate counting has become a mainstay in the nutrition education and management of patients with T1DM. Patients and
their families are provided with information regarding the carbohydrate contents of different foods and food label reading. This allows
patients to adjust their insulin dosage to their mealtime carbohydrate

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 629 u Diabetes Mellitus

3531

Meal

Glucose sensor
Individual

Insulin pump
Alg

Delay (30-100 min) in
insulin absorption

ori

thm

Need for
improved
insulin
kinetics

A

B

Glucose
sensor

Insulin
pump

Adjust insulin dosing
based on glucose
fluctuations

Delay in insulin action
20 min periphery
100 min liver

Correct for:
 Time lag
Errors and noise
Blood versus
interstitial values

Delay (5-15 min) in interstitial
plasma sensing
Algorithm
controller

Compensation for delays, errors, and noise
Safeguards against insulin overdose and underdose
Appreciate patient characteristics (e.g., exercise, behaviors)

Fig. 629.9 Closed-­loop system for T1DM (artificial pancreas). A, Prototype of a closed-­loop system. B, Components of a closed-­loop system. Three

potential delays in the system include glucose sensing in interstitial fluid, insulin absorption (depends on use of rapid vs regular insulin), and insulin
action in peripheral tissues and liver. (From Atkinson MA, Eisenbarth GS, Michels AW. Type 1 diabetes. Lancet. 2014;383:69–78. Fig. 5.)

Table 629.7  Calorie Needs for Children and Young
Adults
AGE

KCAL REQUIRED/KG BODY WEIGHT*

CHILDREN
0-­12 mo

120

1-­10 yr

100-­75

YOUNG WOMEN
11-­15 yr

35

≥16 yr

30

YOUNG MEN
11-­15 yr

80-­55 (65)

16-­20 yr
Average activity

40

Very physically active

50

Sedentary

30

*Gradual decline in calories per unit weight as age increases.
Numbers in parentheses are means.
From Nutrition Guide for Professionals. Diabetes education and meal planning.
Alexandria, VA, and Chicago, IL: The American Diabetes Association and The American
Dietetic Association, 1988.

intake. The use of carbohydrate counting and insulin-­to-­carbohydrate
ratios as a part of an MDI regimen allows for less rigid meal planning.
Flexibility in the use of insulin in relation to carbohydrate content of
food improves the quality of life.
Diets with high fiber content are useful in improving control of
blood glucose. Daily recommended fiber intake can be determined
using the equation:
Age in years + 5 = grams of fiber per day
Moderate amounts of sucrose consumed with fiber-­rich foods such
as whole-­grain bread may have no more glycemic effect than their

low-­fiber, sugar-­free equivalents. Saturated fat intake may increase in
patients with T1DM who reduce carbohydrate consumption to avoid
taking insulin doses by ingesting carbohydrate-­free foods. Total energy
from fat should not exceed 35%, and education should be provided
such that <10% of total energy should come from saturated and trans
fats. Dietary fats derived from animal sources should be reduced and
replaced by polyunsaturated fats from vegetable sources. Substituting
vegetable oil for animal oils or butter in cooking and lean cuts of meat,
poultry, and fish for fatty meats can help to achieve these goals. The
intake of cholesterol is also reduced by these measures. These simple
measures may reduce serum low-­density lipoprotein cholesterol, a
predisposing factor to atherosclerotic disease. Table 629.8 summarizes
typical nutritional guidelines for T1DM.
Each child and family can and should select a diet based on personal taste with the help of the physician or dietitian (or both). Emphasis should be placed on lifestyle changes to promote adherence to a
healthy, balanced diet on a daily basis. Occasional excesses (treats) are
permissible but should be limited just as for any child without diabetes.
Adjustments in meal planning must constantly be made to meet the
needs and the desires of each child. A consistent eating pattern with
appropriate supplements for exercise, the pubertal growth spurt, and
pregnancy in an adolescent with diabetes is important for metabolic
control.

Monitoring

Success in the daily management of the child with diabetes can be measured by the competence acquired by the family, and subsequently by
the child, in assuming responsibility for daily self-­care. Their initial and
ongoing instruction in conjunction with their supervised experience
can lead to a sense of confidence in adjusting an insulin dosage for
dietary deviations, for unusual physical activity, and for some intercurrent illnesses. Such acceptance of responsibility should make them
relatively independent of the physician for their ordinary care. The
physician must maintain ongoing interested supervision and shared
responsibility with the family and the child.
Self-­monitoring of blood glucose is an essential component of
managing diabetes. Effective monitoring often also includes other factors that influence blood glucose such as insulin dose, physical activity,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3532 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 629.8  Summary of Nutrition Guidelines for Children and/or Adolescents with Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus
NUTRITION CARE PLAN
Promotes optimal compliance.
Incorporates goals of management: normal growth and development, control of blood glucose, maintenance of optimal nutritional status, and
prevention of complications. Uses staged approach.
NUTRIENT RECOMMENDATIONS AND DISTRIBUTION
NUTRIENT
% OF CALORIES

RECOMMENDED DAILY INTAKE

Carbohydrate

High fiber, especially soluble fiber; optimal amount unknown

Will vary

Fiber

>20 g/day

Protein

12–20

Fat

<30

Saturated

<10

Polyunsaturated

6–8

Monounsaturated

Remainder of fat allowance

Cholesterol

300 mg

Sodium

Avoid excessive; limit to 3,000-­4,000 mg if hypertensive

ADDITIONAL RECOMMENDATIONS
Energy: If using measured diet, reevaluate prescribed energy level at least every 3 mo.
Protein: High-­protein intakes may contribute to diabetic nephropathy. Low intakes may reverse preclinical nephropathy. Therefore 12–20% of
energy is recommended; lower end of range is preferred. In guiding toward the end of the range, a staged approach is useful.
Alcohol: Safe use of moderate alcohol consumption should be taught as routine anticipatory guidance as early as junior high school.
Snacks: Snacks vary according to individual needs (generally three snacks per day for children; midafternoon and bedtime snacks for junior high
children or teens).
Alternative sweeteners: Use of a variety of sweeteners is suggested.
Educational techniques: No single technique is superior. Choice of educational method used should be based on patient needs. Knowledge of
variety of techniques is important. Follow-­up education and support are required.
Eating disorders: Best treatment is prevention. Unexplained poor control or severe hypoglycemia may indicate a potential eating disorder.
Exercise: Education is vital to prevent delayed or immediate hypoglycemia and to prevent worsened hyperglycemia and ketosis.
From Connell JE, Thomas-­Doberson D. Nutritional management of children and adolescents with insulin-­dependent diabetes mellitus: a review by the Diabetes Care and Education
Dietetic Practice Group. J Am Diet Assoc. 1991;91:1556.

dietary changes, hypoglycemia, and illness. A record of these items
may be valuable in interpreting the self-­monitoring of blood glucose,
prescribing appropriate adjustments in insulin doses, and teaching the
family. If there are discrepancies in the self-­monitoring of blood glucose and other measures of glycemic control (such as the HbA1c), the
clinician should attempt to clarify the situation in a manner that does
not undermine their mutual confidence.
Daily blood glucose monitoring is accomplished using blood test
strips or a CGM. Test strips are impregnated with glucose oxidase that
permit blood glucose measurement from a drop of blood. A portable
calibrated reflectance meter can approximate the blood glucose concentration accurately. Glucometers contain a memory chip enabling
recall of each measurement and the ability to calculate measurement
average over a given interval and display the pattern on a computer
screen. Such information is a useful educational tool for verifying
degree of control and modifying recommended regimens. A small,
spring-­
loaded device that automates capillary bloodletting (lancing device) in a relatively painless fashion is commercially available.
Parents and patients should be taught to use these devices and measure blood glucose at least 4 times daily—before breakfast, lunch, and
supper and at bedtime. When insulin therapy is initiated and when
adjustments are made that may affect the overnight glucose levels, self-­
monitoring of blood glucose should also be performed at midnight and
3 am to detect nocturnal hypoglycemia. Standard blood glucose targets are 90-­130 mg/dL before meals and 90-­150 mg/dL before bedtime;
however, glycemic goals must be individualized to the patient based on
age, hypoglycemia risk, and other factors.
Glucose measurements that are consistently at or outside these limits, in the absence of an identifiable cause such as exercise or dietary
indiscretion, are an indication for a change in the insulin dose. If the

fasting blood glucose is high, the evening dose of long-­acting insulin
(or the early morning/overnight basal rate for insulin pump users)
is increased by 10–20% and/or additional fast-­acting insulin coverage for a bedtime snack may be considered. If the noon glucose level
exceeds set limits, the morning fast-­acting insulin-­to-­carbohydrate
ratio is increased by 10–20%. If the presupper glucose is high, the noon
fast-­acting insulin-­to-­carbohydrate ratio is increased by 10–20%. If
the prebedtime glucose is high, the presupper fast-­acting insulin-­to-­
carbohydrate ratio is increased by 10–15%. The ISF can be increased by
10–20% if it is found that insulin corrections given for hyperglycemia
do not normalize glucose levels as expected. Similarly, reductions in
the insulin type and dose should be made if the corresponding blood
glucose measurements are consistently below desirable limits.
A minimum of four daily blood glucose measurements (or CGM
use) should be performed. However, some children and adolescents
may need to have more frequent blood glucose monitoring based
on their level of physical activity and history of frequent hypoglycemic reactions. Families should be encouraged to become sufficiently
knowledgeable about managing diabetes.
The FDA has approved the use of CGMs to replace finger stick
blood glucose checking for the monitoring and treatment of diabetes in children 2 years of age and older. CGMs are minimally invasive
and entail the placement of a small, subcutaneous catheter that can be
easily worn by adults and children. The system provides information
that allows the patient and healthcare team to adjust the insulin regimen and the nutrition plan to improve glycemic control. CGMs can
be helpful in detecting asymptomatic nocturnal hypoglycemia and in
lowering HbA1c values without increasing the risk for severe hypoglycemia. Although there are potential pitfalls in CGM use, including
suboptimal compliance, human error, incorrect technique, and sensor

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 629 u Diabetes Mellitus
failure, the implementation of CGMs in ambulatory diabetes practice
allows the clinician to diagnose abnormal glycemic patterns in a more
precise manner. In many cases, CGMs are now factory calibrated and
nearly eliminate the need for finger sticks. For these reasons, CGMs are
increasingly replacing finger stick blood testing as the primary means
of glucose monitoring in many patients with T1DM.

Glycosylated Hemoglobin (HbA1c)

A reliable index of long-­term glycemic control is provided by measurement of glycosylated hemoglobin. HbA1c represents the fraction of
hemoglobin to which glucose has been nonenzymatically attached in
the bloodstream. The formation of glycosylated hemoglobin is a slow
reaction that is dependent on the prevailing concentration of blood
glucose; it continues irreversibly throughout the red blood cell’s life
span of approximately 120 days. The higher the blood glucose concentration and the longer the red blood cell’s exposure to it, the higher the
fraction of glycosylated hemoglobin, which is expressed as a percentage of total hemoglobin. Because a blood sample at any given time contains a mixture of red blood cells of varying ages, exposed for varying
times to varying blood glucose concentrations, an HbA1c measurement
reflects the average blood glucose concentration from the preceding
2-­3 months. For some patients, it may be helpful to translate HbA1c
into estimated average glucose (eAG) using the following equation:
eAG = 28.7 * HbA1c − 46.7

When measured by standardized methods to remove labile forms,
HbA1c is not influenced by an isolated episode of hyperglycemia.
HbA1c measurements should be obtained three to four times a year
to obtain a profile of long-­term glycemic control. The lower the HbA1c
level, the more likely it is that microvascular complications such as retinopathy and nephropathy will be less severe, delayed in appearance,
or even avoided altogether. Depending on the method used for determination, HbA1c values may be spuriously elevated in thalassemia (or
other conditions with elevated hemoglobin F) and spuriously lower in
sickle cell disease (or other conditions with high red blood cell turnover). Fructosamine can be used instead of HbA1c in these patients.
Although values of HbA1c may vary according to the method used for
measurement, in individuals without diabetes, the HbA1c is usually less
than 6%. The HbA1c target should be individualized, but the general
recommendation of the ADA and the International Society for Pediatric and Adolescent Diabetes is that children, adolescents, and young
adults with T1DM should aim to achieve an HbA1c of <7%.

Exercise

Regular, daily exercise with the goal of 60 minutes of moderate­to vigorous-­intensity aerobic activity daily, with vigorous muscle-­
strengthening and bone-­strengthening activities at least 3 days per
week is recommended for all children with T1D. A potential complication of exercise in patients with diabetes is the development of hypoglycemia during or within the hours after exercise. Patients and families
should be educated on the risk of hypoglycemia and taught strategies
to ameliorate this risk, including frequent glucose monitoring before,
during, and after exercise; modifying diet and insulin doses around
times of exercise; and ensuring access to fast-­acting carbohydrates during exercise to treat hypoglycemia should it develop. Regular exercise
also improves glucoregulation by increasing glucose use by muscles
and increasing the insulin receptor number. In patients who are in
poor metabolic control, vigorous exercise may precipitate ketoacidosis because of the exercise-­induced increase in the counterregulatory
hormones.

Benefits of Improved Glycemic Control

The Diabetes Control and Complications Trial (DCCT) established
conclusively the association between higher glucose levels and long-­
term microvascular complications. Intensive management produced
dramatic reductions of retinopathy, nephropathy, and neuropathy by
47–76%. The data from the adolescent cohort demonstrated the same
degree of improvement and the same relationship between the outcome measures of microvascular complications.

3533

The beneficial effect of intensified treatment was determined by the
degree of blood glucose normalization independently of the type of
intensified treatment used. Frequent blood glucose monitoring was
considered an important factor in achieving better glycemic control for
the intensively treated adolescents and adults. Patients who were intensively treated had individualized glucose targets, frequent adjustments
based on ongoing capillary blood glucose monitoring, and a team
approach that focused on the person with diabetes as the prime initiator of ambulatory care. Care was constantly adjusted toward reaching
normal or near-­normal glycemic goals while avoiding or minimizing
severe episodes of hypoglycemia. Teaching emphasized a preventive
approach to blood glucose fluctuations with constant readjustment to
counterbalance any high or low blood glucose readings. Target blood
glucose goals were adjusted upward if hypoglycemia could not be
prevented.
Total duration of diabetes contributes to development and severity of complications. Nonetheless, many professionals have concerns
about applying the results of the DCCT to preschool-­age children, who
often have hypoglycemia unawareness with unique safety issues, and to
prepubertal school-­age children, who were not included in the DCCT.
The follow-­up study to the DCCT, called Epidemiology of Diabetes
Interventions and Complications (EDIC), assessed the incidence and
predictors of cardiovascular disease events such as heart attack, stroke,
or needed heart surgery, as well as diabetic complications related to the
eye, kidney, and nerves. The EDIC demonstrated that intensive blood
glucose control reduced the risk of any cardiovascular disease event by
42%. In addition, intensive therapy reduced the risk of nonfatal heart
attack, stroke, or death from cardiovascular causes by 57%.

Hypoglycemic Reactions

Hypoglycemia is the major limitation to tight control of glucose levels. Once injected, insulin absorption and action are independent of
the glucose level, thus creating a unique risk of hypoglycemia from an
unbalanced insulin effect. Insulin analogs may help reduce, but cannot
eliminate, this risk. Most children with T1DM can expect mild hypoglycemia each week, moderate hypoglycemia a few times each year,
and severe hypoglycemia every few years. These episodes are usually
not predictable, although exercise, delayed meals or snacks, and wide
swings in glucose levels increase the risk. Infants and toddlers are at
higher risk for hypoglycemia because they have more variable meals
and activity levels, are unable to recognize early signs of hypoglycemia, and are limited in their ability to seek a source of oral glucose
to reverse the hypoglycemia. The very young have an increased risk
of permanently reduced cognitive function as a long-­term sequela of
severe hypoglycemia. For these reasons, a more relaxed degree of glucose control may be tolerated in infants and young children.
Hypoglycemia can occur at any time of the day or night. Early symptoms and signs (mild hypoglycemia) may occur with a sudden decrease
in blood glucose to levels that do not meet standard criteria for hypoglycemia in children without diabetes. The child may show pallor,
sweating, apprehension or fussiness, hunger, tremor, and tachycardia,
all as a result of the surge in catecholamines as the body attempts to
counter the excessive insulin effect. Behavioral changes such as tearfulness, irritability, and aggression are more prevalent in children. As
glucose levels decline further, cerebral glucopenia occurs with drowsiness, personality changes, mental confusion, and impaired judgment
(moderate hypoglycemia), progressing to inability to seek help and seizures or coma (severe hypoglycemia). Prolonged severe hypoglycemia
can result in a depressed sensorium or strokelike focal motor deficits
that persist after the hypoglycemia has resolved. Although permanent
sequelae are rare, severe hypoglycemia is frightening for the child and
family and can result in significant reluctance to attempt even moderate glycemic control afterward.
Important counterregulatory hormones in children include growth
hormone, cortisol, epinephrine, and glucagon. The latter two seem
more critical in the older child. Many older patients with long-­standing
T1DM lose their ability to secrete glucagon in response to hypoglycemia. In the young adult, epinephrine deficiency may also develop as
part of a general autonomic neuropathy. This substantially increases the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3534 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
risk of hypoglycemia because the early warning signals of a declining
glucose level are as a result of catecholamine release. Recurrent hypoglycemic episodes associated with tight metabolic control may aggravate partial counterregulatory deficiencies, producing a syndrome of
hypoglycemia unawareness and reduced ability to restore euglycemia
(hypoglycemia-­associated autonomic failure). Avoidance of hypoglycemia allows some recovery from this unawareness syndrome.
The most important factors in the management of hypoglycemia are
an understanding by the patient and family of the symptoms and signs
of the reaction and an anticipation of known precipitating factors such
as gym or sports activities. Tighter glucose control increases the risk.
Families should be taught to look for typical hypoglycemic scenarios
or patterns in the home blood glucose log, so that they may adjust the
insulin dose and avert predictable episodes. A source of emergency
glucose should be available at all times and places, including at school
and during visits to friends. If possible, it is important to document
the hypoglycemia before treating, because some symptoms may not
always be from hypoglycemia. Any child suspected of having a moderate to severe hypoglycemic episode should be treated before testing. It
is important not to give too much glucose in response to hypoglycemia;
15 g should be given as juice or a sugar-­containing beverage or candy,
and the blood glucose checked 15-­20 minutes later.
Patients, parents, and teachers should also be instructed in the
administration of glucagon when the child cannot take glucose orally.
Glucagon is available for intramuscular or subcutaneous injection and
as a nasal powder. A glucagon kit should be kept at home and school.
The intramuscular dose of glucagon is 0.5 mg if the child weighs less
than 20 kg and 1.0 mg if more than 20 kg; the subcutaneous dose (via
prefilled device) is 0.5 mg if less than 45 kg and 1.0 mg if more than
45 kg; the intranasal dose is 3 mg. Glucagon produces a brief release
of glucose from the liver. Glucagon often causes emesis, which precludes giving oral supplementation if the blood glucose declines after
the glucagon effects have waned. Caretakers must then be prepared to
take the child to the hospital for IV glucose administration, if necessary. Mini-­dose glucagon (10 μg/yr of age up to a maximum of 150 μg
subcutaneously) is effective in treating hypoglycemia in children with
blood glucose less than 60 mg/dL who fail to respond to oral glucose
and remain symptomatic. Glucagon is reconstituted as per standard
instructions, then drawn up for subcutaneous injection using a standard insulin syringe, whereby 1 unit is the equivalent of 10 mcg of
glucagon.

Dawn Phenomenon and Somogyi Phenomenon

There are several reasons that blood glucose levels increase in the early
morning hours before breakfast. The most common is a simple decline
in insulin levels. This usually results in routinely elevated morning
glucose. The dawn phenomenon is thought to be mainly caused by
overnight growth hormone secretion and increased insulin clearance.
It is a normal physiologic process seen in most adolescents without diabetes, who compensate with more insulin output. A child with T1DM
cannot compensate. The dawn phenomenon is usually recurrent and
modestly elevates most morning glucose levels. Rarely, high morning
glucose is caused by the Somogyi phenomenon, a theoretical rebound
from late-­night or early-­morning hypoglycemia thought to be from an
exaggerated counterregulatory response. It is unlikely to be a common
cause, in that most children remain hypoglycemic (do not rebound)
once nighttime glucose levels decline. CGMs may help clarify a child’s
ambiguously elevated morning glucose levels.

Behavioral/Psychologic Aspects and Eating Disorders

Diabetes in a child affects the lifestyle and interpersonal relationships
of the entire family. Feelings of anxiety and guilt are common in parents. Similar feelings, coupled with denial and rejection, are equally
common in children, particularly during the rebellious teenage years.
Family conflict has been associated with poor treatment adherence
and poor metabolic control among youths with T1DM. On the other
hand, it has been shown that shared responsibility is consistently associated with better psychologic health, good self-­care behavior, and
good metabolic control, whereas responsibility assumed by either the

child or parent alone does not have outcomes that are equally successful. In some cases, links of shared responsibility to health outcomes
were stronger among older adolescents. However, no specific personality disorder or psychopathology is characteristic of diabetes; similar
feelings are observed in families with children who have other chronic
diseases.

COGNITIVE FUNCTION

There is evidence that children with T1DM are at higher risk of developing small differences in cognitive abilities compared to healthy age-­
matched peers. Evidence suggests that early-­onset diabetes (younger
than 7 years) is associated with cognitive difficulties compared to late-­
onset diabetes and healthy controls. The cognitive difficulties observed
were primarily learning and memory skills (both verbal and visual)
and attention/executive function skills. It is likely that the impact of
diabetes on pediatric cognition appears shortly after diagnosis. Indeed,
it has been observed that early-­onset diabetes and longer duration of
diabetes in some children with diabetes adversely affect their school
performance and educational achievements.

COPING STYLES

Children and adolescents with T1DM are faced with a complex set of
developmental changes and shifting burdens of the disease. Adjustment problems might affect psychologic well-­being and the course of
the disease by affecting self-­management and leading to poor metabolic control. Coping styles refer to typical habitual preferences for
ways of approaching problems and might be regarded as strategies that
people generally use to cope across a wide range of stressors. Problem-­
focused coping refers to efforts directed toward rational management
of a problem, and it is aimed at changing the situation causing distress.
On the other hand, emotion-­focused coping implies efforts to reduce
emotional distress caused by the stressful event and to manage or regulate emotions that might accompany or result from the stressor. In adolescents with diabetes, avoidance coping and venting emotions have
been found to predict poor illness-­specific self-­care behavior and poor
metabolic control. Patients who use more mature defenses and exhibit
greater adaptive capacity are more likely to adhere to their regimen.
Coping strategies seem to be age dependent, with adolescents using
more avoidance coping than younger children with diabetes.

NONADHERENCE

Family conflict, anger, sadness, or denial and feelings of anxiety or loss
of control find expression in nonadherence to instructions regarding nutritional and insulin therapy and in noncompliance with self-­
monitoring. When adolescents externalize behavior problems, such
behaviors interfere with adherence and may result in deterioration of
glycemic control. Such externalizing behaviors are common, whereas
repeated omission of insulin resulting in ketoacidosis in the same individual is less common, and episodes of deliberate overdosage with
insulin resulting in hypoglycemia are even less prevalent. They may,
however, be pleas for psychologic help or be manipulative attempts to
escape an environment perceived as undesirable or intolerable; occasionally, they may be manifestations of suicidal intent. Frequent admissions to the hospital for ketoacidosis or hypoglycemia should arouse
suspicion of an underlying emotional conflict. Overprotectiveness on
the part of parents is common and often is not in the best interest of
the adolescent patient. Feelings of being different or of being alone,
or both, are common and must be acknowledged. Tailoring the insulin administration and the timing of meals and blood sugar tests may
support individual lifestyle choices. Aggregating what they know about
diabetes, families and patients worry about the risk of complications
from diabetes and about the decreased life span. Unfortunately, misinformation abounds about the risks of the development of diabetes in
siblings or offspring and of pregnancy in young diabetic women. Even
appropriate information may cause further anxiety.
All of these issues must be spoken about at the outset, and many of
these problems can be averted through continued empathic counseling based on correct information, focusing on normality and on planning to be a productive member of society. Recognizing the potential

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 629 u Diabetes Mellitus
impact of these problems and that feelings of isolation and frustration
tend to be lessened by the sharing of common problems, peer discussion groups have been organized in many locales. Summer camps
for diabetic children afford an excellent opportunity for learning and
sharing under expert supervision. Education about the pathophysiology of diabetes, insulin dose, technique of administration, nutrition,
exercise, and hypoglycemic reactions can be reinforced by medical and
paramedical personnel. The presence of numerous peers with similar
problems offers new insights to the diabetic child. Residential treatment for children and adolescents with difficult-­to-­manage T1DM is
rarely available.

ANXIETY AND DEPRESSION

It has been shown that there are significant correlations between poor
metabolic control and depressive symptoms, a high level of anxiety, or
a previous psychiatric diagnosis. In a similar way, poor metabolic control is related to higher levels of personal, social, school maladjustment,
or family environment dissatisfaction. It is estimated that 20–26% of
adolescent patients may develop major depressive disorder. The prevalence of depression is twofold greater than controls in children with
diabetes and threefold greater in adolescents. Additionally, the prevalence of psychopathology is greater in people with diabetes. The course
characteristics of depression in young diabetic subjects and psychiatric
control subjects appear to be similar. However, eventual propensity of
diabetic youths for more protracted depressions is greater. There is also
a higher risk of recurrence among young diabetic females. On balance,
anxiety and depression play an important and complex role in T1DM;
their relationship to metabolic control does not yet appear clear. Therefore the healthcare providers managing a child or adolescent with diabetes should be aware of their pivotal role as counselor and advisor
and should closely monitor the mental health of patients with diabetes. Accordingly, the recommendation is screening for anxiety and/or
depression in subjects exhibiting symptoms, using a validated screening tool, followed by the appropriate referral to mental health providers
when warranted.

FEAR OF SELF-­INJECTING AND SELF-­TESTING

Extreme fear of self-­injecting insulin (injection phobia) is likely to compromise glycemic control and emotional well-­being. Likewise, fear
of finger pricks of CGM and pump site insertions can be a source of
distress and may seriously hamper self-­management. Children and
adolescents may either omit insulin dosing or refuse to rotate their
injection sites because repeated injection in the same site is associated with less pain sensation. Failure to rotate injection sites results
in subcutaneous scar formation (lipohypertrophy). Insulin injection
into the lipohypertrophic skin is usually associated with poor insulin
absorption, consequent frustration with lack of expected glucose control, and/or insulin leakage with resultant suboptimal glycemic control.
Children and adolescents with injection phobia and fear of self-­testing
can be counseled by a trained behavioral therapist and benefit from
such techniques as desensitization and biofeedback to attenuate pain
sensation and psychologic distress associated with these procedures.

3535

EATING DISORDERS

Treatment of T1DM involves constant monitoring of food intake. In
addition, improved glycemic control is sometimes associated with
increased weight gain. These factors, along with individual, familial,
and socioeconomic factors, can lead to an increased incidence of both
nonspecific and specific eating disorders, which can disrupt glycemic
control and increase the risk of long-­term complications. Eating disorders and subthreshold eating disorders are almost twice as common
in adolescent females with T1DM as in their nondiabetic peers. There
is less information regarding the prevalence of eating disorders among
male adolescents with T1DM. The prevalence of eating disorders identified in females with T1DM has ranged from 9% to 32% in different
studies. Other studies have found that approximately 11% of T1DM
adolescent females take less insulin than prescribed to lose weight.
Among adolescent females with T1DM and an eating disorder, the
misuse of insulin to lose weight is not uncommon.
When behavioral/psychologic problems and/or eating disorders
are assumed to be responsible for poor adherence with the medical
regimen, referral for psychologic evaluation and management is indicated. Behavioral therapists and psychologists usually form part of the
pediatric diabetes team in most centers and can help assess and manage emotional and behavioral disorders in diabetic children. Evaluation of nurse-­delivered motivational enhancement with and without
cognitive-­behavioral therapy in adults revealed that combined therapy
resulted in modest improvement in glycemic control. However, motivational enhancement therapy alone did not improve glycemic control.
Whereas in some studies the effect of therapist-­delivered motivational
enhancement therapy on glycemic control in adolescents with T1DM
lasted only as long as intensive individualized counseling continued,
in other studies, motivational interviewing was shown to be an effective method of facilitating changes in a teenager’s behavior with T1DM,
with corresponding improvement in glycemic control.

Management During Infections

Although infections are no more common in diabetic children than in
nondiabetic ones, they can disrupt glucose control and may precipitate
DKA. In addition, the child with diabetes is at increased risk of dehydration if hyperglycemia causes an osmotic diuresis or if ketosis causes
emesis. Counterregulatory hormones associated with stress blunt insulin action and elevate glucose levels. If anorexia occurs from ketosis,
lack of caloric intake increases the risk of hypoglycemia. Although
children younger than 3 years of age tend to become hypoglycemic and
older children tend toward hyperglycemia, the overall effect is unpredictable. Therefore frequent blood glucose monitoring, monitoring of
urine and/or blood ketones, and adjustment of insulin doses are essential elements of sick day guidelines (Table 629.9).
The overall goals are to maintain hydration, control glucose levels,
and avoid ketoacidosis. This can usually be done at home if proper sick
day guidelines are followed and with telephone contact with healthcare
providers. The development of ketones in a patient on insulin pump
therapy may be a sign of infusion failure and the infusion set should
be changed. The family should seek advice if home treatment does not

Table 629.9  Guidelines for Sick Day Management
GLUCOSE TESTING AND EXTRA RAPID-­ACTING INSULIN
URINE KETONE STATUS

INSULIN

CORRECTION DOSES*

COMMENT

Negative or small†

q2h

q2h for glucose >250 mg/dL

Check ketones every other void

Moderate to large‡

q1h

q1h for glucose >250 mg/dL

Check ketones each void; go to
hospital if emesis occurs

*Give insulin based on individualized dosing schedule. Also give usual dose for carbohydrate intake if glucose >150 mg/dL.
†For home serum ketones <1.5 mmol/L per commercial kit.
‡For home serum ketones >1.5 mmol/L.

Basal insulin: glargine or detemir basal insulin should be given at the usual dose and time. NPH and lente should be reduced by half if blood glucose <150 mg/dL and the oral intake
is limited.
Oral fluids: sugar-­free if blood glucose >250 mg/dL (14 mmol/L); sugar-­containing if blood glucose <250 mg/dL.
Call physician or nurse if blood glucose remains elevated after three extra doses, if blood glucose remains <70 mg/dL and child cannot take oral supplement, if dehydration occurs.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3536 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
control ketosis, hyperglycemia, or hypoglycemia or if the child shows
signs of dehydration or has persistent vomiting. A child with significant
ketosis and emesis should be seen in the emergency department for a
general examination, to evaluate hydration, and to determine whether
ketoacidosis is present by checking serum electrolytes, glucose, pH, and
total CO2. A child whose blood glucose declines to less than 50-­60 mg/
dL (2.8-­3.3 mmol/L) and who cannot maintain oral intake may need IV
glucose, especially if further insulin is needed to control ketosis.

Management During Surgery

Surgery can disrupt glucose control in the same way as intercurrent
infections can. Stress hormones associated with the underlying condition and with the surgery itself cause insulin resistance. This increases
glucose levels, exacerbates fluid losses, and may initiate DKA. On the
other hand, caloric intake is usually restricted, which decreases glucose
levels. The net effect is as difficult to predict as during an infection.
Vigilant monitoring and frequent insulin adjustments are required to
maintain euglycemia and avoid ketosis.
For most elective and other smaller surgical procedures, patients
can simply be continued on their typical home basal regimens. This
includes injection of the usual dose of long-­acting insulin at the usual
time for patients on shots. Patients on pumps can simply wear the
pump during the surgery, if approved by hospital policy. Blood sugar
should be monitored hourly during the procedure and perioperatively;
hyperglycemia can be corrected using the standard home ISF, and IV
dextrose can be provided as needed for hypoglycemia. For major procedures, trauma, or situations where a prolonged period of decreased
oral intake is expected postoperatively, it is advisable to manage insulin
requirements with an IV insulin drip (Table 629.10). IV insulin is typically started at a dose of 0.03 units/kg/hr for patients who are euglycemic at the time of surgery. Serum glucose levels should be followed
every hour operatively and perioperatively, and the insulin dose and/or
the dextrose concentration of the IV fluids can be adjusted as needed.
In patients who are found to be hyperglycemic preoperatively (serum
glucose >250 mg/dL), it is advisable to check for ketones before starting
surgery. If significant ketosis is identified, surgery should be delayed
(if possible) until the ketosis can be treated and resolved. Postoperatively, the patient should not be discharged until blood glucose levels
are stable and oral intake is tolerated.

LONG-­TERM COMPLICATIONS: RELATION TO
GLYCEMIC CONTROL

Complications of DM include microvascular complications, such as
retinopathy and nephropathy; macrovascular complications, including coronary artery disease, cerebrovascular disease, and peripheral
vascular disease; peripheral and autonomic neuropathies; and diabetic
osteopathy manifesting as increased risk for osteoporosis and fracture.

Diabetic Retinopathy

Diabetic retinopathy is the leading cause of blindness in the United
States in adults age 20-­65 years. The risk of diabetic retinopathy after

Table 629.10  Guidelines for Intravenous Insulin Coverage
During Surgery
BLOOD GLUCOSE
LEVEL (mg/dL)

INSULIN INFUSION
(units/kg/hr)

BLOOD GLUCOSE
MONITORING

<120

0.00

1 hr

121-­200

0.03

2 hr

200-­300

0.06

2 hr

300-­400

0.08

1 hr*

400

0.10

1 hr*

*Check urine ketones.
An infusion of 5% glucose and 0.45% saline solution with 20 mEq/L of potassium
acetate is given at 1.5 times the maintenance rate.

15 years’ duration of diabetes is 98% for individuals with T1DM and
78% for those with T2DM. Rates for diabetic retinopathy range from
close to 15% to up to 30%. Lens opacities (caused by glycation of tissue proteins and activation of the polyol pathway) are present in at
least 5% of those younger than age 19 years. Metabolic control has an
impact on the development of this complication, as prevalence rates
are substantially higher with increased duration of diabetes and higher
HbA1c, hypertension, and high cholesterol levels. Independent of duration, the prevalence of diabetic retinopathy is higher in T1DM. Genetic
factors may have a role, because only 50% of patients develop proliferative retinopathy. The earliest clinically apparent manifestations of
diabetic retinopathy are classified as nonproliferative or background
diabetic retinopathy—microaneurysms, dot and blot hemorrhages,
hard and soft exudates, venous dilation and beading, and intraretinal
microvascular abnormalities. These changes do not impair vision. The
more severe form is proliferative diabetic retinopathy, which manifests
by neovascularization, fibrous proliferation, and preretinal and vitreous hemorrhages. Proliferative retinopathy, if not treated, is relentlessly
progressive and impairs vision, leading to blindness. The mainstay of
treatment is panretinal laser photocoagulation. In advanced diabetic
eye disease—manifested by severe vitreous hemorrhage or fibrosis,
often with retinal detachment—vitrectomy is an important therapeutic
modality. Eventually, the eye disease becomes quiescent, a stage termed
involutional retinopathy. A separate subtype of retinopathy is diabetic
maculopathy, which is manifested by severe macular edema impairing
central vision. Focal laser photocoagulation may be effective in treating
diabetic maculopathy.
Diabetic patients should have an initial dilated and comprehensive examination by an ophthalmologist shortly after the diagnosis
of diabetes is made in patients with T2DM and within 3-­5 years after
the onset of T1DM (but not before age 10 years). Any patients with
visual symptoms or abnormalities should be referred for ophthalmologic evaluation. Subsequent evaluations for both T1DM and T2DM
patients should be repeated every 1-­2 years as recommended by an eye
care professional experienced in the diagnosis and management of diabetic retinopathy (Table 629.11).

Diabetic Nephropathy

Diabetic nephropathy is the leading known cause of end-­stage renal disease (ESRD) in the United States. Most ESRD from diabetic nephropathy is preventable. Diabetic nephropathy affects 20–30% of patients
with T1DM and 15–20% of T2DM patients 20 years after onset. The
mean 5-­year life expectancy for patients with diabetes-­related ESRD is
less than 20%. The increased mortality risk in long-­term T1DM may
be the result of nephropathy, which may account for approximately
50% of deaths. The risk of nephropathy increases with the duration
of diabetes (up until 25-­30 years’ duration, after which this complication rarely begins), degree of metabolic control, and genetic predisposition to essential hypertension. Only 30–40% of patients affected by
T1DM eventually experience ESRD. The glycation of tissue proteins
results in glomerular basement membrane thickening. The course of
diabetic nephropathy is slow. An increased urinary albumin excretion
rate of 30-­300 mg/24 hr (20-­200 μg/min)—microalbuminuria—can
be detected and constitutes an early stage of nephropathy from intermittent to persistent (incipient), which is commonly associated with
glomerular hyperfiltration and blood pressure elevation. As nephropathy evolves to an early overt stage with proteinuria (albumin excretion
rate >300 mg/24 hr or >200 μg/min), it is accompanied by hypertension. Advanced-­stage nephropathy is defined by a progressive decline
in renal function (declining glomerular filtration rate and elevation
of serum blood urea and creatinine), progressive proteinuria, and
hypertension. Progression to ESRD is recognized by the appearance
of uremia, nephrotic syndrome, and the need for renal replacement
(transplantation or dialysis).
Screening for diabetic nephropathy is a routine aspect of diabetes care. The ADA recommends yearly screening for individuals
with T2DM and yearly screening for those with T1DM after 5 years’
duration of disease with a random spot urine sample for albumin-­
to-­creatinine ratio. Abnormal results should be confirmed by two

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 629 u Diabetes Mellitus

3537

Table 629.11  Screening Guidelines
INITIAL TESTING

FREQUENCY

TEST

Thyroid disease

At diagnosis

Every 1-­2 yr or sooner if symptoms

TSH, thyroid antibodies

Celiac

At diagnosis

Within 2 yr and again at 5 yr or
sooner if symptoms

IgA and TTG

Hypertension

At diagnosis

Each visit

Elevated BP based on ≥90th%
for age, sex, height on three
separate occasions

Dyslipidemia

≥10 yr of age at diagnosis once glucose
control established

If abnormal annually; every 5 yr if
initially normal

Goal LDL-­C <100 mg/dL

Nephropathy

At puberty or age ≥10 yr whichever comes
first, if T1DM ≥5 yr

Annually

Albuminuria; urine albumin-­to-­
creatinine ratio

Retinopathy

T1DM ≥3-­5 yr when ≥10 yr or puberty,
whichever comes first

Annually

Dilated eye exam

Neuropathy

At puberty or ≥10 year, whichever earlier if
T1DM >5 yr

Annually

Foot exam

BP, Blood pressure; IgA, immunoglobulin A; LDL, low density lipoprotein; TSH, thyroid-­stimulating hormone; TTG, tissue transglutaminase.
Data from American Diabetes Association. Children and adolescents: standards of medical care in diabetes—2018. Diabetes Care. 2018;41(Suppl 1):S126–S136.

additional specimens on separate days because of the high variability
of albumin excretion in patients with diabetes. Short-­term hyperglycemia, strenuous exercise, urinary tract infections, marked hypertension,
heart failure, and acute febrile illness can cause transient elevation in
urinary albumin excretion. There is marked day-­to-­day variability in
albumin excretion, so at least two of three collections done in a 3-­to
6-­month period should show elevated levels before microalbuminuria
is diagnosed and treatment is started. Once albuminuria is diagnosed,
a number of factors attenuate the effect of hyperfiltration on kidneys: (1) meticulous control of hyperglycemia, (2) aggressive control
of systemic blood pressure, (3) selective control of arteriolar dilation
by use of angiotensin-­converting enzyme inhibitors (thus decreasing
transglomerular capillary pressure), and (4) dietary protein restriction
(because high protein intake increases the renal perfusion rate). Tight
glycemic control will delay the progression of microalbuminuria and
slow the progression of diabetic nephropathy.

DIABETIC NEUROPATHY

Both the peripheral and autonomic nervous systems can be involved;
diabetic neuropathy can develop in both children and adolescents. The
etiology of diabetic neuropathy remains incompletely understood, and
the impact of hyperglycemia on its development remains uncertain.
Observational studies done in the years before the era of intensive insulin therapy for T1DM reported a higher incidence of neuropathy compared with more recent studies. However, several studies have found
that the development of preclinical and symptomatic peripheral diabetic neuropathy in childhood is not strongly associated with either
glycemic control or duration of disease. The polyol pathway, nonenzymatic glycation, and/or disturbances of myoinositol metabolism,
affecting one or more cell types in the multicellular constituents of
the peripheral nerve, have been hypothesized to have an inciting role.
Other factors, such as possible direct neurotrophic effects of insulin,
insulin-­related growth factors, nitric oxide, and stress proteins, may
also contribute to the development of neuropathy. Using quantitative
sensory testing, abnormal cutaneous thermal perception is a common
finding in both upper and lower limbs in neurologically asymptomatic
young diabetic patients. Heat-­induced pain threshold in the hand is
correlated with the duration of the diabetes. There is no correlation
between quantitative sensory testing scores and metabolic control.
Subclinical motor nerve impairment as manifested by reduced sensory
nerve conduction velocity and sensory nerve action potential amplitude have been detected in as many as 10–58% of children with diabetes. An early sign of autonomic neuropathy, such as decreased heart rate
variability, may present in adolescents with a history of long-­standing
disease and poor metabolic control. A number of therapeutic strategies

have been attempted with variable results. These treatment modalities include (1) improvement in metabolic control, (2) use of aldose
reductase inhibitors to reduce by-­products of the polyol pathway, (3)
use of α-­lipoic acid (an antioxidant) that enhances tissue nitric oxide
and its metabolites, (4) use of anticonvulsants (e.g., lorazepam, valproate, gabapentin, carbamazepine, pregabalin, phenytoin, tiagabine, and
topiramate) for treatment of neuropathic pain, and (5) use of antidepressants (amitriptyline, imipramine, and selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors). Additional medications include antiarrhythmics such as
lidocaine, topical analgesics, and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs.

Skeletal Effects of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus

The skeleton is adversely affected by diabetes, with T1DM patients at
greater risk for skeletal complications than those with T2DM. T1DM is
associated with an increased risk of fracture that first becomes evident
in childhood and persists across the entire life span. This includes a
dramatically increased hip fracture risk in adults, ranging from two-­
to sevenfold higher than patients without diabetes, depending on the
population studied. Most, but not all, studies have shown T1DM to
be associated with low bone mineral density. This differs from T2DM,
where bone density is normal or even above average because of
increased mechanical loading in association with obesity. The deficits
in bone density do not appear to be sufficient to explain the degree of
increased fracture risk, leading to the hypothesis that bone quality may
be impaired as well. The mechanism(s) underlying diabetic-­related
osteopathy is poorly understood and presumed to be multifactorial.
Most, but not all, studies show an association between poor glycemic
control and adverse skeletal outcomes, suggesting a role for hyperglycemia and/or insulin deficiency. Chronic exposure to hyperglycemia
may weaken bone strength through the accumulation of advanced
glycation end products (AGEs) in bone. Other factors hypothesized to
impair bone health in diabetes include chronic inflammation, abnormalities in the growth hormone-­insulin-­like growth factor 1 (IGF-­1)
axis, and abnormalities in bone mineral metabolism including excess
urinary calcium loss. There are no standard guidelines for bone health
screening in children. Assessment of bone density by dual-­energy
x-­ray absorptiometry (DXA) and markers of bone mineral metabolism
is recommended in adults with fracture history and other risk factors
for osteoporosis. Dietary education should reinforce the importance
of meeting the recommended daily allowance (RDA) for calcium and
vitamin D intake from diet and supplements.

Other Complications

Mauriac syndrome is a rare complication related to chronic under-­
insulinization that is characterized by growth failure and hepatomegaly

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3538 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
caused by excess glycogen accumulation in the liver. It has become
much less common since longer-­acting insulins have become available.
Clinical features of Mauriac syndrome include moon face, protuberant
abdomen, proximal muscle wasting, and enlarged liver from fat and
glycogen infiltration.
The syndrome of limited joint mobility is frequently associated
with the early development of diabetic microvascular complications,
such as retinopathy and nephropathy, which may appear before 18
years of age. The prevalence of limited joint mobility has significantly
decreased, which is attributed to the improved overall metabolic control of children and adolescents with T1DM.

PROGNOSIS

T1DM is a serious, chronic disease. It has been estimated that the average life span of individuals with diabetes is approximately 10 years
shorter than that of people without diabetes, but with improved care,
that figure is lessening consistently. Although most children with T1DM
eventually attain a height within the normal adult range, puberty may
be delayed, and the final height may be less than the genetic potential.
From studies in identical twins, it is apparent that despite seemingly
satisfactory control, the affected twin manifests delayed puberty and a
substantial reduction in height when the onset of disease occurs before
puberty. These observations indicate that, in the past, conventional criteria for judging control were inadequate and that adequate control of
T1DM was almost never achieved by routine means.
The changing pattern of metabolic control is having a profound
influence on reducing the incidence and the severity of certain complications. For example, after 20 years of diabetes, there was a decline
in the incidence of nephropathy in T1DM in Sweden among children
whose disease was diagnosed in 1971–1775 compared with in the preceding decade. In addition, in most patients with microalbuminuria in
whom it was possible to obtain good glycemic control, microalbuminuria disappeared. This improved prognosis is directly related to metabolic control.

PANCREAS AND ISLET TRANSPLANTATION AND
REGENERATION

In an attempt to cure T1DM, transplantation of a segment of the pancreas or of isolated islets has been performed in adults. These procedures are both technically demanding and associated with the risks of
disease recurrence and complications of rejection or its treatment by
immunosuppression. Long-­term complications of immunosuppression include the development of malignancy. Some antirejection drugs,
notably cyclosporine and tacrolimus, are toxic to the islets of Langerhans, impairing insulin secretion and even causing diabetes. Hence,
segmental pancreas transplantation is generally only performed in
association with transplantation of a kidney for a patient with ESRD
caused by diabetic nephropathy in which the immunosuppressive regimen is indicated for the renal transplantation. Several thousand such
transplants have been performed in adults. With experience and better
immunosuppressive agents, functional survival of the pancreatic graft
may be achieved for up to several years, during which time patients
may be in metabolic control with no or minimal exogenous insulin and
reversal of some of the microvascular complications. However, because
children and adolescents with DM are not likely to have ESRD from
their diabetes, pancreas transplantation as a primary treatment in children cannot be recommended.
Islet cell transplantation is challenging because of limited survival
of the transplanted cells and because of rejection. An islet transplantation strategy (Edmonton protocol) infused isolated pancreatic islets
into the portal vein of adults with T1DM, along with immunosuppressive medications that had lower side effect profiles than other drugs.
Although lasting insulin independence was initially low, engraftment and insulin independence have improved over the last decade,
and over a thousand patients have undergone the procedure. There
has been improved islet engraftment using improved induction and
maintenance immunosuppression. Still, in 5-­year follow-­up studies,
only ∼10% maintain insulin independence, with an average duration
of insulin independence of ∼15 months. Long-­term challenges remain

the toxicity of immunosuppression, the limited procurement of viable
tissue, and funding and limitations of engraftment itself.

629.3 Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus
David R. Weber
Formerly known as non–insulin-­dependent diabetes or adult-­onset diabetes, T2DM is a heterogeneous disorder, characterized by peripheral
insulin resistance and failure of the β cell to keep up with increasing
insulin demand. Patients with T2DM have relative rather than absolute
insulin deficiency. Generally, they are not ketosis prone, but ketoacidosis
is the initial presentation in 5–10% of affected subjects (Table 629.12).

NATURAL HISTORY

T2DM is a heterogenous, polygenic disease aggravated by environmental factors, including low physical activity and excessive caloric
intake. Most patients are obese, although the disease can occasionally
be seen in normal-­weight individuals. People of Asian ancestry appear
to be at risk for T2DM at lower degrees of total adiposity. Obesity, in
particular central obesity, is associated with the development of insulin
resistance (Fig. 629.10). In addition, patients who are at risk for developing T2DM exhibit decreased glucose-­
induced insulin secretion.
Obesity does not lead to the same degree of insulin resistance in all
individuals, and even those who develop insulin resistance do not necessarily exhibit impaired β-­cell function. Thus many obese individuals
have some degree of insulin resistance but compensate for it by increasing insulin secretion.
Those individuals who are unable to adequately compensate for
insulin resistance by increasing insulin secretion develop IGT and IFG,
usually, although not always, in that order. Hepatic insulin resistance
leads to excessive hepatic glucose output (failure of insulin to suppress
hepatic glucose output), and skeletal muscle insulin resistance leads to
decreased glucose uptake in a major site of glucose disposal. Over time
hyperglycemia worsens, a phenomenon that has been attributed to the
deleterious effect of chronic hyperglycemia (glucotoxicity) or chronic
hyperlipidemia (lipotoxicity) on β-­cell function and is often accompanied by increased triglyceride content and decreased insulin gene
expression.
At some point, blood glucose elevation meets the criteria for a diagnosis of T2DM (see Table 629.2), but most patients with T2DM remain
asymptomatic for months to years after this point because hyperglycemia is moderate and symptoms are not as dramatic as the polyuria and
weight loss at presentation of T1DM. Weight gain may even continue.
The prolonged hyperglycemia may be accompanied by the development of microvascular and macrovascular complications. Among the
differences between T2DM in children and adults is a faster decline in
β-­cell function and insulin secretion, as well as faster development of
diabetes complications in children.
In T2DM, insulin deficiency is rarely absolute, so patients usually do
not need insulin to survive, at least early in the disease course. However, in some cases, the degree of hyperglycemia is such that exogenous
insulin therapy is needed. DKA is uncommon in patients with T2DM
but does occur and appears to be more common in children than in
adults. Although it is generally believed that autoimmune destruction
of pancreatic β-­cells does not occur in T2DM, autoimmune markers of
T1DM—namely, GAD, ICA512, and IAA—may be positive in ∼30%
of the cases of adolescent T2DM. The presence of these autoimmune
markers does not rule out T2DM in children and adolescents. At the
same time, because of the general increase in obesity, the presence
of obesity does not preclude the diagnosis of T1DM. Although most
newly diagnosed children and adolescents can be confidently assigned
a diagnosis of T1DM or T2DM, a few exhibit features of both types and
are difficult to classify.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The prevalence of T2DM in children (10-­19 years) has risen dramatically from 34 cases per 100,000 youth in 2001 to 67 cases per 100,000

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 629 u Diabetes Mellitus

3539

Table 629.12  Characteristics at Presentation for Type 1, Type 2, and Monogenic Diabetes
TYPE 1 DIABETES

TYPE 2 DIABETES

MATURITY-­ONSET DIABETES OF
THE YOUNG

Age of onset during childhood and
adolescence

Any

Rarely before puberty

Any

Weight status

Any

Rarely with normal weight

Any

Symptomatic (polyuria, polydipsia, weight
loss)

Nearly universal

Two thirds

Common

Duration of symptoms before presentation

<1 mo

Frequently >1 mo

Any

Diabetic ketoacidosis at presentation

Common

Rare (6–11%)

—

Family history of diabetes before age 40

Uncommon

Strong family history for type 2
diabetes

Very strong family history, classically
in three generations

Acanthosis nigricans

Rare

Common (86%)

—

Ethnicity

Any

Predominantly Black or minority
ethnicity

Any

Diabetes-­associated antibodies (IA2,
glutamate decarboxylase, insulin)

Positive in majority

Negative (<10%)

Negative (<1%)

Pathogenic variants in HNF1A, GCK, or
HNF4A

Negative

Negative

Nearly universal

Complications at presentation

Very rare

Common

Rare

IA2, Tyrosine phosphatase-­related islet antigen 2.
From Viner R, White B, Christie D. Type 2 diabetes in adolescents: a severe phenotype posing major clinical challenges and public health burden. Lancet. 2017;389:2252–2260.

in 2017. Certain ethnic groups appear to be at higher risk; for example,
Native Americans, Hispanic Americans, and Black Americans (in that
order) have higher incidence rates than White Americans (Fig. 629.11).
Although most children presenting with diabetes have T1DM, the percentage of children presenting with T2DM is increasing and represents
up to 50% of the newly diagnosed children in some centers.

GENETICS

T2DM has a strong genetic component; concordance rates among
identical twins are in the 40–80% range, but there is not a simple mendelian pattern. Twinning itself increases the risk of T2DM (because
of intrauterine growth restriction), and this may distort estimates of
genetic risk. Monozygotic twins have a lifetime concordance of T2DM
of around 70%, indicating that shared environmental factors (including the prenatal environment) may have a role in the development of
T2DM; dizygotic twins have a lifetime concordance of around 20–30%.
The genetic basis for T2DM is complex and incompletely defined; no
single identified defect predominates. Genome-­wide association studies have identified certain genetic polymorphisms that are associated
with increased T2DM risk in most populations studied; the most consistently identified are variants of TCF7L2, which may have a role in
β-­cell function. Other identified risk alleles include variants in PPARG
and KCNJ11-­ABCC8. These variants only explain a small portion
(probably less than 20%) of the population risk of diabetes, and in
many cases the mechanism by which these polymorphisms confer risk
of T2DM is not clear.

EPIGENETICS AND FETAL PROGRAMMING

Low birthweight and intrauterine growth restriction are associated
with increased risk of T2DM. This risk appears to be higher in low-­
birthweight infants who gain weight more rapidly in the first few
years of life. These findings have led to the formulation of the thrifty
phenotype hypothesis, which postulates that poor fetal nutrition programs these children to maximize storage of nutrients and makes
them more prone to future weight gain and development of diabetes. Epigenetic modifications may play a role in this phenomenon,
given that so few of the known T2DM genes are associated with low
birthweight.

ENVIRONMENTAL AND LIFESTYLE-­RELATED RISK
FACTORS

Obesity is the most important lifestyle factor associated with development of T2DM. This, in turn, is associated with the intake of
high-­energy foods, physical inactivity, excess screen time, and low
socioeconomic status. Maternal smoking also increases the risk of
diabetes and obesity in the offspring. Increasingly, exposure to land
pollutants and air pollutants is demonstrated to contribute to insulin
resistance. The lipophilic nature of these organic pollutants and their
consequent storage in adipose tissue may promote obesity and insulin
resistance. In addition, sleep deprivation and psychosocial stress are
associated with increased risk of obesity in childhood and with IGT
in adults, possibly via overactivation of the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­
adrenal axis. Many antipsychotics (especially the atypical antipsychotics like olanzapine and quetiapine) and antidepressants (both
tricyclic antidepressants and newer antidepressants like fluoxetine and
paroxetine) induce weight gain. In addition to the risk conferred by
increased obesity, some of these medications may also have a direct
role in causing insulin resistance, β-­cell dysfunction, leptin resistance,
and activation of inflammatory pathways.

CLINICAL FEATURES

In the United States, T2DM in children is more likely to be diagnosed in
Native American, Hispanic American, and Black American youth, with
the highest incidence being reported in Pima Indian youth. Although
cases may be seen as young as 4 years of age, most are diagnosed in adolescence; the incidence increases with increasing age. Family history of
T2DM is present in most cases. Patients are obese and present with
mild symptoms of polyuria and polydipsia or are asymptomatic and
T2DM is detected on screening tests. Presentation with DKA occurs in
∼10% of cases. Physical examination frequently reveals the presence of
acanthosis nigricans, most commonly on the neck and in other flexural
areas. Other findings may include striae and an increased waist-­to-­hip
ratio. Laboratory testing reveals elevated HbA1c levels. Hyperlipidemia
characterized by elevated triglycerides and low-­density lipoprotein
cholesterol levels is commonly seen in patients with T2DM at diagnosis. Lipid screening is indicated in all new cases of T2DM. The current
recommendation is that blood pressure measurement, random urine

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Pathophysiologic disease drivers

3540 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System

Hyperglycemia

β-cell function
Insulin resistance

Adiposopathy

Obesity

Prediabetes

Resolution of
metabolic
syndrome
Goals of therapy

Clinical disease state

Metabolic syndrome

Prevention of
comorbidities

Prevention of
prediabetes

Diabetes

Improvement in
metabolic
syndrome

Improvement in
metabolic
syndrome

Resolution of
prediabetes

Resolution of
diabetes

Prevention of
diabetes

Prevention of
complications

Microvascular
and
macrovascular
complications

Improvement in
diabetes
Resolution,
improvement, or
stabilization
of complications

Fig. 629.10 The disease continuum for weight-­related type 2 diabetes. (From Lingvay I, Sumithran P, Cohen RV, le Roux CW. Obesity management
as a primary treatment goal for type 2 diabetes: time to reframe the conversation. Lancet. 2022;399:394–404.)

Presentation

Characteristics
65–70% are female in all cohorts; ethnic minorities are predominantly affected, although ethnic groups vary by country

97% overweight or obese

Sex

Ethnicity (TODAY cohort, USA)
Other
(6%)

Asian
(2%)

Symptomatic at presentation

Symptoms of hyperglycemia in 67%

Male
(35%)

White
(20%)
Female
(65%)

Other
t(5%)

Hispanic
(41%)

Mixed
(8%)

Black
(9%)

White
(43%)

Asian
(35%)

Black
(31%)

DKA in 6–11%
HSS in 2%

Ethnicity (NPDA cohort, USA)

Family history of type 2
diabetes in 90%
Type 2 diabetes in nuclear family (60%); Type 2 diabetes in grandparents (30%)
Complications at diagnosis
Complications are common at diagnosis in adolescent type 2 diabetes
High triglycerides

10·2%

High LDL cholesterol
86% with acanthosis nigricans

4·5%

Low HDL cholesterol

80%

Hypertension

14%
13%

Microalbuminuria
0%

20%

40%

60%

80%

100%

Fig. 629.11 Features of adolescent type 2 diabetes at diagnosis. DKA, diabetic ketoacidosis. HHS, hyperglycemic hyperosmolar syndrome;
NPDA, National Diabetes Pediatric Audit; TODAY, Treatment Options for Type 2 Diabetes in Adolescents and Youth. (From Viner R, White B, Christie
D. Type 2 diabetes in adolescents: a severe phenotype posing major clinical challenges and public health burden. Lancet. 2017;389:2252–2260.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 629 u Diabetes Mellitus
albumin-­to-­creatinine ratio, and a dilated eye examination should be
performed at diagnosis.
Because hyperglycemia develops slowly and patients may be asymptomatic for months or years after they develop T2DM, screening is
recommended in high-­risk children (Table 629.13). All youth who are
overweight and have at least one other risk factor should be tested for
T2DM beginning at age 10 years or at the onset of puberty. Risk factors
include family history of T2DM in first-­or second-­degree relatives,
history of gestational diabetes in the mother, belonging to a high-­risk
racial or ethnic group (i.e., Native American, Black American, Hispanic, or Asian/Pacific Islander groups), and having signs of insulin
resistance (e.g., acanthosis nigricans, hypertension, dyslipidemia, or
polycystic ovary syndrome). The current recommendation is to use
the HbA1c the screening tool; fasting plasma glucose is also acceptable.
In borderline or asymptomatic cases, the diagnosis may be confirmed
using a standard OGTT, but this test is not required if typical symptoms are present or fasting plasma glucose or HbA1c is clearly elevated.

TREATMENT

T2DM is a progressive syndrome that gradually leads to complete insulin deficiency during the patient’s life. A systematic approach for the
treatment of T2DM should be implemented according to the natural
course of the disease, including adding insulin when hyperglycemia
cannot be controlled by lifestyle and noninsulin pharmacotherapy.
Lifestyle modification (diet and exercise) is an essential part of the
treatment regimen, and consultation with a dietitian is usually necessary (see Fig. 629.10). An oral agent monotherapy may not maintain
lasting glucose control in close to half of those with T2DM.
Recommendations are to implement a comprehensive lifestyle modification plan designed to induce weight loss of 7–10%. There is no specific dietary or exercise regimen that has been conclusively shown to be
superior, and practitioners recommend a low-­calorie, low-­fat diet and
30-­60 minutes of physical activity at least 5 times a week. Screen time
should be limited to 1-­2 hours a day. Education is provided to diminish
unhealthy habits such as skipping meals, heavy snacking, and excessive screen time. Adolescents may engage in non–appetite-­based eating (i.e., emotional eating, television-­cued eating, boredom) and cyclic
dieting (“yo-­yo” dieting). Treatment in these cases is frequently challenging and may not be successful unless the entire family buys into the
need to change their unhealthy lifestyle.
Pharmacologic therapy should be initiated at diagnosis of T2DM.
Noninsulin pharmacotherapies used in the treatment of T2DM are
shown in Table 629.14; most of these are not approved for use in patients
under the age of 18 years. Metformin is the first line of pharmacotherapy and should be started in all patients. Renal insufficiency and liver
disease are contraindications to metformin use and may increase the
risk of lactic acidosis. Patients with markedly elevated liver transaminases should undergo evaluation by a gastroenterologist/hepatologist
before initiating therapy. The starting dose is 500-­1000 mg/day, which

Table 629.13  Testing for Type 2 Diabetes in Children
• Criteria*
Overweight (body mass index >85th percentile for age and sex
Plus
One or more of the following risk factors:
Family history of type 2 diabetes in first-­or second-­degree
relative or gestational diabetes in the mother
High risk racial/ethnic background (Native American, Black
American, Hispanic, Asian/Pacific Islander)
Signs of insulin resistance or conditions associated with insulin
resistance (acanthosis nigricans, hypertension, dyslipidemia,
polycystic ovary syndrome)
• Age of initiation: age 10 yr or at onset of puberty if puberty
occurs at a younger age
• Frequency: every 1-­2 yr, based upon clinical suspicion
• Test: fasting glucose, HbA1c, or oral glucose tolerance teat
*Clinical judgment should be used to test for diabetes in high-­risk patients who do not
meet these criteria.

3541

should be increased over a few weeks to the full therapeutic dose of
2,000 mg daily. Patients who present with significant (HbA1c >8.5%)
or symptomatic (e.g., polyuria, polydipsia) hyperglycemia should be
started on basal insulin with a long-­acting insulin analog, typically at a
dose of 0.5 units/kg/day. Those presenting in DKA will require initial
treatment with insulin using protocols similar to those used for treating T1DM. Once blood glucose levels are under control, many cases
can be managed with hypoglycemic agents and lifestyle interventions,
but some patients will continue to require insulin therapy.
Ongoing care should include periodic review of weight and BMI,
diet, and physical activity; blood glucose monitoring; and monitoring
of HbA1c at 3-­month intervals. Frequency of home glucose monitoring
can range from 3-­4 times daily for those on multiple daily insulin injections to twice daily for those on a stable long-­acting insulin regimen
or metformin. Alternatively, blood glucose monitoring can be done by
CGM. Patients who fail to achieve glycemic targets (typically HbA1c
<7%) with lifestyle modification and metformin alone will require
escalation of therapy with the addition of basal insulin or liraglutide.
Liraglutide is an injectable glucagon-­like peptide-­1 (GLP-­1) analog
approved by the FDA for use in children ≥10 years. A potential benefit
of liraglutide over basal insulin is that it may promote weight loss. The
typical starting dose is 0.6 mg/daily, increased as tolerated by 0.6 mg/
day per week until a maximum dose of 1.8 mg is achieved. Gastrointestinal symptoms are the most common side effect. Liraglutide is
contraindicated in patients with a personal or family history of medullary thyroid cancer or multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2),
based on animal data showing a dose-­and duration-­dependent effect
to promote thyroid C-­cell tumors in rodents.
Other agents such as thiazolidinediones, sulfonylureas, other GLP-­1
analogs, dipeptidyl peptidase-­4 inhibitors (DPP-­4 inhibitors), pramlintide, and sodium-­
glucose transport protein inhibitors (SGLT2
inhibitors) are used with variable frequency in adults but are infrequently used in children. Sulfonylureas cause insulin release by closing
the potassium channel (KATP) on β cells. They are occasionally used
when metformin monotherapy is unsuccessful or contraindicated for
some reason (use in certain forms of neonatal diabetes is discussed
in the relevant section). Thiazolidinediones increase insulin sensitivity via activation of the peroxisome proliferator-­activated receptor
pathway, but use is limited because of concerns about adverse cardiac
effects. Pramlintide is an analog of islet amyloid polypeptide (IAPP),
which delays gastric emptying, suppresses glucagon, and possibly suppresses food intake. It is not approved for pediatric use and increases
the risk of hypoglycemia when used with insulin or other hypoglycemic agents.
Incretins are gut-­derived peptides like GLP-­1, GLP-­2, and GIP
(glucose-­dependent insulinotropic peptide, previously known as gastric inhibitory protein) that are secreted in response to meals and act to
enhance insulin secretion and action, suppress glucagon production,
and delay gastric emptying (among other actions). Other daily and
weekly forms of GLP-­1 agonists beyond liraglutide are commonly used
in adults. DPP-­4 inhibitors are oral agents that prolong the action of
GLP-­1 and are currently being studied for use in children. The SGLT-­2
inhibitors act by blocking glucose reabsorption in the proximal renal
tubule and are commonly used as second-­or third-­line agents in adults,
with specific benefits in improving cardiorenal outcomes in patients
with heart failure or declining renal function. SGLT-­2 inhibitors are
currently under evaluation for potential use in children. Adults with
T2DM have been treated with double incretion therapy (tirzepatide)
with the combination of a GLP-­1 agonist and GIP.
Further rises in HbA1c despite the addition of basal insulin and/or
liraglutide will necessitate addition of short-­acting insulin at mealtimes. Bariatric surgery is also used in adolescents with moderate to
severe obesity and frequently leads to complete remission of T2DM.
Guidelines for the routine use of bariatric surgery in adolescents continue to emerge, but expert opinion suggests that adolescents with BMI
≥35 or 120% of the 95th percentile for age and gender with a clinically
significant complication (including T2DM) are potential candidates,
provided there is access to a quality multidisciplinary center with pediatric experience.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3542 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 629.14  Noninsulin Pharmacotherapies Used to Treat T2DM
MEDICATIONS

CLASS

MECHANISM OF ACTION

ROUTE

FDA-­APPROVED AGE

Pramlintide

Amylin analogue

Increases satiety, slows gastric emptying,
and suppresses postprandial glucagon
secretion, resulting in decreased
postmeal glucose excursions

Subcutaneous
injection

>18 yr

Metformin

Biguanide

Improves hepatic insulin sensitivity.
Increases GLP-­1 and PYY

Oral

>10 yr

Alogliptin
Linagliptin
Saxagliptin
Sitagliptin

DPP-­4 inhibitors

Inhibits DPP-­4 from degrading GLP-­1 and
GIP

Oral

>18 yr

Albiglutide
Dulaglutide
Exenatide
Liraglutide
Lixisenatide
Semaglutide

Glucagon-­like
peptide agonists

Increase release of GLP-­1, which stimulates
release of insulin

Subcutaneous
injection

>8 yr, with exception of
liraglutide, which is >10 yr

Nateglinide
Repaglinide

Meglitinides

Causes rapid secretion of insulin by acting
Oral
on the ATP sensitive potassium channel of
pancreatic beta cells

>18 yr

Canagliflozin
Dapagliflozin
Empagliflozin
Ertugliflozin

Sodium-­glucose
co-transporter 2
inhibitors

Promotes renal excretion of glucose at the
level of the proximal tubule causing an
osmotic diuresis

Oral

>18 yr

Gliclazide
Glimepiride
Glipizide
Glyburide

Sulfonylureas

Increase insulin section via interaction with
the K-­ATP channel in β cells

Oral

>18 yr

Pioglitazone
Rosiglitazone

Thiazolidinediones

Increase insulin sensitivity at adipose and
muscle tissue

Oral

>18 yr

DPP-­4, Dipeptidyl peptidase 4; GIP, glucose-dependent insulinotropic peptide; GLP-­1, glucagon-­like peptide 1 agonist; PYY, peptide YY.

COMPLICATIONS

In one study of diabetes in youth, 92% of the patients with T2DM had
two or more elements of metabolic syndrome (hypertension, hypertriglyceridemia, decreased high-­density lipoprotein, increased waist
circumference), including 70% with hypertension. In addition, the
incidence of microalbuminuria and diabetic retinopathy appears to
be higher in T2DM than it is in T1DM. In long-­term follow-­up from
another study, the participants at a mean of age 26 years reported a
cumulative incidence of hypertension of 68%, dyslipidemia 52%, diabetic kidney disease 55%, and nerve disease 32%.
Given the extremely high risk of diabetes-­related comorbidities, routine screening for microalbuminuria, dyslipidemia, hypertension, and
retinopathy should commence shortly after diagnosis. Sleep apnea and
fatty liver disease are being diagnosed with increasing frequency and
may necessitate referral to the appropriate specialists. Complications
associated with all forms of diabetes and recommendations for screening are noted in Table 629.12; Table 629.15 lists conditions particularly
associated with T2DM.

PREVENTION

The difficulties in achieving good glucose control and preventing diabetes complications make prevention a compelling strategy. This is
particularly true for T2DM, which is linked to modifiable risk factors
(obesity, a sedentary lifestyle). The Diabetes Prevention Program demonstrated that intensified lifestyle or drug intervention in individuals
with IGT prevented or delayed the onset of T2DM. Lifestyle intervention reduced the diabetes incidence by 58%; metformin reduced the
incidence by 31% compared with placebo. Lifestyle interventions are
believed to have similar beneficial effects in obese adolescents with
IGT.

629.4 Other Specific Types of Diabetes
David R. Weber
Most cases of diabetes in children and adults fall into the two broad
categories of T1DM and T2DM, but between 1% and 10% of cases are
caused by single-­gene disorders. These disorders include hereditary
defects of β-­cell function and insulin action, as well as rare forms of
mitochondrial diabetes.

GENETIC DEFECTS OF β-­CELL FUNCTION
Transient Neonatal Diabetes Mellitus

Neonatal diabetes is transient in approximately 50% of cases, but
after an interim period of normal glucose tolerance, 50–60% of these
patients develop permanent diabetes (at an average age of 14 years).
It remains to be determined whether this association of transient diabetes in the newborn followed much later in life by classic T1DM is a
chance occurrence or causally related (Fig. 629.12).
The syndrome of transient DM in the newborn infant has its onset
in the first week of life and persists several weeks to months before
spontaneous resolution. Median duration is 12 weeks. It occurs most
often in infants who are small for gestational age and is characterized
by hyperglycemia and pronounced glycosuria, resulting in severe dehydration and, at times, metabolic acidosis, but with only minimal or no
ketonemia or ketonuria. There may also be findings such as umbilical
hernia or large tongue. Insulin responses to glucose or tolbutamide are
low to absent; basal plasma insulin concentrations are normal. After
spontaneous recovery, the insulin responses to these same stimuli are
brisk and normal, implying a possible functional delay in β-­cell maturation with spontaneous resolution. Occurrence of the syndrome in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 629 u Diabetes Mellitus

3543

Table 629.15  Monitoring for Complications and Comorbidities in T2DM
CONDITION

SCREENING TEST

Hypertension

Blood pressure

Fatty liver

Aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, possibly liver
ultrasound

Polycystic ovary syndrome

Menstrual history, assessment for androgen excess with free/total
testosterone, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate

Microalbuminuria

Urine albumin concentration and albumin-­to-­creatinine ratios

Dyslipidemia

Fasting lipid profile (total, low-­density lipoprotein, high-­density lipoprotein
cholesterol, triglycerides)

Sleep apnea

Polysomnography: Sleep study to assess overnight oxygen saturation,
airflow, heart rate, electromyography, and eye movements

consecutive siblings has been reported. About 70% of cases are the
result of abnormalities of an imprinted locus on chromosome 6q24,
resulting in overexpression of paternally expressed genes such as
PLAGL1/ZAC and HYMAI. Most of the remaining cases are caused by
pathogenic variants in KATP channels. Variants in KATP channels also
cause many cases of permanent neonatal diabetes, but there is practically no overlap between the variants that lead to transient neonatal
DM and those causing permanent neonatal DM. This syndrome of
transient neonatal DM should be distinguished from the severe hyperglycemia that may occur in hypertonic dehydration that usually occurs
in infants beyond the newborn period and responds promptly to rehydration with minimal or no requirement for insulin.
Administration of insulin is mandatory during the active phase of
DM in the newborn. Rehydration and IV insulin are usually required
initially; transition to subcutaneous insulin can occur once clinically
stable. A variety of regimens, including intermediate-­or long-­acting
insulin given in one to two daily doses or continuous insulin therapy
with an insulin pump, have been used successfully. The starting dose
is typically 1-­2 units/kg/day but will need to be adjusted based upon
blood glucose levels. Attempts at gradually reducing the dose of insulin
may be made as soon as recurrent hypoglycemia becomes manifested
or after 2 months of age.

Permanent Neonatal Diabetes Mellitus

Permanent DM in the newborn period is caused, in approximately 50%
of the cases, by pathogenic variants in the KCNJ11 and ABCC8 genes (see
Figs. 629.12 and 629.13). These genes code for the Kir6.2 and SUR1 subunits of the adenosine triphosphate–sensitive potassium channel, which is
involved in an essential step in insulin secretion by the β cell. Some cases
are caused by pancreatic agenesis because of homozygous pathogenic
variants in IPF-­1 (where heterozygous variants cause MODY4); homozygous variants in the glucokinase gene (where heterozygous variants cause
MODY2); and variants in the insulin gene (see Tables 629.1 and 629.12).
Almost all these infants are small at birth because of the role of insulin as
an intrauterine growth factor. Instances of affected twins and families with
more than one affected infant have been reported. Infants with permanent
neonatal DM may be initially euglycemic and typically present between
birth and 6 months of life (mean age of presentation is 5 weeks), but rarely
can present up to 1 year of age. There is a spectrum of severity, and up to
20% have neurologic features. The most severely affected patients have the
syndrome of developmental delay, epilepsy, and neonatal diabetes (DEND
syndrome).
Activating pathogenic variants in the KCNJ11 gene (encoding the
adenosine triphosphate–sensitive potassium channel subunit Kir6.2)
are associated with both TND and PND, with variants associated with
each phenotype. More than 90% of these patients respond to sulfonylureas (at higher doses than those used in T2DM), but patients with
severe neurologic disease may be less responsive. Pathogenic variants
in ABCC8 (encoding the SUR1 subunit of this potassium channel)
were thought to be less likely to respond to sulfonylureas (because this
is the subunit that binds sulfonylurea drugs), but some of these variants

COMMENT

Obtain at diagnosis and every 2 yr

are reported to respond; patients have been successfully switched from
insulin to oral therapy. Several protocols for switching the patient from
insulin to glyburide are available, and patients are usually stabilized
on doses ranging from 1 to 2.5 mg/kg/day. Because approximately
50% of neonatal diabetics have potassium-­channel variants that can be
switched to sulfonylurea therapy, with dramatic improvement in glycemic control, neurologic outcomes, and quality of life, all patients with
diabetes diagnosed before 6 months of age (and perhaps even those
diagnosed before 12 months of age) in whom insulin dependence persists beyond 7-­10 days should have genetic testing (Fig. 629.14).

Maturity-­Onset Diabetes of Youth

Several forms of diabetes are associated with monogenic defects in β-­
cell function. Before these genetic defects were identified, this subset
was diagnosed on clinical grounds and described by the term MODY.
This subtype of DM consists of a group of heterogeneous clinical entities that are characterized by onset before 25 years, autosomal dominant
inheritance, and a primary defect in insulin secretion. Strict criteria
for the diagnosis of MODY include diabetes in at least three generations with autosomal dominant transmission and diagnosis before age
25 years in at least one affected subject. Pathogenic variants have been
found in at least 14 different genes, accounting for the dominantly inherited monogenic defects of insulin secretion, for which the term MODY is
used (Table 629.16). The ADA groups these disorders together under the
broader category of genetic defects of β-­cell function. Just three of them
(MODY2, MODY3, and MODY5) account for 90% of the cases in this
category in European populations, but the distribution may be different
in other ethnic groups. Except for MODY2 (which is caused by variants
in the enzyme glucokinase), all other forms are caused by genetic defects
in various transcription factors (see Table 629.16).

MODY2

This is the second most common form of MODY and accounts for
approximately 15–30% of all patients diagnosed. Glucokinase plays
an essential role in β-­cell glucose sensing, and heterozygous pathogenic variants in this gene lead to mild reductions in pancreatic β-­cell
response to glucose. Homozygotes with the same variants are completely unable to secrete insulin in response to glucose and develop
a form of PND. Patients with heterozygous variants have a higher
threshold for insulin release but are able to secrete insulin adequately
at higher blood glucose levels (typically 125 mg/dL [7 mmol/L] or
higher). This results in a relatively mild form of diabetes (HbA1c is
usually less than 7%), with mild fasting hyperglycemia and IGT in
most patients. MODY2 may be misdiagnosed as T1DM in children,
gestational diabetes in pregnant women, or well-­controlled T2DM in
adults (see Table 629.12). An accurate diagnosis is important because
most cases are not progressive, and except for gestational diabetes, may
not require treatment. When needed, they can usually be treated with
small doses of exogenously administered insulin. Treatment with oral
agents (sulfonylureas and related drugs) can be successful and may be
more acceptable to many patients.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3544 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
KCNJ11 (n=240)
ABCC8 (n=150)

100%
Diabetes remission
Unknown

90%

Unknown

6q24 (n=113)
ZFP57 (n=12)

INS (n=110)

Exocrine insufficiency

80%

70%

GCK (n=30)
Alternative treatment
of hyperglycemia
SLC19A2 (n=7)

PTF1A

Other

GCK

EIF2AK3

Other

GATA6
PTF1A

INS
60%

GCK
GATA6 (n=29)
GATA4 (n=4)

SLC2A2 (n=6)
HNF1B (n=1)

50%

6q24

Insulin treatment
40%

EIF2AK3
ABCC8

PDX1(n=6)

30%

PTF1A (n=22)

INS
20%

EIF2AK3 (n=76)
MNX1 (n=1)

Neurologic features

6q24

KCNJ11
10%

NEUROD1 (n=3)
NKX2-2 (n=2)
IER3IP1 (n=1)

ABCC8
KCNJ11

0%

Nonconsanguineous (%)

Consanguineous (%)

Fig. 629.13 Different genetic causes of neonatal diabetes in patients
FOXP3 (n=14)
GLIS3 (n=9)
NEUROG3 (n=2)
RFX6 (n=1)

Other features

Implications for
pancreatic phenotype
Development of
extrapancreatic features

Fig. 629.12 A genetic diagnosis guides clinical management. Sche-

matic representation of genetic causes of neonatal diabetes and the
implications of this genetic diagnosis. n indicates the number of patients identified with pathogenic variants in each of the genes in the
1,020 neonatal diabetes patient cohort. Solid arrows indicate implications for most pathogenic variants in the genes. Dashed arrows indicate
the implications for specific variants. (From De Franco E, Flanagan SE,
Houghton JAL, et al. The effect of early, comprehensive genomic testing on clinical care in neonatal diabetes: an international cohort study.
Lancet. 2015;386:957–963. Fig. 3.)

MODY3

Patients affected with pathogenic variants in the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor-­1α show abnormalities of carbohydrate
metabolism varying from IGT to severe diabetes and often progressing from a mild to a severe form over time. They are also prone to
the development of vascular complications. This is the most common
MODY subtype and accounts for 30–60% of all cases of MODY. These
patients are very sensitive to the action of sulfonylureas and can usually be treated with relatively low doses of these oral agents, at least
in the early stages of the disease. In children, this form of MODY is

born to nonconsanguineous and consanguineous parents. Comparison
of genetic causes of neonatal diabetes in nonconsanguineous (n = 790)
and consanguineous groups (n = 230). Consanguinity is defined by parents being second cousins or more closely related or by the presence of
1.56% or higher total homozygosity. Genes involved in less than 2.5%
of patients in both cohorts were grouped in the other category. (From
De Franco E, Flanagan SE, Houghton JAL, et al. The effect of early,
comprehensive genomic testing on clinical care in neonatal diabetes:
an international cohort study. Lancet. 2015;386:957–963. Fig. 2.)

sometimes misclassified as T1DM and treated with insulin. Evaluation of autoimmune markers helps to rule out T1DM; genetic testing
for MODY is available and is indicated in patients with relatively mild
diabetes and a family history suggestive of autosomal dominant inheritance. Accurate diagnosis can lead to avoidance of unnecessary insulin
treatment and specific genetic counseling (see Fig. 629.14).

Less Common Forms of Monogenic Diabetes

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-­4α (MODY1), insulin promoter factor
(IPF)-­1, also known as (PDX-­1) (MODY4), hepatocyte nuclear factor 1β/TCF2 (MODY5), and NeuroD1 (MODY6) are all transcription factors that are involved in β-­cell development and function,
and mutations in these lead to various rare forms of MODY. In addition to diabetes, they can also have specific findings unrelated to
hyperglycemia; for example, MODY1 is associated with low triglyceride and lipoprotein levels, and MODY5 is associated with renal
cysts and renal dysfunction. In terms of treatment, MODY1 and
MODY4 may respond to oral sulfonylureas, but MODY5 does not
respond to oral agents and requires treatment with insulin. NeuroD1 defects are extremely rare and not much is known about their
natural history.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 629 u Diabetes Mellitus

3545

Fasting PG ≥100 mg/dL, confirmed
No symptoms or signs of secondary diabetes
Signs suggestive of
syndromic DM: specific
genetic testing
(e.g., urogenital
malformations or chronic
renal failure: HNF1B;
early deafness: m3243A>G)

T1D autoantibodies testing
DM criteria
T1D autoAb positive

T1D autoAb negative

Onset > 6 mo

Onset < 12 mo

Onset:
adolescence

Onset:
adolescence

Onset > 6 mo

T1Da

Monogenic
autoimmune
diabetes
e.g.: FOXP3,
LRBA, other

Overweight,
T2D family
history, high
C-peptide

Lean,
high insulin/
C-peptide,
achanthosis

Autosomal
dominant
inheritance
(impaired β-cell
function)

Type A-SIR

T2D

Onset < 6 mo

MODY

NDM or
GCK/MODY

FPG ≤150 mg/dL

HbA1c < 7.3%

HbA1c > 7.3%

Screen GCK gene first

Screen HNF1A gene first

Fig. 629.14 Diagnostic algorithm of monogenic forms of diabetes. Negativity of genetic testing of two common subtypes of MODY in children
and adolescents implies that further testing is mandatory if the clinical diagnosis is robust. FPG, fasting plasma glucose; MODY, maturity onset diabetes of the young; NDM, neonatal diabetes mellius; SIR, severe insulin resistance. (From Barbetti F, D’Annunzio G. Genetic causes and treatment
of neonatal diabetes and early childhood diabetes. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2018;32[4]:575-­591. Fig. 1.)

Primary or secondary defects in the glucose transporter-­2, which
is an insulin-­independent glucose transporter, may also be associated
with diabetes. Diabetes may also be a manifestation of a polymorphism
in the glycogen synthase gene. This enzyme is crucially important for
storage of glucose as glycogen in muscle. Patients with this defect are
notable for marked insulin resistance and hypertension, as well as a
strong family history of diabetes.
Another form of IDDM is Wolfram syndrome (Table 629.17).
Wolfram syndrome 1 is characterized by diabetes insipidus, DM, optic
atrophy, and deafness—thus the acronym DIDMOAD. Some patients
with diabetes appear to have severe insulinopenia, whereas others
have significant insulin secretion as judged by C-­peptide. The overall
prevalence is estimated at 1 in 770,000 live births. The sequence of
appearance of the stigmata is as follows: non-­autoimmune IDDM in
the first decade, central diabetes insipidus and sensorineural deafness
in ∼65–75% of the patients in the second decade, renal tract anomalies
in ∼50% of the patients in the third decade, and neurologic complications such as cerebellar ataxia and myoclonus in half to two thirds
of the patients in the fourth decade. Other features include primary
gonadal atrophy in most males and a progressive neurodegenerative
course with neurorespiratory death at a median age of 30 years. Some
cases are caused by pathogenic variants in WFS-­1. Wolfram syndrome
2 has early-­onset optic atrophy, DM, deafness, and a shortened life

span but no diabetes insipidus; the associated gene is CISD2. Other
forms of Wolfram syndrome may be caused by variants in mitochondrial DNA. Other syndromes associated with diabetes are noted in
Table 629.17.

Mitochondrial Gene Defects

Pathogenic variants in mitochondrial DNA are associated with maternally inherited DM and deafness. The most common mitochondrial
DNA variant in these cases is the variant m.3243A>G in the transfer
RNA leucine gene. This variant is identical to the variant in MELAS
(myopathy, encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, and strokelike syndrome),
but MELAS syndrome is not associated with diabetes; the phenotypic
expression of the same defect varies. Diabetes in most of these cases
presents insidiously, but approximately 20% of patients have an acute
presentation resembling T1DM. The mean age of diagnosis of diabetes
is 37 years, but cases have been reported as young as 11 years; not all
patients have deafness. This variant has been estimated to be present
in 1.5% of Japanese people with diabetes, which may be higher than
the prevalence in other ethnic groups. Metformin should be avoided in
these patients because of the theoretical risk of severe lactic acidosis in
the presence of mitochondrial dysfunction. Some children with mitochondrial DNA mutations affecting complex I and/or complex IV may
also develop diabetes.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3546 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
Table 629.16  Clinical Characteristics of Maturity-­Onset Diabetes of the Young (MODY) Genetic Subtypes
MODY TYPE

GENE NAME (LOCUS)

PREVALENCE (%)

OTHER FEATURES

TREATMENT

MODY 1

HNF4A (20ql2)

5–10

Neonatal hyperinsulinemia and
hypoglycemia with associated
macrosomia, low serum levels of
cholesterol

Sensitive to sulfonylureas

MODY 2

GCK (7pl3)

30–60

Mild fasting hyperglycemia throughout
life, often asymptomatic, gestational
diabetes, low birthweight (with
unaffected mother)

No treatment outside of
pregnancy

MODY 3

HNF1A (12q24.2)

30–60

Glycosuria

Sensitive to sulfonylureas

MODY 4

PDX1 (13ql2.1)

<1

Homozygote: pancreatic agenesis

Diet, OAD, or insulin

MODY 5

HNFIB (17q21)

5–10

Diabetes in association with renal and
genitourinary abnormalities

Insulin

MODY 6

NEUROD I (2q31.3)

<1

Obesity and insulin resistance

OAD or insulin

MODY 7

KLF11 (2p25)

<1

Impaired glucose tolerance to overt
diabetes

OAD or insulin

MODY 8

CEL (9p34)

<1

Diabetes and pancreatic exocrine
deficiency

OAD or insulin

MODY 9

PAX4 (7q32)

<1

Ketosis-­prone diabetes

Diet, OAD, or insulin

MODY 10

INS (llpl5.5)

<1

May result in neonatal diabetes, antibody-­
negative diabetes, and MODY

OAD or insulin

MODY 11

BLK (8p23)

<1

Obesity common

Diet, OAD, or insulin

MODY 12

ABCC8 (11pl5.1)

<1

Usually associated with neonatal diabetes,
rare cause of MODY

Sensitive to sulfonylureas

MODY 13

KCNJ11 (11p 15.13)

<1

Usually associated with neonatal diabetes,
rare cause of MODY

Sensitive to sulfonylureas

MODY 14

APPL1 (3pl4.3)

<1

Adult-­onset diabetes

Diet, OAD, or insulin

ABCC8, ATP-­binding cassette, subfamily C (CFTR/MRP), member 8; APPL1, adaptor protein, phosphotyrosine interacting with PH domain and leucine zipper 1; BLK, B-­lymphocyte
kinase; CEL, carboxyl ester lipase enzyme; GCK, glucokinase; HNF1A, hepatocyte nuclear factor-­lα; HNF1B, hepatocyte nuclear factor-­lβ; INS, preproinsulin; KCNJ11, potassium
channel, inwardly rectifying subfamily J, member 11; KLF11, Kruppel-­like factor 11; NEUROD 1, neurogenic differentiation factor 1; OAD, oral antidiabetic; PAX4, paired box gene
4; PDX1, pancreas/duodenum homeobox protein 1.
Modified from Sanyoura M, Philipson LH, Naylor R. Monogenic diabetes in children and adolescents: recognition and treatment options. Curr Diab Rep. 2018;18:58. Table 1.

Abnormalities of the Insulin Gene

Diabetes of variable degrees may also result from pathogenic variants in the insulin gene that impair the effectiveness of insulin at the
receptor level. Insulin gene defects are exceedingly rare and may be
associated with relatively mild diabetes or even normal glucose tolerance. Diabetes may also develop in patients with faulty processing of
proinsulin to insulin (an autosomal dominant defect). These defects
are notable for the high concentration of insulin as measured by radioimmunoassay, whereas MODY and glucose transporter-­2 defects are
characterized by relative or absolute deficiency of insulin secretion for
the prevailing glucose concentrations.

GENETIC DEFECTS OF INSULIN ACTION

Various genetic variants in the insulin receptor can impair the action of
insulin at the insulin receptor or impair postreceptor signaling, leading
to insulin resistance. The mildest form of the syndrome with variants in
the insulin receptor was previously known as type A insulin resistance.
This condition is associated with hirsutism, hyperandrogenism, and
cystic ovaries in females, without obesity. Acanthosis nigricans may be
present, and life expectancy is not significantly impaired. More severe
forms of insulin resistance are seen in two variants in the insulin receptor gene that cause the pediatric syndromes of Donohue syndrome
(formerly called leprechaunism) and Rabson-­Mendenhall syndrome.

Donohue Syndrome

This is a syndrome characterized by intrauterine growth restriction,
fasting hypoglycemia, and postprandial hyperglycemia in association
with profound resistance to insulin; severe hyperinsulinemia is seen

during an OGTT. Various defects of the insulin receptor have been
described, thereby attesting to the important role of insulin and its
receptor in fetal growth and possibly in morphogenesis. Many of these
patients die in the first year of life. Potential treatments include high-­
dose insulin, metformin, and continuous IGF-­1 via insulin pump.

Rabson-­Mendenhall Syndrome

This entity is defined by clinical manifestations that appear to be intermediate between those of acanthosis nigricans with insulin resistance
type A and Donohue syndrome. The features include extreme insulin
resistance, acanthosis nigricans, abnormalities of the teeth and nails,
and pineal hyperplasia. It is not clear whether this syndrome is entirely
distinct from Donohue syndrome; however, by comparison, patients
with Rabson-­Mendenhall tend to live significantly longer. Therapies
with modest benefit have included IGF-­1 and leptin.

Lipoatrophic Diabetes

Various forms of lipodystrophy are associated with insulin resistance
and diabetes (Table 629.18). Familial partial lipoatrophy, or lipodystrophy, is associated with pathogenic variants in LMNA, encoding
nuclear envelope proteins lamin A and C. Severe congenital generalized lipoatrophy is associated with variants in the seipin and AGPAT2
genes, but the mechanism by which these variants lead to insulin resistance and diabetes is not known.

Stiff-­Person Syndrome

This is an extremely rare autoimmune CNS disorder that is characterized by progressive stiffness and painful spasms of the axial muscles

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 629 u Diabetes Mellitus

3547

Table 629.17  Syndromic Forms of Diabetes that May Present in Childhood or Early Childhood
SYNDROME

GENE (LOCUS)

INHERITANCE

TYPE OF DIABETES

CLINICAL FEATURES

Diabetes and deafness

Mitochondria tRNA

Maternal

Insulin deficient

Adult-­onset diabetes, sensorineural
deafness

Wolfram syndrome 1

WFS1 (4p16)

AR/AD

Insulin deficient

Childhood-­onset diabetes, optic atrophy,
deafness, diabetes insipidus

Wolfram syndrome 2

CISD2 (4q24)

AR

Insulin deficient

Childhood-­onset, diabetes, optic atrophy,
deafness, and defective platelet
aggregation

Thiamine-­responsive
megaloblastic anemia
syndrome

SLC19A2 (1q23)

AR

Vitamin dependent

Childhood-­onset diabetes, megaloblastic
or sideroblastic anemia, sensorineural
deafness

Mitchell-­Riley syndrome

RFX6 (6q22)

AR

Insulin deficient

Rare cases with childhood-­onset,
pancreatic hypoplasia, intestinal atresia,
and gallbladder aplasia or hypoplasia

Alström syndrome

ALMS1 (2p13)

AR

Insulin resistant

Childhood to early adulthood,
pigmentary retinopathy, deafness,
obesity, dilated cardiomyopathy

Bardet-­Biedl syndrome

BBS1–BBS21

AR/DR

Insulin resistant

Childhood to early adulthood,
developmental delay, pigmentary
retinopathy, polydactyly, obesity,
hypogonadism

Insulin resistance
syndrome type A

INSR (19p13)

AD/AR

Insulin resistant

Childhood to early adulthood, obesity,
diabetes, and acanthosis nigricans

ALMS1, Alström syndrome 1; AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; BBS, Bardet-­Biedl; CISD2, CDGSH iron sulfur domain 2; DR, digenic recessive; INSR, insulin
receptor; RFX6, regulatory factor X6; SLC19A2, solute carrier family 19 member 2; tRNA, transfer RNA; WFS1, wolframin.
Modified from Sanyoura M, Philipson LH, Naylor R. Monogenic diabetes in children and adolescents: recognition and treatment options. Curr Diab Rep. 18:58, 2018. Table 2.

Table 629.18  Clinical and Biochemical Features of Inherited Lipodystrophies
CONGENITAL GENERALIZED LIPODYSTROPHY

FAMILIAL PARTIAL LIPODYSTROPHY

SUBTYPE

BSCL1

BSCL2

FPLD2

FPLD3

DEFECTIVE GENE

AGPAT2

BSCL2

LMNA

PPARG

Clinical onset

Soon after birth

Soon after birth

Puberty

Usually puberty, but may
present in younger children

Fat distribution

Generalized absence

Generalized absence

Loss of limb and gluteal fat;
typically excess facial and
nuchal fat; trunk fat often
lost

Loss of limb and gluteal fat;
preserved facial and trunk
fat

Cutaneous features

Acanthosis nigricans and
skin tags; hirsutism
common in women

Acanthosis nigricans
and skin tags;
hirsutism common in
women

Acanthosis nigricans and skin
tags; hirsutism common in
women

Acanthosis nigricans and skin
tags; hirsutism common in
women

Musculoskeletal

Acromegaloid features
common

Acromegaloid features
common

Frequent muscle hypertrophy;
some have overlap features
of muscular dystrophy

Muscle hypertrophy

Nonalcoholic fatty liver
disease

Severe

Severe

Yes

Yes

Dyslipidemia

Severe; associated with
pancreatitis

Severe; associated with
pancreatitis

Yes, may be severe

Yes, may be severe

Insulin resistance

Severe; early onset

Severe; early onset

Severe

Severe; early onset in some

Diabetes onset

<20 yr

<20 yr

Variable; generally later in
men than women

Variable; generally later in
men than women

Hypertension

Common

Common

Common

Very common

Other

Mild mental retardation
possible

From Semple RK, Savage DB, Halsall DJ, O’Rahilly S. Syndromes of severe insulin resistance and/or lipodystrophy. In Weiss RE, Refetoff S, eds. Genetic Diagnosis of Endocrine
Disorders. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2010: Table 4.2.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3548 Part XXIV u The Endocrine System
and very high titers of glutamic acid decarboxylase antibodies. About
one third of patients also develop T1DM.

inadequate weight gain may benefit from the addition of basal insulin
even if they do not meet the criteria for a diagnosis of diabetes.

Systemic Lupus Erythematosus

Friedreich Ataxia

In rare cases, patients with systemic lupus erythematosus may develop
autoantibodies to the insulin receptor, leading to insulin resistance and
diabetes.

CYSTIC FIBROSIS–RELATED DIABETES

See Chapter 454.
As patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) live longer, an increasing
number are being diagnosed with cystic fibrosis–related diabetes
(CFRD); up to 20% of children and 50% of adults are affected with
CFRD. There is an association with pancreatic insufficiency, and there
may be a higher risk in patients with class I and class II CF transmembrane conductance regulator variants. Cross-­sectional studies indicate
that the prevalence of IGT may be significantly higher than this, and
up to 65% of children with CF have diminished first-­phase insulin
secretion, even when they have normal glucose tolerance. In Denmark, oral glucose tolerance screening of the entire CF population
demonstrated no diabetes in patients younger than 10 years, diabetes
in 12% of patients age 10-­19 years, and diabetes in 48% of adults age
20 years and older.
Patients with CFRD have features of both T1DM and T2DM. In
the pancreas, exocrine tissue is replaced by fibrosis and fat; many of
the pancreatic islets are destroyed. The remaining islets demonstrate
diminished numbers of β-­, α-­, and pancreatic polypeptide-­secreting
cells. Secretion of the islet hormones insulin, glucagon, and pancreatic
polypeptide is impaired in patients with CF in response to a variety
of secretagogues. This pancreatic damage leads to slowly progressive
insulin deficiency, of which the earliest manifestation is an impaired
first-­phase insulin response. When patients age, this response becomes
progressively delayed and less robust than normal. At the same time,
these patients develop insulin resistance because of chronic inflammation and the intermittent use of corticosteroids. Insulin deficiency and
insulin resistance lead to a gradual onset of IGT that eventually evolves
into diabetes. In some cases, diabetes may wax and wane with disease
exacerbations and the use of corticosteroids. The clinical presentation
is similar to that of T2DM in that the onset of the disease is insidious and the occurrence of ketoacidosis is rare. Islet antibody titers are
negative. Microvascular complications do develop but may do so at a
slower rate than in typical T1DM or T2DM. Macrovascular complications do not appear to be of concern in CFRD. Several factors unique
to CF influence the onset and the course of diabetes: (1) frequent infections are associated with waxing and waning of insulin resistance; (2)
energy needs are increased because of infection and pulmonary disease; (3) malabsorption is common, despite enzyme supplementation;
(4) nutrient absorption is altered by abnormal intestinal transit time;
(5) liver disease is frequently present; (6) anorexia and nausea are common; (7) there is a wide variation in daily food intake based on the
patient’s acute health status; and (8) both insulin and glucagon secretion are impaired (in contrast to autoimmune diabetes, in which only
insulin secretion is affected).
IGT and CFRD are associated with poor weight gain, and there is
evidence that treatment with insulin improves weight gain and slows
the rate of pulmonary deterioration. Because of these observations,
guidelines recommend that routine diabetes screening of all children
with CF begin at age 10 years. Despite debate over the ideal screening
modality, the recommendation is the 2-­hour OGTT, although growing
evidence suggests a role for mid-­OGTT hyperglycemia at the 1-­hour
mark as a clinically relevant finding. When hyperglycemia develops,
the accompanying metabolic derangements are usually mild, and relatively low doses of insulin usually suffice for adequate management.
Basal insulin may be started initially, but basal-­bolus therapy similar
to that used in T1DM will eventually be needed. Dietary restrictions
are minimal, as increased energy needs are present and weight gain
is usually desired. Ketoacidosis is uncommon but may occur with
progressive deterioration of islet cell function. IGT is not necessarily
an indication for treatment, but patients who have poor growth and

Friedreich ataxia (FRDA) is a multisystem neurodegenerative disorder resulting from alterations in FXN. Approximately 20% of patients
with FRDA will develop diabetes. Individuals with early-­onset diabetes
during childhood display a phenotype similar to T1DM characterized
by insufficient pancreatic insulin secretion, hyperglycemia, and ketosis. Insulin therapy is typically required from diagnosis. By contrast,
adults with FRDA who develop diabetes have a phenotype more similar to T2DM, where insulin resistance appears to play a role in the
pathogenesis.

DRUGS

High-­dose oral or parenteral steroid therapy usually results in significant insulin resistance leading to glucose intolerance and overt diabetes. The immunosuppressive agents cyclosporine and tacrolimus are
toxic to β cells, causing IDDM in a significant proportion of patients
treated with these agents. Their toxicity to pancreatic β cells was one of
the factors that limited their usefulness in arresting ongoing autoimmune destruction of β cells. Streptozotocin and the rodenticide Vacor
are also toxic to β cells, causing diabetes.
There are no consensus guidelines regarding treatment of steroid-­
induced hyperglycemia in children. Many patients on high-­dose steroids have elevated blood glucose during the day and evening but
become normoglycemic late at night and early in the morning. In general, significant hyperglycemia in an inpatient setting is treated with
short-­acting insulin on an as-­needed basis. Basal insulin may be added
when fasting hyperglycemia is significant. Outpatient treatment can be
more difficult, but when treatment is needed, protocols similar to the
basal-­bolus regimens used in T1DM are used.
Immune checkpoint inhibitors used to treat malignancies by blocking inhibitory immune receptors have been associated with the rare
development of DM and other autoimmune diseases. DM may develop
after one to two cycles of therapy and present with DKA. Some are
GAD antibody positive; all require insulin therapy.

GENETIC SYNDROMES ASSOCIATED WITH
DIABETES MELLITUS

A number of rare genetic syndromes associated with IDDM or carbohydrate intolerance have been described (see Tables 629.1 and 629.17).
These syndromes represent a broad spectrum of diseases, ranging from
premature cellular aging, as in Werner and Cockayne syndromes
(see Chapter 109), to excessive obesity associated with hyperinsulinism, resistance to insulin action, and carbohydrate intolerance, as in
Prader-­Willi syndrome (see Chapters 97 and 98). Some of these syndromes are characterized by primary disturbances in the insulin receptor or in antibodies to the insulin receptor without any impairment
in insulin secretion. Although rare, these syndromes provide unique
models to understand the multiple causes of disturbed carbohydrate
metabolism from defective insulin secretion or from defective insulin
action at the cell receptor or postreceptor level.

AUTOIMMUNE DISEASES ASSOCIATED WITH T1DM
IPEX Syndrome

IPEX (immunodysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, and enteropathy, X-­linked) is a genetic syndrome leading to autoimmune disease.
In most patients with IPEX, pathogenic variants in FOXP3, a specific
marker of natural and adaptive regulatory T cells, leads to severe
immune dysregulation and rampant autoimmunity. Autoimmune diabetes develops in >90% of cases, usually within the first year of life,
and is accompanied by enteropathy, failure to thrive, and other autoimmune disorders.

Autoimmune Polyendocrine Syndromes

Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1 (APS-­1, also known as
APCED) is a syndrome of multiple endocrinopathy related to pathogenic variants in AIRE. It typically first manifests in infancy with

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 629 u Diabetes Mellitus
recurrent mucocutaneous candidiasis, followed variably by hypocalcemia (autoimmune hypoparathyroidism), adrenal insufficiency (Addison disease), T1DM, hypothyroidism (Hashimoto disease), celiac
disease, and other autoimmune conditions. It is clear that any patient
with an autoimmune disease is at increased risk for the development of
T1DM (and any patient with T1DM is at increased risk of other autoimmune diseases) and should be counseled regarding the signs and
symptoms of new-­onset diabetes. See Table 629.11 for recommendations regarding screening tests to look for other autoimmune diseases
in patients with T1DM.
Chronic lymphocytic thyroiditis (Hashimoto thyroiditis) is frequently associated with T1DM in children (see Chapter 604). About
20% of patients with insulin-­dependent diabetes have thyroid antibodies in their serum; the prevalence is 2-­20 times greater than in control
populations. Only a small proportion of these patients acquire clinical
hypothyroidism; the interval between diagnosis of diabetes and thyroid
disease averages about 5 years.
Celiac disease, which is caused by hypersensitivity to dietary gluten,
is another autoimmune disorder that occurs with significant frequency
in children with T1DM (see Chapter 384). It is estimated that approximately 7–15% of children with T1DM develop celiac disease within the
first 6 years of diagnosis, and the incidence of celiac disease is significantly

3549

higher in children younger than 4 years of age and in females. Young
children with T1DM and celiac disease can present with gastrointestinal
symptoms (abdominal cramping, diarrhea, constipation, gastroesophageal reflux), growth failure as a consequence of suboptimal weight gain,
unexplained hypoglycemic reactions because of nutrient malabsorption,
and less commonly hypocalcemia caused by severe vitamin D malabsorption; in some cases the disease can be asymptomatic.
When diabetes and thyroid disease coexist, the possibility of autoimmune adrenal insufficiency should be considered. It may be heralded
by decreasing insulin requirements, increasing pigmentation of the
skin and buccal mucosa, salt craving, weakness, asthenia and postural
hypotension, or even frank adrenal crisis. This syndrome is unusual
in the first decade of life, but it may become apparent in the second
decade or later.
Circulating antibodies to gastric parietal cells and to intrinsic factor
are 2-­3 times more common in patients with T1DM than in control
subjects. The presence of antibodies to gastric parietal cells is correlated
with atrophic gastritis, and antibodies to intrinsic factor are associated
with malabsorption of vitamin B12. However, megaloblastic anemia is
rare in children with T1DM.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

